The Independent Jane
For all the love, romance and scandal in Jane Austen’s books, what they are really about is freedom and independence. Independence of thought and the freedom to choose.
Elizabeth’s refusal of Mr. Collins offer of marriage showed an independence seldom seen in heroines of the day. Her refusal of Mr. Darcy while triggered by anger showed a level of independence that left him shocked and stunned.
The freedom she exhibited in finally accepting him in direct defiance of Lady Catherine and knowing her father would disapprove was unusual even for Austen. In her last book Anne Elliot is persuaded to refuse Captain Wentworth at Lady Russel’s insistence.
Although Jane played by the rules of the day, all of her writing is infused with how she wanted life to be. She ‘screams’ her outrage at the limitations for women in Emma.
When accosted by Mrs. Elton, Jane Fairfax says,
“Excuse me, ma’am, but this is by no means my intention; I make no inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends. When I am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed. There are places in town, offices, where inquiry would soon produce something — offices for the sale, not quite of human flesh, but of human intellect.”
“Oh! my dear, human flesh! You quite shock me; if you mean a fling at the slave-trade, I assure you Mr. Suckling was always rather a friend to the abolition.”
“I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” replied Jane; “governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widely different certainly, as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies.”
That same sentiment is emphasized in Emma’s shock when Mrs. Weston tells her of Frank Churchill’s secret engagement to Jane.
“Good God!” cried Emma, “Jane actually on the point of going as governess! What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy? To suffer her to engage herself — to suffer her even to think of such a measure!”
I find it interesting that at the moment of Austen’s birth or there about, John Adams left his farm in Massachusetts for the Continental Congress in Philadelphia. Doesn’t sound particularly interesting, I know but consider this.
John Adams left his home in mid-December 1775 to attend an unprecedented meeting of colonial representatives to consider severing ties with their mother country and her monarch; a decision that culminated in a document unlike any ever written. In the mother country, one day in that same cold December a baby girl was born at Steventon Rectory. Her cry was heard by only the people in the house but the years to come would see her pen create works unlike any the world had ever seen.
Comparing Austen’s words with Thomas Jefferson’s may seem a trivialization but I believe that Austen’s impact on the world is no less important than Jefferson’s. The effect of Jane’s writing maybe more subtle than that of the Virginian but it is no less influential.
Jefferson’s words instigated and promoted a revolution, a war of independence. Jane’s words had no such excessive consequence. Still in her own quiet, genteel yet powerful way she declared and promoted the same principles of freedom and self-regulated independence as our American forefathers. In all her novels Jane advocates independence of person and thought, the rights of all and acceptance of responsibility for those rights.
Jane may not have incited military action as Jefferson did but even as an avowed royalist, I doubt not that Jane Austen firmly believed in his declaration of the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Taking Play Seriously
By ROBIN MARANTZ HENIG
Published: February 17, 2008
On a drizzly Tuesday night in late January, 200 people came out to hear a psychiatrist talk rhapsodically about play -- not just the intense, joyous play of children, but play for all people, at all ages, at all times. (All species too; the lecture featured touching photos of a polar bear and a husky engaging playfully at a snowy outpost in northern Canada.) Stuart Brown, president of the National Institute for Play, was speaking at the New York Public Library's main branch on 42nd Street. He created the institute in 1996, after more than 20 years of psychiatric practice and research persuaded him of the dangerous long-term consequences of play deprivation. In a sold-out talk at the library, he and Krista Tippett, host of the public-radio program ''Speaking of Faith,'' discussed the biological and spiritual underpinnings of play. Brown called play part of the ''developmental sequencing of becoming a human primate. If you look at what produces learning and memory and well-being, play is as fundamental as any other aspect of life, including sleep and dreams.''
The message seemed to resonate with audience members, who asked anxious questions about what seemed to be the loss of play in their children's lives. Their concern came, no doubt, from the recent deluge of eulogies to play . Educators fret that school officials are hacking away at recess to make room for an increasingly crammed curriculum. Psychologists complain that overscheduled kids have no time left for the real business of childhood: idle, creative, unstructured free play. Public health officials link insufficient playtime to a rise in childhood obesity. Parents bemoan the fact that kids don't play the way they themselves did -- or think they did. And everyone seems to worry that without the chance to play stickball or hopscotch out on the street, to play with dolls on the kitchen floor or climb trees in the woods, today's children are missing out on something essential.
The success of ''The Dangerous Book for Boys'' -- which has been on the best-seller list for the last nine months -- and its step-by-step instructions for activities like folding paper airplanes is testament to the generalized longing for play's good old days. So were the questions after Stuart Brown's library talk; one woman asked how her children will learn trust, empathy and social skills when their most frequent playing is done online. Brown told her that while video games do have some play value, a true sense of ''interpersonal nuance'' can be achieved only by a child who is engaging all five senses by playing in the three-dimensional world.
This is part of a larger conversation Americans are having about play. Parents bobble between a nostalgia-infused yearning for their children to play and fear that time spent playing is time lost to more practical pursuits. Alarming headlines about U.S. students falling behind other countries in science and math, combined with the ever-more-intense competition to get kids into college, make parents rush to sign up their children for piano lessons and test-prep courses instead of just leaving them to improvise on their own; playtime versus r?m?uilding.
Discussions about play force us to reckon with our underlying ideas about childhood, sex differences, creativity and success. Do boys play differently than girls? Are children being damaged by staring at computer screens and video games? Are they missing something when fantasy play is populated with characters from Hollywood's imagination and not their own? Most of these issues are too vast to be addressed by a single field of study (let alone a magazine article). But the growing science of play does have much to add to the conversation. Armed with research grounded in evolutionary biology and experimental neuroscience, some scientists have shown themselves eager -- at times perhaps a little too eager -- to promote a scientific argument for play. They have spent the past few decades learning how and why play evolved in animals, generating insights that can inform our understanding of its evolution in humans too. They are studying, from an evolutionary perspective, to what extent play is a luxury that can be dispensed with when there are too many other competing claims on the growing brain, and to what extent it is central to how that brain grows in the first place.
Scientists who study play, in animals and humans alike, are developing a consensus view that play is something more than a way for restless kids to work off steam; more than a way for chubby kids to burn off calories; more than a frivolous luxury. Play, in their view, is a central part of neurological growth and development -- one important way that children build complex, skilled, responsive, socially adept and cognitively flexible brains.
Their work still leaves some questions unanswered, including questions about play's darker, more ambiguous side: is there really an evolutionary or developmental need for dangerous games, say, or for the meanness and hurt feelings that seem to attend so much child's play? Answering these and other questions could help us understand what might be lost if children play less.

How do you get HIV?
HIV can be passed on when infected bodily fluid, such as blood or semen, is passed into an uninfected person. Semen is the liquid which is released from a man's penis during sex which carries sperm. It can be infected with HIV or AIDS when someone is HIV positive or is carrying the AIDS virus. This can happen during unprotected sex. For example when two people have sex without using a condom when one partner is already infected, or between drug users who inject and share needles.
It can't be transmitted by things like coughing, sneezing, kissing, sharing a toilet seat, swimming pools, sweat and tears.

CTComms sends on average 2 million emails monthly on behalf of over 125 different charities and not for profits.
Take the complexity of technology and stir in the complexity of the legal system and what do you get? Software licenses! If you've ever attempted to read one you know how true this is, but you have to know a little about software licensing even if you can't parse all of the fine print.
By: Chris Peters
March 10, 2009
A software license is an agreement between you and the owner of a program which lets you perform certain activities which would otherwise constitute an infringement under copyright law. The software license usually answers questions such as:
The price of the software and the licensing fees, if any, are sometimes discussed in the licensing agreement, but usually it's described elsewhere.
If you read the definitions below and you're still scratching your head, check out Categories of Free and Non-Free Software which includes a helpful diagram.
Free vs Proprietary:
When you hear the phrase "free software" or "free software license," "free" is referring to your rights and permissions ("free as in freedom" or "free as in free speech"). In other words, a free software license gives you more rights than a proprietary license. You can usually copy, modify, and redistribute free software without paying a fee or obtaining permission from the developers and distributors. In most cases "free software" won't cost you anything, but that's not always the case – in this instance the word free is making no assertion whatsoever about the price of the software. Proprietary software puts more restrictions and limits on your legal permission to copy, modify, and distribute the program.
Free, Open-Source or FOSS?
In everyday conversation, there's not much difference between "free software," "open source software," and "FOSS (Free and Open-Source Software)." In other words, you'll hear these terms used interchangeably, and the proponents of free software and the supporters of open-source software agree with one another on most issues. However, the official definition of free software differs somewhat from the official definition of open-source software, and the philosophies underlying those definitions differ as well. For a short description of the difference, read Live and Let License. For a longer discussion from the "free software" side, read Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software. For the "open-source" perspective, read Why Free Software is Too Ambiguous.
Public domain and copyleft.
These terms refer to different categories of free, unrestricted licensing. A copyleft license allows you all the freedoms of a free software license, but adds one restriction. Under a copyleft license, you have to release any modifications under the same terms as the original software. In effect, this blocks companies and developers who want to alter free software and then make their altered version proprietary. In practice, almost all free and open-source software is also copylefted. However, technically you can release "free software" that isn't copylefted. For example, if you developed software and released it under a "public domain" license, it would qualify as free software, but it isn't copyleft. In effect, when you release something into the public domain, you give up all copyrights and rights of ownership.
Shareware and freeware.
These terms don't really refer to licensing, and they're confusing in light of the discussion of free software above. Freeware refers to software (usually small utilities at sites such as Tucows.com) that you can download and install without paying. However, you don't have the right to view the source code, and you may not have the right to copy and redistribute the software. In other words, freeware is proprietary software. Shareware is even more restrictive. In effect, shareware is trial software. You can use it for a limited amount of time (usually 30 or 60 days) and then you're expected to pay to continue using it.
End User Licensing Agreement (EULA).
When you acquire software yourself, directly from a vendor or retailer, or directly from the vendor's Web site, you usually have to indicate by clicking a box that you accept the licensing terms. This "click-through" agreement that no one ever reads is commonly known as a EULA. If you negotiate a large purchase of software with a company, and you sign a contract to seal the agreement, that contract usually replaces or supersedes the EULA.
Most major vendors of proprietary software offer some type of bulk purchasing and volume licensing mechanism. The terms vary widely, but if you order enough software to qualify, the benefits in terms of cost and convenience are significant. Also, not-for-profits sometimes qualify for it with very small initial purchases.
Some of the benefits of volume licensing include:
Lower cost. As with most products, software costs less when you buy more of it.
Ease of installation. Without volume licenses, you usually have to enter a separate activation code (also known as a product key or license key) for each installed copy of the program. On the other hand, volume licenses provide you with a single, organisation-wide activation code, which makes it much easier to find when you need to reinstall the software.
Easier tracking of licenses. Keeping track of how many licenses you own, and how many copies you've actually installed, is a tedious, difficult task. Many volume licensing programs provide an online account which is automatically updated when you obtain or activate a copy of that company's software. These accounts can also coordinate licensing across multiple offices within your organisation.
To learn more about volume licensing from a particular vendor, check out some of the resources below:
Qualified not-for-profits and libraries can receive donated volume licenses for Microsoft products through TechSoup. For more information, check out our introduction to the Microsoft Software Donation Program, and the Microsoft Software Donation Program FAQ. For general information about the volume licensing of Microsoft software, see Volume Licensing Overview.
If you get Microsoft software from TechSoup or other software distributors who work with not-for-profits, you may need to go to the eOpen Web site to locate your Volume license keys. For more information, check out the TechSoup Donation Recipient's Guide to the Microsoft eOpen Web Site.
Always check TechSoup Stock first to see if there's a volume licensing donation program for the software you're interested in. If TechSoup doesn't offer that product or if you need more copies than you can find at TechSoup, search for "volume licensing not-for-profits software" or just "not-for-profits software." For example, when we have an inventory of Adobe products, qualifying and eligible not-for-profits can obtain four individual products or one copy of Creative Suite 4 through TechSoup. If we're out of stock, or you've used up your annual Adobe donation, you can also check TechSoup's special Adobe donation program and also Adobe Solutions for Nonprofits for other discounts available to not-for-profits. For more software-hunting tips, see A Quick Guide to Discounted Software Programs.
Pay close attention to the options and licensing requirements when you acquire server-based software. You might need two different types of license – one for the server software itself, and a set of licenses for all the "clients" accessing the software. Depending on the vendor and the licensing scenario, "client" can refer either to the end users themselves (for example, employees, contractors, clients, and anyone else who uses the software in question) or their computing devices (for example, laptops, desktop computers, smartphones, PDAs, etc.). We'll focus on Microsoft server products, but similar issues can arise with other server applications.
Over the years, Microsoft has released hundreds of server-based applications, and the licensing terms are slightly different for each one. Fortunately, there are common license types and licensing structures across different products. In other words, while a User CAL (Client Access License) for Windows Server is distinct from a User CAL for SharePoint Server, the underlying terms and rights are very similar. The TechSoup product pages for Microsoft software do a good job of describing the differences between products, so we'll focus on the common threads in this article.
Moreover, Microsoft often lets you license a single server application in more than one way, depending on the needs of your organisation. This allows you the flexibility to choose the licenses that best reflect your organisation's usage patterns and thereby cost you the least amount of money. For example, for Windows Server and other products you can acquire licenses on a per-user basis (for example, User CALs) or per-device basis (for example, Device CALs).
The license required to install and run most server applications usually comes bundled with the software itself. So you can install and run most applications "out of the box," as long as you have the right number of client licenses (see the section below for more on that). However, when you're running certain server products on a computer with multiple processors, you may need to get additional licenses. For example, if you run Windows Server 2008 DataCenter edition on a server with two processors, you need a separate license for each processor. SQL Server 2008 works the same way. This type of license is referred to as a processor license. Generally you don't need client licenses for any application that's licensed this way.
Client Licenses for Internal Users
Many Microsoft products, including Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2008, require client access licenses for all authenticated internal users (for example, employees, contractors, volunteers, etc.). On the other hand, SQL Server 2008 and other products don't require any client licenses. Read the product description at CTXchange if you're looking for the details about licensing a particular application.
User CALs: User CALs allow each user access to all the instances of a particular server product in an organisation, no matter which device they use to gain access. In other words, if you run five copies of Windows Server 2008 on five separate servers, you only need one User CAL for each person in your organisation who access those servers (or any software installed on those servers), whether they access a single server, all five servers, or some number in between. Each user with a single CAL assigned to them can access the server software from as many devices as they want (for example, desktop computers, laptops, smartphones, etc.). User CALs are a popular licensing option.
Device CALs: Device CALs allow access to all instances of a particular server application from a single device (for example, a desktop computer, a laptop, etc.) in your organisation. Device CALs only make sense when multiple employees use the same computer. For example, in 24-hour call centres different employees on different shifts often use the same machine, so Device CALs make sense in this situation.
Choosing a licensing mode for your Windows Server CALs: With Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2008, you use a CAL (either a User CAL or a Device CAL) in one of two licensing modes: per seat or per server. You make this decision when you're installing your Windows Server products, not when you acquire the CALs. The CALs themselves don't have any mode designation, so you can use either a User CAL or a Device CAL in either mode. Per seat mode is the default mode, and the one used most frequently. The description of User CALs and Device CALs above describes the typical per seat mode. In "per server" mode, Windows treats each license as a "simultaneous connection." In other words, if you have 40 CALs, Windows will let 40 authenticated users have access. The 41st user will be denied access. However, in per server mode, each CAL is tied to a particular instance of Windows Server, and you have to acquire a new set of licenses for each new server you build that runs Windows. Therefore, per server mode works for some small organisations with one or two servers and limited access requirements.
You don't "install" client licenses the way you install software. There are ways to automate the tracking of software licenses indirectly, but the server software can't refuse access to a user or device on licensing grounds. The licenses don't leave any "digital footprint" that the server software can read. An exception to this occurs when you license Windows Server in per server mode. In this case, if you have 50 licenses, the 51st authenticated user will be denied access (though anonymous users can still access services).
Some key points to remember about client licensing:
The licensing scenarios described in this section arise less frequently, and are too complex to cover completely in this article, so they're described briefly below along with more comprehensive resources.
You don't need client licenses for anonymous, unauthenticated external users. In other words, if someone accesses your Web site, and that site runs on Internet Information Server (IIS), Microsoft's Web serving software, you don't need a client license for any of those anonymous users.
If you have any authenticated external users who access services on your Windows-based servers, you can obtain CALs to cover their licensing requirements. However, the External Connector License (ECL) is a second option in this scenario. The ECL covers all use by authenticated external users, but it's a lot more expensive than a CAL, so only get one if you'll have a lot of external users. For example, even if you get your licenses through the CTXchange donation program, an ECL for Windows Server 2008 has an £76 administrative fee, while a User CAL for Windows Server 2008 carries a £1 admin fee. If only a handful of external users access your Windows servers, you're better off acquiring User CALs. Also, an ECL only applies to external users and devices. In other words, if you have an ECL, you still have to get a CAL for all employees and contractors.
Even though Terminal Services (TS) is built into Windows Server 2003 and 2008, you need to get a separate TS CAL for each client (i.e. each user or each device) that will access Terminal Services in your organisation. This TS license is in addition to your Windows Server CALs.
Microsoft's System Centre products (a line of enterprise-level administrative software packages) use a special type of license known as a management license (ML). Applications that use this type of licensing include System Center Configuration Manager 2007 and System Center Operations Manager 2007. Any desktop or workstation managed by one of these applications needs a client management license. Any server managed by one of these applications requires a server management license, and there are two types of server management licenses – standard and enterprise. You need one or the other but not both. There are also special licensing requirements if you're managing virtual instances of Windows operating systems. For more information, see TechSoup's Guide to System Center Products and Licensing and Microsoft's white paper on Systems Center licensing.
Some Microsoft server products have two client licensing modes, standard and enterprise. As you might imagine, an Enterprise CAL grants access to more advanced features of a product. Furthermore, with some products, such as Microsoft Exchange, the licenses are additive. In other words, a user needs both a Standard CAL AND an Enterprise CAL in order to access the advanced features. See Exchange Server 2007 Editions and Client Access Licenses for more information.
With virtualisation technologies, multiple operating systems can run simultaneously on a single physical server. Every time you install a Microsoft application, whether on a physical hardware system or a virtual hardware system, you create an "instance" of that application. The number of "instances" of particular application that you can run using a single license varies from product to product. For more information see the Volume Licensing Briefs, Microsoft Licensing for Virtualization and the Windows Server Virtualization Calculator. For TechSoup Stock products, see the product description for more information.
There are a lot of nuances to Microsoft licensing, and also a lot of excellent resources to help you understand different scenarios.
About the Author:
Chris is a former technology writer and technology analyst for TechSoup for Libraries, which aims to provide IT management guidance to libraries. His previous experience includes working at Washington State Library as a technology consultant and technology trainer, and at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation as a technology trainer and tech support analyst. He received his M.L.S. from the University of Michigan in 1997.
Originally posted here.
Copyright © 2009 CompuMentor. This work is published under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 License.
The latest version of Microsoft Office Professional Plus is an integrated collection of programs, servers, and services designed to work together to enable optimised information work.

Hold the salt: UCLA engineers develop revolutionary new desalination membrane
Process uses atmospheric pressure plasma to create filtering 'brush layer'
Desalination can become more economical and used as a viable alternate water resource.
By Wileen Wong Kromhout
Originally published in UCLA Newsroom
Researchers from the UCLA Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science have unveiled a new class of reverse-osmosis membranes for desalination that resist the clogging which typically occurs when seawater, brackish water and waste water are purified.
The highly permeable, surface-structured membrane can easily be incorporated into today's commercial production system, the researchers say, and could help to significantly reduce desalination operating costs. Their findings appear in the current issue of the Journal of Materials Chemistry.
Reverse-osmosis (RO) desalination uses high pressure to force polluted water through the pores of a membrane. While water molecules pass through the pores, mineral salt ions, bacteria and other impurities cannot. Over time, these particles build up on the membrane's surface, leading to clogging and membrane damage. This scaling and fouling places higher energy demands on the pumping system and necessitates costly cleanup and membrane replacement.
The new UCLA membrane's novel surface topography and chemistry allow it to avoid such drawbacks.
"Besides possessing high water permeability, the new membrane also shows high rejection characteristics and long-term stability," said Nancy H. Lin, a UCLA Engineering senior researcher and the study's lead author. "Structuring the membrane surface does not require a long reaction time, high reaction temperature or the use of a vacuum chamber. The anti-scaling property, which can increase membrane life and decrease operational costs, is superior to existing commercial membranes."
The new membrane was synthesized through a three-step process. First, researchers synthesized a polyamide thin-film composite membrane using conventional interfacial polymerization. Next, they activated the polyamide surface with atmospheric pressure plasma to create active sites on the surface. Finally, these active sites were used to initiate a graft polymerization reaction with a monomer solution to create a polymer "brush layer" on the polyamide surface. This graft polymerization is carried out for a specific period of time at a specific temperature in order to control the brush layer thickness and topography.
"In the early years, surface plasma treatment could only be accomplished in a vacuum chamber," said Yoram Cohen, UCLA professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering and a corresponding author of the study. "It wasn't practical for large-scale commercialization because thousands of meters of membranes could not be synthesized in a vacuum chamber. It's too costly. But now, with the advent of atmospheric pressure plasma, we don't even need to initiate the reaction chemically. It's as simple as brushing the surface with plasma, and it can be done for almost any surface."
In this new membrane, the polymer chains of the tethered brush layer are in constant motion. The chains are chemically anchored to the surface and are thus more thermally stable, relative to physically coated polymer films. Water flow also adds to the brush layer's movement, making it extremely difficult for bacteria and other colloidal matter to anchor to the surface of the membrane.
"If you've ever snorkeled, you'll know that sea kelp move back and forth with the current or water flow," Cohen said. "So imagine that you have this varied structure with continuous movement. Protein or bacteria need to be able to anchor to multiple spots on the membrane to attach themselves to the surface — a task which is extremely difficult to attain due to the constant motion of the brush layer. The polymer chains protect and screen the membrane surface underneath."
Another factor in preventing adhesion is the surface charge of the membrane. Cohen's team is able to choose the chemistry of the brush layer to impart the desired surface charge, enabling the membrane to repel molecules of an opposite charge.
The team's next step is to expand the membrane synthesis into a much larger, continuous process and to optimize the new membrane's performance for different water sources.
"We want to be able to narrow down and create a membrane selection system for different water sources that have different fouling tendencies," Lin said. "With such knowledge, one can optimize the membrane surface properties with different polymer brush layers to delay or prevent the onset of membrane fouling and scaling.
"The cost of desalination will therefore decrease when we reduce the cost of chemicals [used for membrane cleaning], as well as process operation [for membrane replacement]. Desalination can become more economical and used as a viable alternate water resource."
Cohen's team, in collaboration with the UCLA Water Technology Research (WaTeR) Center, is currently carrying out specific studies to test the performance of the new membrane's fouling properties under field conditions.
"We work directly with industry and water agencies on everything that we're doing here in water technology," Cohen said. "The reason for this is simple: If we are to accelerate the transfer of knowledge technology from the university to the real world, where those solutions are needed, we have to make sure we address the real issues. This also provides our students with a tremendous opportunity to work with industry, government and local agencies."
A paper providing a preliminary introduction to the new membrane also appeared in the Journal of Membrane Science last month.
Published: Thursday, April 08, 2010

Not Just for Kids
The Hunt for Falling Leaves...
Nature's Color on the Ground
by Mary Catherine Ball
Being a reporter, I am always looking for an adventure. Last week, I found one.
I left work to go on a simple journey, but it turned out to be much more.
First, I crossed a mud-ridden stream. Then, I came face to face with flying creatures, fighting to get near me. I even endured webmakers spinning my hair into a shiny maze.
Where did I go? Into the woods, of course. Why? I wanted to gather some fallen leaves.
My luck was good that day. I was able to spy lots of different kinds of leaves lying on the ground. Some were leaves I had never seen. Some were still green, while others were changing to their autumn colors.
Have you ever hunted for leaves? I wonder if you know the names of five of the trees that live in your neighborhood? I bet the answer is no.
Well, me neither. So I had five of the leaves analyzed. I had found the leaves from an oak, a beech, a sweet gum tree and more.
Now, I invite you to make this journey.
Narrow body with pointy edges
Narrow body with pointy edges
May grow berries
Good for sap & color
3 distinct leafs
May grow nuts
This is your task...
Travel to the deep, dark woods (in the daylight) to find these 5 leaves. Cut out the page and take it with you. Make sure you can match your discovery with mine. Happy leaf-hunting!
Stone Soup October 9 (11:30am)-Enjoy lunch and a show. After you eat peanut butter & jelly, watch Stone Soup, performed by the Lost Caravan. Lunch is at noon; show starts at 12:30. Chesapeake Music Hall, Off Rt. 50 approaching the Bay Bridge: 410/406-0306.
All Aboard October 9 & 10 (2pm)-Chug a chug to Zany Brainy for train fun. Listen to stories and sing railroad songs. Build your own trains. Ages 3+. Zany Brainy, Annap. Harb. Ctr.: 410/266-1447.
Tiny Tots Fall for Nature Tues. Oct 12 (10:30am-noon) Three- to five-year-olds (and their adult) hike into the woods to hear autumn stories, gather leaves and make a craft. Bring a bag lunch to enjoy w/apple cider @ King's Landing Park, Huntingtown. $3 rsvp: 800/735-2258.
Spooky Stories in the Woods Tues. Oct. 12 (10:30-noon)-Hike with a ranger to a clearing in the woods. Listen to autumn stories and drink warm apple cider. Gather leaves to make a craft. Bring a bag lunch. Kings Landing Park, Huntingtown: 410/535-5327.
Musical Minds Wed. Oct. 13 (4-4:45pm)-Music makes the world go round. So sing, listen to stories and play musical instruments. Ages 2-4. Chesapeake Children's Museum, Festival at Riva. $8.50; rsvp: 410/266-0677.
Nature Designs Deadline Oct. 15-Create your favorite nature scene out of clay or on paper to win prizes. Age categories are 3-5, 6-8 and 9-12 years. Place winners win nature books or statues. All art forms accepted. Take your masterpiece to Wild Bird Center, Annapolis Harbour Center: 410/573-0345.
Tiny Tots get in Touch with Mother Nature Sat. Oct 16 (10-10:30am)
Tiny tots (2-3 w/adult) learn nature by touch, feeling the many different
textures rough and soft in the world around us. @ Battle Creek Cypress Swamp,
Prince Frederick: 800/735-2258.
| Issue 40 |
Volume VII Number 40
October 7-13, 1999
New Bay Times
| Homepage |
| Back to Archives |

The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft is expected to discover its 1,000TH comet this summer.
The SOHO spacecraft is a joint effort between NASA and the European Space Agency. It has accounted for approximately one-half of all comet discoveries with computed orbits in the history of astronomy.
"Before SOHO was launched, only 16 sun grazing comets had been discovered by space observatories. Based on that experience, who could have predicted SOHO would discover more than 60 times that number, and in only nine years," said Dr. Chris St. Cyr. He is senior project scientist for NASA's Living With a Star program at the agency's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. "This is truly a remarkable achievement!"
About 85 percent of the comets SOHO discovered belongs to the Kreutz group of sun grazing comets, so named because their orbits take them very close to Earth's star. The Kreutz sun grazers pass within 500,000 miles of the star's visible surface. Mercury, the planet closest to the sun, is about 36 million miles from the solar surface.
SOHO has also been used to discover three other well-populated comet groups: the Meyer, with at least 55 members; Marsden, with at least 21 members; and the Kracht, with 24 members. These groups are named after the astronomers who suggested the comets are related, because they have similar orbits.
Many comet discoveries were made by amateurs using SOHO images on the Internet. SOHO comet hunters come from all over the world. The United States, United Kingdom, China, Japan, Taiwan, Russia, Ukraine, France, Germany, and Lithuania are among the many countries whose citizens have used SOHO to chase comets.
Almost all of SOHO's comets are discovered using images from its Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument. LASCO is used to observe the faint, multimillion-degree outer atmosphere of the sun, called the corona. A disk in the instrument is used to make an artificial eclipse, blocking direct light from the sun, so the much fainter corona can be seen. Sun grazing comets are discovered when they enter LASCO's field of view as they pass close by the star.
"Building coronagraphs like LASCO is still more art than science, because the light we are trying to detect is very faint," said Dr. Joe Gurman, U.S. project scientist for SOHO at Goddard. "Any imperfections in the optics or dust in the instrument will scatter the light, making the images too noisy to be useful. Discovering almost 1,000 comets since SOHO's launch on December 2, 1995 is a testament to the skill of the LASCO team."
SOHO successfully completed its primary mission in April 1998. It has enough fuel to remain on station to keep hunting comets for decades if the LASCO continues to function.
For information about SOHO on the Internet, visit:
Explore further: Long-term warming, short-term variability: Why climate change is still an issue

Bolivia: Coca-chewing protest outside US embassy
Indigenous activists in Bolivia have been holding a mass coca-chewing protest as part of campaign to end an international ban on the practice.
Hundreds of people chewed the leaf outside the US embassy in La Paz and in other cities across the country.
Bolivia wants to amend a UN drugs treaty that bans chewing coca, which is an ancient tradition in the Andes.
But the US has said it will veto the amendment because coca is also the raw material for making cocaine.
The protesters outside the US embassy also displayed products made from coca, including soft drinks, toothpaste, sweets and ointments.
They were supporting a Bolivian government campaign to amend the 1961 UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs to remove language that bans the chewing of coca leaf.
The convention stipulates that coca-chewing be eliminated within 25 years of the convention coming into effect in 1964.
Bolivia says that is discriminatory, given that coca use is so deeply rooted in the indigenous culture of the Andes.Eradication
The US is opposed to changing the UN convention because it says it would weaken the fight against cocaine production.
In a statement, the US embassy said Washington recognised coca-chewing as a "traditional custom" of Bolivia's indigenous peoples but could not support the amendment.
"The position of the US government in not supporting the amendment is based on the importance of maintaining the integrity of the UN convention, which is an important tool in the fight against drug-trafficking," it said.
The US is the world's largest consumer of cocaine and has been leading efforts to eradicate coca production in the Andes for decades.
Bolivia is the world's first biggest producer of cocaine after Peru and Colombia, and much of its coca crop is used to make the illegal drug.
Bolivian President Evo Morales has long advocated the recognition of coca as a plant of great medicinal, cultural and religious importance that is distinct from cocaine.
As well as being Bolivia's first indigenous head of state, Mr Morales is also a former coca-grower and leader of a coca-growers trade union.
The Bolivian amendment would come into effect on 31 January only if there were no objections.

Breaking the COX code
Using the team approach
Editor’s Note: This story, first published in 2004, has been updated.
Prostaglandins, which were first isolated from the prostate gland in 1936, are very rapidly metabolized, or broken down, making measurement in the blood difficult. Researchers at Vanderbilt led by John Oates, M.D., developed methods for measuring levels of prostaglandin metabolites (breakdown products) in the urine using mass spectrometry.
Using this technique, the research team—which by the late 1970s included L. Jackson Roberts, M.D.—identified prostaglandin D2 as a product of the human mast cell and demonstrated its release during allergic asthma.
With colleagues including Garret A. FitzGerald, M.D., now chair of Pharmacology at the University of Pennsylvania, Oates and Roberts showed that low doses of aspirin blocked the production of thromboxane, a prostaglandin made by platelets that causes blood clotting and constriction of blood vessels. Their findings supported the use of low dose aspirin to prevent heart attacks.
In the early 1990s, Vanderbilt researchers led by Ray DuBois, M.D., Ph.D., discovered a link between the COX-2 enzyme and colon cancer. That work helped lead to current tests of COX-2 inhibitors as a potential way to prevent cancer.
In 2004 another group led by the late Jason Morrow, M.D., and David H. Johnson, M.D., director of the Hematology-Oncology division at Vanderbilt, reported that urine levels of a prostaglandin metabolite called PGE-M could predict the effectiveness of a COX-2 inhibitor in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. This suggests, Morrow said in 2004, “that the measurement of these inflammatory ‘mediators’ and their suppression may be useful in the treatment of lung cancer.”
COX enzymes also may play a role in Alzheimer’s disease. In addition to prostaglandins, the COX pathway can lead to the production of highly reactive molecular compounds called levuglandins, which, in turn, can form “adducts,” or irreversible attachments to proteins that may be toxic to nerve cells.
Also in 2004, Oates and his colleagues at Vanderbilt and Johns Hopkins University reported that they found a 12-fold increase in the level of adducts in the brains of patients who had Alzheimer’s disease compared to age-matched control brains.
“These are the first clear data showing that COX products are elevated in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease,” says Oates, Thomas F. Frist Professor of Medicine and professor of Pharmacology.
Vanderbilt currently is participating in a national trial to see if long-term use of COX inhibitors will reduce the incidence of the disease.

Discover the cosmos! Each day a different image or photograph of our fascinating universe is featured, along with a brief explanation written by a professional astronomer.
2012 June 23
Explanation: As seen from Frösön island in northern Sweden the Sun did set a day after the summer solstice. From that location below the arctic circle it settled slowly behind the northern horizon. During the sunset's final minute, this remarkable sequence of 7 images follows the distorted edge of the solar disk as it just disappears against a distant tree line, capturing both a green and blue flash. Not a myth even in a land of runes, the colorful but elusive glints are caused by atmospheric refraction enhanced by long, low, sight lines and strong atmospheric temperature gradients.
Authors & editors:
Jerry Bonnell (UMCP)
NASA Official: Phillip Newman Specific rights apply.
A service of: ASD at NASA / GSFC
& Michigan Tech. U.

Network With Us
Join us on Facebook to get the latest news and updates.
Lauren Boulden's Story
Using Think-Alouds to Get Inside Langston Hughes' Head
Over my past few years of teaching, there have been multiple occasions where I have been stumped on how to present a particular concept to my students. I've always been able to turn to ReadWriteThink.org for hands-on, engaging lessons. For example, I knew I wanted my students to develop their skills when it came to interacting with text, particularly with poetry. While searching through the myriad options on ReadWriteThink, I came upon "Building Reading Comprehension Through Think-Alouds."
At first, I planned to use the lesson exactly as written: Read Langston Hughes's poem "Dream Variation" and model a think-aloud with students; then have the students try their hand at some think-alouds using other poetry. After working out all of the details, I realized I could develop some additional skills, which would fit perfectly into the scope and sequence of my class. After completing the think-aloud to "Dream Variation," I broke students into selected groups. Each group was given a different Langston Hughes poem and asked to complete a think-aloud. The next day, the students were put into a new jigsaw group where they were solely responsible for sharing what their Langston Hughes poem conveyed. Based on the meanings behind their group mates' poems, along with using the knowledge of both their poem and "Dream Variation," students were asked to figure out who Langston Hughes was as a man. What did he stand for? What were his beliefs? What did he want out of life? Students used clues from the various poems to fill in a head-shaped graphic organizer to depict their understanding of who Hughes could be. This simple lesson of working with poems and think-alouds turned into a few days of group communication, text deciphering, inferences, and even an author study!
Without great lessons available on ReadWriteThink.org, such as "Building Reading Comprehension Through Think-Alouds," my students would never have been able to tackle so many key reading strategies in such a short amount of time.
Grades 6 – 8 | Lesson Plan | Standard Lesson
Students learn components of think-alouds and type-of-text interactions through teacher modeling. In the process, students develop the ability to use think-alouds to aid in reading comprehension tasks.
Lauren describes how she used ReadWriteThink in her classroom.
I have been teaching seventh- and eighth-grade language arts in Delaware for the past five years. I grew up in Long Island, New York, but have called Delaware my home since completing my undergraduate and master’s work at the University of Delaware. Teaching and learning have become my prime passions in life, which is why my days are spent teaching English, directing plays, organizing the school newspaper, and teaching yoga in the evenings.

King James II of England (who was also James VII of Scotland) inherited the throne in 1685 upon the death of his brother, Charles II. James II was unpopular because of his attempts to increase the power of the monarchy and restore the Catholic faith. Deposed in the "Glorious Revolution" of 1688-89, he fled to France. His daughter and son-in-law succeeded him as Queen Mary II and King William III. James II died in 1701.
Unless otherwise noted, these books are for sale at Amazon.com. Your purchase through these links will help to support the continued operation and improvement of the Royalty.nu site.
James II by John Miller. Biography from the Yale English Monarchs series.
James II: The Triumph and the Tragedy by John Callow. Charts James' life using little-known material from the UK National Archives. Includes James' own description of the Battle of Edgehill, his reasons for his conversion to Catholicism, and his correspondence with William of Orange.
A Court in Exile: The Stuarts in France, 1689-1718 by Edward Corp. After James II was deposed, he established his court in France. The book describes his court and the close relationships between the British and French royal families.
King in Exile: James II: Warrior, King and Saint by John Callow. Reassesses James's strategy for dealing with his downfall and exile, presenting a portrait of a man who planned for great political rewards and popular acclaim.
James II and the Trial of the Seven Bishops by William Gibson. The trial of seven bishops in 1688 was a prelude to the Glorious Revolution, as popular support for the bishops led to widespread welcome for William of Orange's invasion.
The Making of King James II by John Callow is about the formative years of the fallen king. Out of print, but sometimes available from Alibris.
The Countess and the King: A Novel of the Countess of Dorchester and King James II by Susan Holloway Scott. Novel about Katherine Sedley, a royal mistress forced to make the most perilous of choices: to remain loyal to the king, or to England.
The Crown for a Lie by Jane Lane. Novel about how James II lost his throne. Out of print, but sometimes available from Alibris.

RWJF Priority: Use pricing strategies—both incentives and disincentives—to promote the purchase of healthier foods
Prices can significantly affect family food choices and are emerging as an important strategy in the movement to reverse the childhood obesity epidemic. For example, when healthy foods like fruits and vegetables are more affordable, children are less likely to gain excess weight. And leading health authorities, including the Institute of Medicine, recommend new policies to reduce overconsumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, which are one of the top sources of calories in the American diet.
The resources below, from RWJF grantees and partners, explore the possible health and economic impacts of using pricing strategies to promote consumption of healthy foods and beverages and discourage consumption of unhealthy products.

This section provides primary sources that document how Indian and European men and one English and one Indian woman have described the practice of sati, or the self-immolation of Hindu widows.
Although they are all critical of self-immolation, Francois Bernier, Fanny Parks, Lord William Bentinck, and Rev. England present four different European perspectives on the practice of sati and what it represents about Indian culture in general, and the Hindu religion and Hindu women in particular. They also indicate increasing negativism in European attitudes toward India and the Hindu religion in general. It would be useful to compare the attitudes of Bentinck and England as representing the secular and sacred aspects of British criticism of sati. A comparison of Bentinck’s minute with the subsequent legislation also reveals differences in tone between private and public documents of colonial officials. Finally, a comparison between the Fanny Parks and the three men should raise discussion on whether or not the gender and social status of the writer made any difference in his or her appraisal of the practice of self-immolation.
The three sources by Indian men and one by an Indian woman illustrate the diversity of their attitudes toward sati. The Marathi source illuminates the material concerns of relatives of the Hindu widow who is urged to adopt a son, so as to keep a potentially lucrative office within the extended family. These men are willing to undertake intense and delicate negotiations to secure a suitably related male child who could be adopted. This letter also documents that adoption was a legitimate practice among Hindus, and that Hindu women as well as men could adopt an heir. Ram Mohan Roy’s argument illustrates a rationalist effort to reform Hindu customs with the assistance of British legislation. Roy illustrates one of the many ways in which Indians collaborate with British political power in order to secure change within Indian society. He also enabled the British to counter the arguments of orthodox Hindus about the scriptural basis for the legitimacy of self-immolation of Hindu widows. The petition of the orthodox Hindu community in Calcutta, the capital of the Company’s territories in India, documents an early effort of Indians to keep the British colonial power from legislating on matters pertaining to the private sphere of Indian family life. Finally, Pandita Ramabai reflects the ways in which ancient Hindu scriptures and their interpretation continued to dominate debate. Students should consider how Ramabai’s effort to raise funds for her future work among child widows in India might have influenced her discussion of sati.
Two key issues should be emphasized. First, both Indian supporters and European and Indian opponents of the practice of self-immolation argue their positions on the bodies of Hindu women, and all the men involved appeal to Hindu scriptures to legitimate their support or opposition. Second, the voices of Indian women were filtered through the sieve of Indian and European men and a very few British women until the late 19th century.
- How do the written and visual sources portray the Hindu women who commit self-immolation? Possible aspects range from physical appearance and age, motivation, evidence of physical pain (that even the most devoted woman must suffer while burning to death), to any evidence of the agency or autonomy of the Hindu widow in deciding to commit sati. Are any differences discernible, and if so, do they seem related to gender or nationality of the observer or time period in which they were observed?
- How are the brahman priests who preside at the self-immolation portrayed in Indian and European sources? What might account for any similarities and differences?
- What reasons are used to deter Hindu widows from committing sati? What do these reasons reveal about the nature of family life in India and the relationships between men and women?
- What do the reasons that orthodox Hindus provide to European observers and to Indian reformers reveal about the significance of sati for the practice of the Hindu religion? What do their arguments reveal about orthodox Hindu attitudes toward women and the family?
- How are Hindu scriptures used in various ways in the debates before and after the prohibition of sati?
- What is the tone of the petition from 800 Hindus to their British governor? Whom do they claim to represent? What is their justification for the ritual of self-immolation? What is their attitude toward the Mughal empire whose Muslim rulers had preceded the British? What is their characterization of the petitioners toward those Hindus who support the prohibition on sati? How do the petitioners envision the proper relationship between the state and the practice of religion among its subjects?
- Who or what factors do European observers, British officials, and Indian opponents of sati hold to be responsible for the continuance of the practice of sati?
- What were the reasons that widows gave for committing sati? Were they religious, social or material motives? What is the evidence that the widows were voluntarily committing sati before 1829? What reasons did the opponents of sati give for the decisions of widows to commit self-immolation? What reasons did opponents give for widows who tried to escape from their husbands’ pyres?
- What are the reasons that Lord Bentinck and his Executive Council cite for their decision to declare the practice of sati illegal? Are the arguments similar to or different from his arguments in his minute a month earlier? What do these reasons reveal about British attitudes toward their role or mission in India? Do they use any of the arguments cited by Ram Mohan Roy or Pandita Ramabai?
- What do these sources, both those who oppose sati and those who advocate it, reveal about their attitudes to the Hindu religion in particular and Indian culture in general?

March 30, 2012
CDC Releases New Report on Autism Prevalence in U.S.
Researchers at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health contributed to a new Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report that estimates the prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) as affecting 1 in 88 U.S. children overall, and 1 in 54 boys.
This is the third such report by the CDC’s Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network (ADDM), which has used the same surveillance methods for more than a decade. Previous ADDM reports estimated the rate of ASDs at 1 in 110 children in the 2009 report that looked at data from 2006, and 1 in 150 children in the 2007 report, which covered data from 2002. The current prevalence estimate, which analyzed data from 2008, represents a 78 percent increase since 2002, and a 23 percent increase since 2006.
ASDs include diagnoses of autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, and Pervasive Developmental Disorder-Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS). ASDs encompass a wide spectrum of conditions, all of which affect communication, social and behavioral skills. The causes of these developmental disorders are not completely understood, although studies show that both environment and genetics play an important and complex role. There is no known cure for ASDs, but studies have shown that behavioral interventions, particularly those begun early in a child’s life, can greatly improve learning and skills.
The latest CDC report, “Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders – Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2008,” provides autism prevalence estimates from different areas of the United States, including Maryland. The purpose of the report is to provide high-quality data on the extent and distribution of ASDs in the U.S. population, to promote better planning for health and educational services, and to inform the further development of research on the causes, progression, and treatments.
“We continue observing increases in prevalence since the inception of the project in 2000,” said Li-Ching Lee, PhD, a psychiatric epidemiologist with the Bloomberg School"s Departments of Epidemiology and Mental Health and the principal investigator for the prevalence project’s Maryland site. “In Maryland, we found 27 percent of children with ASDs were never diagnosed by professionals. So, we know there are more children out there and we may see the increase continue in coming years.”
The new report, which focuses on 8-year-olds because that is an age where most children with ASD have been identified, shows that the number of those affected varies widely among the 14 participating states, with Utah having the the highest overall rate (1 in 47) and Alabama the lowest (1 in 210). Across all sites, nearly five times as many boys as girls are affected. Additionally, growing numbers of minority children are being diagnosed, with a 91 percent increase among black non-Hispanic children and a 110 percent increase for Hispanic children. Researchers say better screening and diagnosis may contribute to those increases among minority children.
The overall rate in Maryland is 1 in 80 children; 1 in 49 boys and 1 in 256 girls. In Maryland, the prevalence has increased 85 percent from 2002 to 2008. The increase was 41 percent between 2004 and 2008, and 35 percent between 2006 and 2008.
The data were gathered through collaboration with the Maryland State Department of Education and participating schools in Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Cecil, Harford and Howard counties, as well as clinical sources such as Kennedy Krieger Institute, Mt. Washington Pediatric Hospital, and University of Maryland Medical System.
While the report focuses on the numbers, its authors acknowledge that the reasons for the increase are not completely understood and that more research is needed. They note that the increase is likely due in part to a broadened definition of ASDs, greater awareness among the public and professionals, and the way children receive services in their local communities. “It’s very difficult, if not impossible, to tease these factors apart to quantify how much each of these factors contributed to the increase,” Dr. Lee said.
But whatever the cause, “This report paints a picture of the magnitude of the condition across our country and helps us understand how communities identify children with autism. One thing the data tell us with certainty – there are more children and families that need help,” said CDC Director Thomas Frieden, MD, MPH.
Researchers also identified the median age of ASD diagnosis, documented in records. In Maryland, that age was 5 years and 6 months, compared with 4 years, 6 months nationally. Across all sites, children who have autistic disorder tend to be identified earlier, while those with Asperger Disorder tend to be diagnosed later. Given the importance of early intervention, ADDM researchers carefully track at what age children receive an ASD diagnosis.
“Unfortunately, most children still are not diagnosed until after they reach age 4. We’ve heard from too many parents that they were concerned long before their child was diagnosed. We are working hard to change that,” said Coleen Boyle, PhD, MSHyg, director of CDC’s National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities.
To see the full report: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6103a1.htm?s_cid=ss6103a1_w
To the Community Report with state statistics: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/documents/ADDM-2012-Community-Report.pdf
Media contact for Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health: Natalie Wood-Wright at 410-614-6029 or email@example.com

- Yes, this is a good time to plant native grass seed in the ground. You may have to supplement with irrigation if the rains stop before the seeds have germinated and made good root growth.
- Which grasses should I plant? The wonderful thing about California is that we have so many different ecosystems; the challenging thing about California is that we have so many different ecosystems. It’s impossible for us to know definitively which particular bunchgrasses used to grow or may still grow at your particular site, but to make the best guesses possible, we recommend the following:
- Bestcase scenario is to have bunchgrasses already on the site that you can augment through proper mowing or grazing techniques.
- Next best is to have a nearby site with native bunchgrasses and similar elevation, aspect, and soils, that you can use as a model.
- After that, go to sources such as our pamphlet Distribution of Native Grasses of California, by Alan Beetle, $7.50.
- Also reference local floras of your area, available through the California Native Plant Society.
Container growing: We grow seedlings in pots throughout the season, but ideal planning for growing your own plants in pots is to sow six months before you want to put them in the ground. Though restorationists frequently use plugs and liners (long narrow containers), and they may be required for large areas, we prefer growing them the horticultural way: first in flats, then transplanting into 4" pots, and when they are sturdy little plants, into the ground. Our thinking is that since they are not tap-rooted but fibrous-rooted (one of their main advantages as far as deep erosion control is concerned) square 4" pots suit them, and so far our experiences have borne this out.
In future newsletters, we will be reporting on the experiences and opinions of Marin ranchers Peggy Rathmann and John Wick, who are working with UC Berkeley researcher Wendy Silver on a study of carbon sequestration and bunchgrasses. So far, it’s very promising. But more on that later. For now, I’ll end with a quote from Peggy, who grows, eats, nurtures, lives, and sleeps bunchgrasses, for the health of their land and the benefit of their cows.
“It takes a while. But it’s so worth it.”

I’m struggling a bit to teach my children to pack for themselves. I want them to learn how to be self-reliant, but I also want to make sure they have everything they need for the day. If I don’t triple check every detail, they’re likely to be fully prepared for snack time but missing important papers or sports equipment. What’s the right thing to do?
Your desire to raise self-reliant children is fantastic. But there’s no doubt that passing the baton can be tough. The first question has to be: how old are your children? A good general rule of thumb is, if they’re old enough to read, they’re old enough to pack their own bags. Assuming your little ones are old enough, the most effective thing to do is give them some time frame to take complete responsibility for getting themselves ready, ask questions to help prompt them if you think they aren’t paying attention to something crucial, and most importantly, when things aren’t crucial (e.g. do they have the right uniform packed), letting them fail. Nothing teaches quite like experience. As you let go of the reigns a bit, here are some more ideas to guide you.
• Planning Starts the Night Before. Mornings are not the right time to teach your children how to pack themselves. You’re rushed, and they’re often bleary-eyed and grumpy. The ideal time to sit down with them, explain what you are trying to accomplish, and get them to start preparing for the next day is after homework but before TV time. That way you have time to ask them questions and offer un-stressed help in the initial stages. This is a process that will take time and spending time in the evenings helping them learn how to become responsible for themselves is time well spent.
• Explain as You Go. You need to develop a checklist with them and then go through the items. Don’t criticize or watch over the task being done. Accept that the task will not be done exactly the way you would do it but recognize that as long as it is accomplished and done on time, that it is okay. In the beginning, be prepared to patiently ask and answer a lot of questions! Why do emergency numbers need to be in the backpacks? Because you might need to call someone. Why does lunch have to be prepared? So that mom knows they are eating healthy and, besides, too much sugar will make them feel bad, Why do you keep asking about permission slips or projects that need to go with them? Because it’s important they do not miss out on something the rest of the class is doing. This is just a primer but you get the idea.
• Provide Feedback. Once the task has been completed, give constructive feedback to the person. As a guideline, tell your son or daughter five great things about the job for every one criticism. If after some time you notice they are consistently sloppy or forgetful, be patient but firm and make sure there are consequences for actions.

Newegg.com - A great place to buy computers, computer parts, electronics, software, accessories, and DVDs online. With great prices, fast shipping, and top-rated customer service - once you know, you Newegg.
If you are reading this message, Please click this link to reload this page.(Do not use your browser's "Refresh" button). Please email us if you're running the latest version of your browser and you still see this message.
Table of contents
Bluetooth is an industrial specification for wireless data transfer. Bluetooth connectivity is often found in high-end keyboards and mice. Bluetooth generally provide an operating range of up to 30 feet and is less prone to interference in comparison to RF technology.
DPI and FPS
DPI (dots per inch) and FPS (frames per second) are the number of counts in an inch of movement and the number of times the sensor reads the surface in a second respectively. These figures are measures of the amount of information recorded by the mouse's sensor. The greater the amount of information that is gathered, the more accurately and precisely the surface can be tracked. To detect movement, optical and laser mice use sensors to read beams of light as they are reflected from the tracking surface.
Currently 400 and 800 DPI optical mice as well as 800 DPI laser mice are very popular, but some high-end models are capable of 1000, 1600 or even 2000 DPI tracking speeds.
The Personal System/2 or PS/2 was the designation for IBM's second generation of personal computers. The PS/2 keyboard and mouse ports were introduced with it. PS/2 ports connect the keyboard and mouse to a computer and are usually color-coded on today's systems - purple for keyboards and green for mice. Most desktop motherboards still provide PS/2 ports, but an increasing number of keyboards and mice are using USB ports.
Radio Frequency (RF) is a wireless communication technology. Using RF technology allows keyboards and mice to computers without annoying cables.
The USB (Universal Serial Bus) port is a popular I/O interface used for connecting computers and peripherals or other devices. It is capable of supporting up to 127 daisy-chained peripheral devices simultaneously. The latest USB 2.0 specification can deliver 480Mbps data transfer bandwidth. In addition, USB provides plug-and-play capabilities to allow device changes while the computer is powered on. Today, many keyboard and mice use the USB interface.

exactly located (exactlyLocated)
The actual, minimal location of an
Object. This is a subrelation of the more general Predicate
SUMO / BASE-ONTOLOGY
Related WordNet synsets
- the precise location of something; a spatially limited location; "she walked to a point where she could survey the whole street"
Agar obj is partly located in region, to yah kuch subobj nahin, ki subobj is a part of obj aur subobj is exactly located in region.
(partlyLocated ?OBJ ?REGION)
(part ?SUBOBJ ?OBJ)
(exactlyLocated ?SUBOBJ ?REGION))))
Agar obj is exactly located in region, to yah kuch otherobj nahin, ki otherobj is exactly located in region aur otherobj is not equal to obj.
(exactlyLocated ?OBJ ?REGION)
(exactlyLocated ?OTHEROBJ ?REGION)
(equal ?OTHEROBJ ?OBJ))))))
"thing ki jagah time tha" is equal to region agar hai thing is exactly located in region during time.
(WhereFn ?THING ?TIME)
(exactlyLocated ?THING ?REGION)))

Reishiki - the external expression of respect
In Iaido dojo you will practice with a wooden sword (Bokken), or a training sword (Iaito), or even a real Japanese sword with a cutting blade (Katana). There will be numerous people practicing, all in one room. Following the rules of etiquette ensures that no one gets injured. Also, following the rules of etiquette enhances practice in other ways. The teacher can more quickly determine skill levels when students line up in the order of rank. The ceremonial bowing serves as a concentration and focusing point; when bowing, practitioners shows respect for others. Maintaining observant silence allows students to focus their attention and practice reading body language. Cleaning the dojo after practice leaves it ready for the next group.
Always remember, reishiki comes from the heart and without sincere respect it will be only an empty gestures.
- Be on time.
- Do not make class wait.
- Finger and toe nails must be cut short and all jewelry removed.
- Remove shoes before entering.
- A sword should be untied and held in the right hand.
- Step directly in to the dojo.
- Do not block doorway.
- Stop and bow to Shinzen.
- Avoid drawing or pointing a sword toward Shinzen.
- Before practice, be sure your sword is in proper shape.
- Check the Mekugi.
- Place it at Shimoza (opposite side of room from shinzen) with the Ha to the wall.
- Never touch a sword without the owner's permission.
- Do not knock or step over any sword.
- The floor must be cleared and swept.
- Leave the Dojo ready for those who practice after you.
- Eating, drinking, and smoking are not allowed on the Dojo floor.
- When on the practice floor do not have private conversations other than iaido related subjects.
- Tell the teacher of any injuries or problems, or of having to leave early.
- Do not leave without permission.
- Do not speak when teacher is speaking.
- Thank the teacher.
- Show respect to other iaidoka (students)
- Do not draw directly towards others.
- Do not do anything that may distract or injure a fellow practitioner or spectator.

- Enter a word for the dictionary definition.
From The Collaborative International Dictionary of English v.0.48:
Nectarine \Nec`tar*ine"\ (n[e^]k`t[~e]r*[=e]n"), n. [Cf. F. nectarine. See Nectar.] (Bot.) A smooth-skinned variety of peach. [1913 Webster] Spanish nectarine, the plumlike fruit of the West Indian tree Chrysobalanus Icaco; -- also called cocoa plum. It is made into a sweet conserve which is largely exported from Cuba. [1913 Webster]

Throughout life there are many times when outside influences change or influence decision-making. The young child has inner motivation to learn and explore, but as he matures, finds outside sources to be a motivating force for development, as well. Along with being a beneficial influence, there are moments when peer pressure can overwhelm a child and lead him down a challenging path. And, peer pressure is a real thing – it is not only observable, but changes the way the brain behaves.
As a young adult, observational learning plays a part in development through observing and then doing. A child sees another child playing a game in a certain way and having success, so the observing child tries the same behavior. Albert Bandura was a leading researcher in this area. His famous bobo doll studies found that the young child is greatly influenced by observing other’s actions. When a child sees something that catches his attention, he retains the information, attempts to reproduce it, and then feels motivated to continue the behavior if it is met with success.
Observational learning and peer pressure are two different things – one being the observing of behaviors and then the child attempting to reproduce them based on a child’s own free will. Peer pressure is the act of one child coercing another to follow suit. Often the behavior being pressured is questionable or taboo, such as smoking cigarettes or drinking alcohol.
Peer Pressure and the Brain
Recent studies find that peer pressure influences the way our brains behave, which leads to better understanding about the impact of peer pressure and the developing child. According to studies from Temple University, peer pressure has an effect on brain signals involved in risk and reward department, especially when the teen’s friends are around. Compared to adults in the study, teenagers were much more likely to take risks they would not normally take on their own when with friends. Brain signals were more activated in the reward center of the brain, firing greatest during at risk behaviors.
Peer pressure can be difficult for young adults to deal with, and learning ways to say “no” or avoid pressure-filled situations can become overwhelming. Resisting peer pressure is not just about saying “no,” but how the brain functions. Children that have stronger connections among regions in their frontal lobes, along with other areas of the brain, are better equipped to resist peer pressure. During adolescence, the frontal lobes of the brain develop rapidly, causing axioms in the region to have a coating of fatty myelin, which insulates them and causes the frontal lobes to more effectively communicate with other brain regions. This helps the young adult to develop judgment and self-control needed to resist peer pressure.
Along with the frontal lobes contributing to the brain and peer pressure, other studies find that the prefrontal cortex plays a role in how teens respond to peer pressure. Just as with the previous study, children that were not exposed to peer pressure had greater connectivity within the brain as well as abilities to resist peer pressure.
Working through Peer Pressure
The teenage years are exciting years. The young adult is often going through physical changes due to puberty, adjusting to new friends and educational environments, and learning how to make decisions for themselves. Adults can offer a helping and supportive hand to young adults when dealing with peer pressure by considering the following:
Separation: Understanding that this is a time for the child to separate and learn how to be his own individual is important. It is hard to let go and allow the child to make mistakes for himself, especially when you want to offer input or change plans and actions, but allowing the child to go down his own path is important. As an adult, offering a helping hand if things go awry and being there to offer support is beneficial.
Talk it Out: As an adult, take a firm stand on rules and regulations with your child. Although you cannot control whom your child selects as friends, you can take a stand on your control of your child. Setting specific goals, rules, and limits encourages respect and trust, which must be earned in response. Do not be afraid to start talking with your child early about ways to resist peer pressure. Focus on how it will build your child’s confidence when he learns to say “no” at the right time and reassure him that it can be accomplished without feeling guilty or losing self-confidence.
Stay Involved: Keep family dinner as a priority, make time each week for a family meeting or game time, and plan family outings and vacations regularly. Spending quality time with kids models positive behavior and offers lots of opportunities for discussions about what is happening at school and with friends.
If at any time there are concerns a child is becoming involved in questionable behavior due to peer pressure, ask for help. Understand that involving others in helping a child cope with peer pressure, such as a family doctor, youth advisor, or other trusted friend, does not mean that the adult is not equipped to properly help the child, but that including others in assisting a child, that may be on the brink of heading down the wrong path, is beneficial.
By Sarah Lipoff. Sarah is an art educator and parent. Visit Sarah’s website here.
Read More →

Ptosis Correction Surgery:
Ptosis Correction Surgery India offers information on Ptosis Correction Surgery in India, Ptosis Correction Surgery cost India, Ptosis Correction Surgery hospital in India, Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad & Bangalore, Ptosis Correction Surgeon in India.
Ptosis is the medical term for drooping of the upper eyelid, a condition that may affect one or botheyes.
The ptosis may be mild - in which the lid partially covers the pupil; or severe - in which the lid completely covers the pupil.
When does Ptosis occur?
Ptosis can occur at any age. When present since birth it is called congenital ptosis. When present in the elderly it is called acquired ptosis.
What causes Ptosis?
While the cause of congenital ptosis is often unclear, the most common reason is improper development of the levator muscle. The levator muscle is the major muscle responsible for elevating the upper eyelid. In adults ptosis is generally due to weakening / dehiscence of the levator muscle. It may also occur following injury to the muscle as after lid injuries and eye surgeries. Rarely it may be due to myasthenia gravis ( a condition where there is progressive weakness of muscles).
Why should Ptosis be treated?
Children with significant ptosis may need to tilt their head back into a chin-up position, lift their eyelid with a finger, or raise their eyebrows in an effort to see from under their drooping eyelid. Children with congenital ptosis may also have amblyopia ("lazy eye"), strabismus or squint (eyes that are not properly aligned or straight), refractive errors, astigmatism, or blurred vision. In addition, drooping of the eyelid may result in an undesired facial appearance and difficult social life. In moderate ptosis there is a loss of the upper field of vision by the drooping upper lid.
How is Ptosis treated?
The eye condition Ptosis is trated by a specified sugery called ptosis surgery.
Ptosis is treated surgically, with the specific operation based on the severity of the ptosis and the strength of the levator muscle. If the ptosis is not severe, surgery is generally performed when the child is between 3 and 5 years of age (the "pre-school" years). However, when the ptosis interferes with the child's vision, surgery is performed at an earlier age to allow proper visual development. Ptosis repair is usually completed under general anesthesia in infants and young children and under local anesthesia in adults.
What to expect after surgery ?
Most patients will tolerate the procedure very well and have a rapid recovery. Cold packs may need to be applied to the operated eyelid for the first 48 hours following surgery. Antibiotic ointments applied to the incision are sometimes recommended. The elevation of the eyelid will often be immediately noticeable, though in some cases bruising and swelling will obscure this finding. Most patients will have sutures that need removing about a week following surgery. In children, absorbable sutures are often used.
The bruising and swelling associated with the surgery will usually resolve in two to three weeks. Some patients may need adjustment of the sutures to better align the lid height. This may or may not require additional anaesthesia or a trip to the operating room.
India Surgery Ptosis,Ptosis Correction, India Cost Price Ptosis, Ptosis Correction Surgery, Ptosis Correction, India Ptosis Correction Surgery, India Cost Ptosis Correction Surgery, Low Cost Mechanical Ptosis Correction Mumbai,, India Low Cost Ptosis Correction Surgery Hospital, Affordable Ptosis Correction Hospital Mumbai, Health Care, Ptosis Corrective Surgery, Eyelid Surgery, Drooping, Treatment On Ptosis Correction Surgery, India Ptosis Correction Surgery Surgeons, Ptosis Correction Surgery Doctors
Call: + 91 9029304141 (10 am. To 8 pm. IST)
Email : email@example.com (Preferred)
(Only for international patients seeking treatment in India)

Vol. 17 Issue 6
One-Legged (Single Limb) Stance Test
The One-Legged Stance Test (OLST)1,2 is a simple, easy and effective method to screen for balance impairments in the older adult population.
You may be asking yourself, "how can standing on one leg provide you with any information about balance, after all, we do not go around for extended periods of time standing on one leg?"
True, as a rule we are a dynamic people, always moving, our world always in motion, but there are instances were we do need to maintain single limb support. The most obvious times are when we are performing our everyday functional activities.
Stepping into a bath tub or up onto a curb would be difficult, if not impossible to do without the ability to maintain single limb support for a given amount of time. The ability to switch from two- to one-leg standing is required to perform turns, climb stairs and dress.
As we know, the gait cycle requires a certain amount of single limb support in order to be able to progress ourselves along in a normal pattern. When the dynamics of the cycle are disrupted, loss of balance leading to falls may occur.
This is especially true in older individuals whose gait cycle is altered due to normal and potentially abnormal changes that occur as a result of aging.
The One-Legged Stance Test measures postural stability (i.e., balance) and is more difficult to perform due to the narrow base of support required to do the test. Along with five other tests of balance and mobility, reliability of the One-Legged Stance Test was examined for 45 healthy females 55 to 71 years old and found to have "good" intraclass correlations coefficients (ICC range = .95 to .099). Within raters ICC ranged from 0.73 to 0.93.3
To perform the test, the patient is instructed to stand on one leg without support of the upper extremities or bracing of the unweighted leg against the stance leg. The patient begins the test with the eyes open, practicing once or twice on each side with his gaze fixed straight ahead.
The patient is then instructed to close his eyes and maintain balance for up to 30 seconds.1
The number of seconds that the patient/client is able to maintain this position is recorded. Termination or a fail test is recorded if 1) the foot touches the support leg; 2) hopping occurs; 3) the foot touches the floor, or 4) the arms touch something for support.
Normal ranges with eyes open are: 60-69 yrs/22.5 ± 8.6s, 70-79 yrs/14.2 ± 9.3s. Normal ranges for eyes closed are: 60-69 yrs/10.2 ± 8.6s, 70-79 yrs/4.3 ± 3.0s.4 Briggs and colleagues reported balance times on the One-Legged Stance Test in females age 60 to 86 years for dominant and nondominant legs.
Given the results of this data, there appears to be some difference in whether individuals use their dominant versus their nondominant leg in the youngest and oldest age groups.
When using this test, having patients choose what leg they would like to stand on would be appropriate as you want to record their "best" performance.
It has been reported in the literature that individuals increase their chances of sustaining an injury due to a fall by two times if they are unable to perform a One-Legged Stance Test for five seconds.5 Other studies utilizing the One-Legged Stance Test have been conducted in older adults to assess static balance after strength training,6 performance of activities of daily living and platform sway tests.7
Interestingly, subscales of other balance measures such as the Tinetti Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment8 and Berg Balance Scale9 utilize unsupported single limb stance times of 10 seconds and 5 seconds respectively, for older individuals to be considered to have "normal" balance.
Thirty percent to 60 percent of community-dwelling elderly individuals fall each year, with many experiencing multiple falls.10 Because falls are the leading cause of injury-related deaths in older adults and a significant cause of disability in this population, prevention of falls and subsequent injuries is a worthwhile endeavor.11
The One-Legged Stance Test can be used as a quick, reliable and easy way for clinicians to screen their patients/clients for fall risks and is easily incorporated into a comprehensive functional evaluation for older adults.
1. Briggs, R., Gossman, M., Birch, R., Drews, J., & Shaddeau, S. (1989). Balance performance among noninstitutionalized elderly women. Physical Therapy, 69(9), 748-756.
2. Anemaet, W., & Moffa-Trotter, M. (1999). Functional tools for assessing balance and gait impairments. Topics in Geriatric Rehab, 15(1), 66-83.
3. Franchignoni, F., Tesio, L., Martino, M., & Ricupero, C. (1998). Reliability of four simple, quantitative tests of balance and mobility in healthy elderly females. Aging (Milan), 10(1), 26-31.
4. Bohannon, R., Larkin, P., Cook, A., & Singer, J. (1984). Decrease in timed balance test scores with aging. Physical Therapy, 64, 1067-1070.
5. Vellas, B., Wayne, S., Romero, L., Baumgartner, R., et al. (1997). One-leg balance is an important predictor of injurious falls in older persons. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 45, 735-738.
6. Schlicht, J., Camaione, D., & Owen, S. (2001). Effect of intense strength training on standing balance, walking speed, and sit-to-stand performance in older adults. Journal of Gerontological Medicine and Science, 56A(5), M281-M286.
7. Frandin, K., Sonn, U., Svantesson, U., & Grimby, G. (1996). Functional balance tests in 76-year-olds in relation to performance, activities of daily living and platform tests. Scandinavian Journal of Rehabilitative Medicine, 27(4), 231-241.
8. Tinetti, M., Williams, T., & Mayewski, R. (1986). Fall risk index for elderly patients based on number of chronic disabilities. American Journal of Medicine, 80, 429-434.
9. Berg, K., et al. (1989). Measuring balance in the elderly: Preliminary development of an instrument. Physio Therapy Canada, 41(6), 304-311.
10. Rubenstein, L., & Josephson, K. (2002). The epidemiology of falls and syncope. Clinical Geriatric Medicine, 18, 141-158.
11. National Safety Council. (2004). Injury Facts. Itasca, IL: Author.
Dr. Lewis is a physical therapist in private practice and president of Premier Physical Therapy of Washington, DC. She lectures exclusively for GREAT Seminars and Books, Inc. Dr. Lewis is also the author of numerous textbooks. Her Website address is www.greatseminarsandbooks.com. Dr. Shaw is an assistant professor in the physical therapy program at the University of South Florida dedicated to the area of geriatric rehabilitation. She lectures exclusively for GREAT Seminars and Books in the area of geriatric function.
APTA Encouraged by Cap Exceptions
New process grants automatic exceptions to beneficiaries needing care the most
Calling it "a good first step toward ensuring that Medicare beneficiaries continue to have coverage for the physical therapy they need," Ben F Massey, Jr, PT, MA, president of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA), expressed optimism that the new exceptions process will allow a significant number of Medicare patients to receive services exceeding the $1,740 annual financial cap on Medicare therapy coverage. The new procedure, authorized by Congress in the recently enacted Deficit Reduction Act (PL 109-171), will be available to Medicare beneficiaries on March 13 under rules released this week by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).
"APTA is encouraged by the new therapy cap exceptions process," Massey said. "CMS has made a good effort to ensure that Medicare beneficiaries who need the most care are not harmed by an arbitrary cap."
As APTA recommended, the process includes automatic exceptions and also grants exceptions to beneficiaries who are receiving both physical therapy and speech language pathology (the services are currently combined under one $1,740 cap).
"We have yet to see how well Medicare contractors will be able to implement and apply this process. Even if it works well, Congress only authorized this new process through 2006. Congress must address this issue again this year, and we are confident that this experience will demonstrate to legislators that they must completely repeal the caps and provide a more permanent solution for Medicare beneficiaries needing physical therapy," Massey continued.
The therapy caps went into effect on Jan. 1, 2006, limiting Medicare coverage on outpatient rehabilitation services to $1,740 for physical therapy and speech therapy combined and $1,740 for occupational therapy.
The American Physical Therapy Association is a national professional organization representing more than 65,000 members. Its goal is to foster advancements in physical therapy practice, research and education.
New Mouthwash Helps With Pain
Doctors in Italy are studying whether a new type of mouthwash will help alleviate pain for patients suffering from head and neck cancer who were treated with radiation therapy, according to a new study (International Journal of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics, Feb. 1, 2006).
Fifty patients, suffering from various forms of head and neck cancer and who received radiation therapy, were observed during the course of their radiation treatment. Mucositis, or inflammation of the mucous membrane in the mouth, is the most common side effect yet no additional therapy has been identified that successfully reduces the pain.
This study sought to discover if a mouthwash made from the local anesthetic tetracaine was able to alleviate the discomfort associated with head and neck cancer and if there would be any negative side effects of the mouthwash. The doctors chose to concoct a tetracaine-based mouthwash instead of a lidocaine-based version because it was found to be four times more effective, worked faster and produced a prolonged relief.
The tetracaine was administered by a mouthwash approximately 30 minutes before and after meals, or roughly six times a day. Relief of oral pain was reported in 48 of the 50 patients. Sixteen patients reported that the mouthwash had an unpleasant taste or altered the taste of their food.

Hypertension is often diagnosed during a visit to your doctor. Blood pressure is measured using a cuff around your arm and a device called a sphygmomanometer. Your doctor may ask you to sit quietly for five minutes before checking your blood pressure.
If your blood pressure reading is high, you will probably be asked to come back for repeat blood pressure checks. If you have three visits with readings over 140/90 mmHG, you will be diagnosed with high blood pressure.
Some people’s blood pressure goes up when they are at the doctor’s office. If your doctor suspects that may be occurring, he or she may ask you to get some blood pressure readings at home. In some cases, he or she may recommend that you wear an ambulatory blood pressure monitor. This device measures your blood pressure regularly throughout the day as you go about your activities. It is usually worn for 24 hours, even while sleeping.
- Reviewer: Michael J. Fucci, DO
- Review Date: 09/2012 -
- Update Date: 00/91/2012 -

Engineer your first step to a four-year degree at Edmonds Community College
Engineers Make a Difference
Engineering is the art of applying scientific and mathematical principles, experience, judgment, and common sense to make things that benefit people. Engineers solve problems. They improve and develop products to meet consumer and societal needs. They find ways for existing products to work better, last longer, operate more safely and cost less.
They also look for innovative solutions to global problems. Engineers design bridges and important medical equipment as well as processes for cleaning up toxic spills and systems for mass transit.
It's a Fact
Engineering professions requiring a four-year degree are among the highest paying jobs in Washington State according to the office of Labor Market and Economic Analysis. Source: www.workforceexplorer.com

Information for Students
Welcome to the Flint Regional Science Fair! We look forward to seeing you at the Fair in March.
Taking part in a science fair is fun, educational, and rewarding. This part of our web site provides information and links that can help you get started, conduct your research and enter the Flint Regional Science Fair.
The FASF is held every Spring. This means you should begin planning in the Fall and Winter prior to the Fair to ensure you pick a good research topic, and have plenty of time to do a good job and present a quality project.
Parents, teachers, and mentors are important helpers to identify projects, collect the resources required for your project, and track your progress. Ask your parents and your teachers for assistance. They are your best bet for one-on-one direction and support in your Science Fair experience.
Elementary Division and Junior Division projects follow simpler rules than Senior Division projects.
More Web Student Science Resources
Questions? Email firstname.lastname@example.org.

Linn, Amy. Illuminating News: What You Don't Know About Lightning Might
Come As Shock. Providence Sunday Journal. August 21, 1988.
Abstract: This article explains some common misconceptions about
lightning. For example, one misconception is that lightning never strikes
the same place twice. This is untrue. Once lightning discovers an easy target
it will likely strike again. The article also provides important safety
precautions. The safest place during a thunderstorm is inside a house away
from windows or inside a closed car.

Problems of Philosophy
Chapter 5 - Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description
After distinguishing two types of knowledge, knowledge of things and knowledge of truths, Russell devotes this fifth chapter to an elucidation of knowledge of things. He further distinguishes two types of knowledge of things, knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description. We have knowledge by acquaintance when we are directly aware of a thing, without any inference. We are immediately conscious and acquainted with a color or hardness of a table before us, our sense-data. Since acquaintance with things is logically independent from any knowledge of truths, we can be acquainted with something immediately without knowing any truth about it. I can know the color of a table "perfectly and completely when I see it" and not know any truth about the color in itself. The other type of knowledge of things is called knowledge by description. When we say we have knowledge of the table itself, a physical object, we refer to a kind of knowledge other than immediate, direct knowledge. "The physical object which causes such-and-such sense-data" is a phrase that describes the table by way of sense-data. We only have a description of the table. Knowledge by description is predicated on something with which we are acquainted, sense-data, and some knowledge of truths, like knowing that "such- and-such sense-data are caused by the physical object." Thus, knowledge by description allows us to infer knowledge about the actual world via the things that can be known to us, things with which we have direct acquaintance (our subjective sense-data).
According to this outline, knowledge by acquaintance forms the bedrock for all of our other knowledge. Sense-data is not the only instance of things with which we can be immediately acquainted. For how would we recall the past, Russell argues, if we could only know what was immediately present to our senses. Beyond sense-data, we also have "acquaintance by memory." Remembering what we were immediately aware of makes it so that we are still immediately aware of that past, perceived thing. We may therefore access many past things with the same requisite immediacy. Beyond sense-data and memories, we possess "acquaintance by introspection." When we are aware of an awareness, like in the case of hunger, "my desiring food" becomes an object of acquaintance. Introspective acquaintance is a kind of acquaintance with our own minds that may be understood as self-consciousness. However, this self-consciousness is really more like a consciousness of a feeling or a particular thought; the awareness rarely includes the explicit use of "I," which would identify the Self as a subject. Russell abandons this strand of knowledge, knowledge of the Self, as a probable but unclear dimension of acquaintance.
Russell summarizes our acquaintance with things as follows: "We have acquaintance in sensation with the data of the outer senses, and in introspection with the data of what may be called the inner sense—thoughts, feelings, desires, etc.; we have acquaintance in memory with things which have been data either of the outer senses or of the inner sense. Further, it is probable, though not certain, that we have acquaintance with Self, as that which is aware of things or has desires towards things." All these objects of acquaintance are particulars, concrete, existing things. Russell cautions that we can also have acquaintance with abstract, general ideas called universals. He addresses universals more fully later in chapter 9.
Russell allocates the rest of the chapter to explaining how the complicated theory of knowledge by description actually works. The most conspicuous things that are known to us by description are physical objects and other people's minds. We approach a case of having knowledge by description when we know "that there is an object answering to a definite description, though we are not acquainted with any such object." Russell offers several illustrations in the service of understanding knowledge by description. He claims that it is important to understand this kind of knowledge because our language uses depends so heavily on it. When we say common words or proper names, we are really relying on the meanings implicit in descriptive knowledge. The thought connoted by the use of a proper name can only really be explicitly expressed through a description or proposition.
Bismarck, or "the first Chancellor of the German Empire," is Russell's most cogent example. Imagine that there is a proposition, or statement, made about Bismarck. If Bismarck is the speaker, admitting that he has a kind of direct acquaintance with his own self, Bismarck might have voiced his name in order to make a self-referential judgment, of which his name is a constituent. In this simplest case, the "proper name has the direct use which it always wishes to have, as simply standing for a certain object, and not for a description of the object." If one of Bismarck's friends who knew him directly was the speaker of the statement, then we would say that the speaker had knowledge by description. The speaker is acquainted with sense-data which he infers corresponds with Bismarck's body. The body or physical object representing the mind is "only known as the body and the mind connected with these sense-data," which is the vital description. Since the sense-data corresponding to Bismarck change from moment to moment and with perspective, the speaker knows which various descriptions are valid.
Still more removed from direct acquaintance, imagine that someone like you or I comes along and makes a statement about Bismarck that is a description based on a "more or less vague mass of historical knowledge." We say that Bismarck was the "first Chancellor of the German Empire." In order to make a valid description applicable to the physical object, Bismarck's body, we must find a relation between some particular with which we have acquaintance and the physical object, the particular with which we wish to have an indirect acquaintance. We must make such a reference in order to secure a meaningful description.
To usefully distinguish particulars from universals, Russell posits the example of "the most long-lived of men," a description which wholly consists of universals. We assume that the description must apply to some man, but we have no way of inferring any judgment about him. Russell remarks, "all knowledge of truths, as we shall show, demands acquaintance with things which are of an essentially different character from sense-data, the things which are sometimes called 'abstract ideas', but which we shall call 'universals'." The description composed only of universals gives no knowledge by acquaintance with which we might anchor an inference about the longest-lived man. A further statement about Bismarck, like "The first Chancellor of the German Empire was an astute diplomatist," is a statement that contains particulars and asserts a judgment that we can only make in virtue of some acquaintance (like something heard or read).
Statements about things known by description function in our language as statements about the "actual thing described;" that is, we intend to refer to that thing. We intend to say something with the direct authority that only Bismarck himself could have when he makes a statement about himself, something with which he has direct acquaintance. Yet, there is a spectrum of removal from acquaintance with the relevant particulars: from Bismarck himself, "there is Bismarck to people who knew him; Bismarck to those who only know of him through history" and at a far end of the spectrum "the longest lived of men." At the latter end, we can only make propositions that are logically deducible from universals, and at the former end, we come as close as possible to direct acquaintance and can make many propositions identifying the actual object. It is now clear how knowledge gained by description is reducible to knowledge by acquaintance. Russell calls this observation his fundamental principle in the study of "propositions containing descriptions": "Every proposition which we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted."
Indirect knowledge of some particulars seems necessary if we are to expressively attach meanings to the words we commonly use. When we say something referring to Julius Caesar, we clearly have no direct acquaintance with the man. Rather, we are thinking of such descriptions as "the man who was assassinated on the Ides of March" or "the founder of the Roman Empire." Since we have no way of being directly acquainted with Julius Caesar, our knowledge by description allows us to gain knowledge of "things which we have never experienced." It allows us to overstep the boundaries of our private, immediate experiences and engage a public knowledge and public language.
This knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description theory was a famous epistemological problem-solver for Russell. Its innovative character allowed him to shift to his moderate realism, a realism ruled by a more definite categorization of objects. It is a theory of knowledge that considers our practice of language to be meaningful and worthy of detailed analysis. Russell contemplates how we construct a sense of meaning about objects remote from our experience. The realm of acquaintance offers the most secure references for our understanding of the world. Knowledge by description allows us to draw inferences from our realm of acquaintance but leaves us in a more vulnerable position. Since knowledge by description also depends on truths, we are prone to error about our descriptive knowledge if we are somehow mistaken about a proposition that we have taken to be true.
Critics of this theory have held that Russell's hypothesis of knowledge by description is confusing. His comments when defining sense-data, that the physical world is unknowable to us, contradict his theory of knowledge by descriptions. He implies that "knowledge by description" is not really a form of knowledge since we can only know those things with which we are acquainted and we cannot be acquainted with physical objects. Russell's theory amounts to the proposition that our acquaintance with mental objects appears related in a distant way to physical objects and renders us obliquely acquainted with the physical world. Sense-data are our subjective representations of the external world, and they negotiate this indirect contact.
While innovative, Russell's theory of knowledge by description is not an attractive theory of knowledge. It is clearly unappealing because our impressions of the real world, on his view, are commensurate with muddy representations of reality. Though we have direct access to these representations, it seems impossible to have any kind of direct experience of reality. Reality, rather, consists in unconscious, inferential pieces of reasoning.
Readers' Notes allow users to add their own analysis and insights to our SparkNotes—and to discuss those ideas with one another. Have a novel take or think we left something out? Add a Readers' Note!

What are managed lanes?
Highway facilities or a set of lanes where operational strategies are proactively implemented and managed in response to changing conditions.
Transportation agencies are faced with growing challenges of congestion and a limited ability to expand freeway capacity due to construction costs, right-of-way constraints, and environmental and societal impacts. Transportation officials are taking advantage of opportunities to address mobility needs and provide travel options through a combination of limited capacity expansion coupled with operational strategies that seek to manage travel demand and improve transit and other forms of ridesharing. The managed lanes concept is gaining interest around the country as an approach that combines these elements to make the most effective and efficient use of a freeway facility.
The distinction between managed lanes and other traditional forms of freeway lane management is the operating philosophy of "active management." Under this philosophy, the operating agency proactively manages demand and available capacity on the facility by applying new strategies or modifying existing strategies. The agency defines from the outset the operating objectives for the managed lanes and the kinds of actions that will be taken once pre-defined performance thresholds are met.
You will need the Adobe Acrobat Reader to view the PDFs on this page.
United States Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Administration

Dengue Fever in India
04 March 2013
Dengue fever is a growing concern in India. In 2012, 247 deaths were recorded as a result of dengue fever nationwide.
Latest data on disease prevalence released by the Health Ministry shows a significant rise in the incidence of dengue fever from 18 860 cases in 2011, to 49 606 in year 2012.
Around 1700 dengue cases were reported from Delhi in 2012.
Advice for Travellers
India is a popular tourist destination and travellers should be aware of the risk of dengue fever. Avoidance of mosquito bites, particularly during daylight hours, by covering up with clothing, the use of bite avoidance measures such as repellent and bed nets is advised. Elimination of breeding sites around hotel rooms/houses is advised for longer term stays.

Intellectual knowledge appears to be innate and privy to the few, but in fact, access to information, development of intellectual work skills, time investment, and the maintenance of intellectual appearances are key to being perceived as an intellectual.
To make education more equitable, professors must go beyond knowledge transmission and instruct students in the concrete skills of knowledge acquisition and knowledge presentation. Instruction in intellectual skills-acquisition implies the breakdown of the traditional professor-student relationship and of the academic intellectual hierarchy and professors must learn to cope with the consequences of adopting new pedagogies. If we wish to share the secrets of our professions, how do we prepare our students for such a democratic approach and at the same time maintain our professional status?
The author, a professor of Spanish language and literature, presents strategies for democratizing education and demystifying intellectual work through the application of skills-based pedagogical methodologies to the teaching of literature. The implications that these strategies have for a new type of learning and the impact that they have on social stratification will also be discussed.
|Keywords:||Democratizing Education, Demystifying Intellectual Work, Knowledge Acquisition Skills, Interpretative Skills, Teaching Literature, Skills Based Teaching|
Assistant Professor of Spanish, Department of Literature and Languages, Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois, USA
There are currently no reviews of this product.Write a Review

(Phys.org)—Controlling "mixing" between acceptor and donor layers, or domains, in polymer-based solar cells could increase their efficiency, according to a team of researchers that included physicists from North Carolina State University. Their findings shed light on the inner workings of these solar cells, and could lead to further improvements in efficiency.
Polymer-based solar cells consist of two domains, known as the acceptor and the donor layers. Excitons, the energy particles created by solar cells, must be able to travel quickly to the interface of the donor and acceptor domains in order to be harnessed as an energy source. Researchers had believed that keeping the donor and acceptor layers as pure as possible was the best way to ensure that the excitons could travel unimpeded, so that solar cells could capture the maximum amount of energy.
NC State physicist Harald Ade and his group worked with teams of scientists from the United Kingdom, Australia and China to examine the physical structure and improve the production of polymer-based solar cells. In findings published in two separate papers appearing this month online in Advanced Energy Materials and Advanced Materials, the researchers show that some mixing of the two domains may not be a bad thing. In fact, if the morphology, or structure, of the mixed domains is small, the solar cell can still be quite efficient.
According to Ade, "We had previously found that the domains in these solar cells weren't pure. So we looked at how additives affected the production of these cells. When you manufacture the cell, the relative rate of evaporation of the solvents and additives determines how the active layer forms and the donor and acceptor mix. Ideally, you want the solvent to evaporate slowly enough so that the materials have time to separate – otherwise the layers 'gum up' and lower the cell's efficiency. We utilized an additive that slowed evaporation. This controlled the mixing and domain size of the active layer, and the portions that mixed were small."
The efficiency of those mixed layers was excellent, leading to speculation that perhaps some mixing of the donor and acceptor isn't a problem, as long as the domains are small.
"We're looking for the perfect mix here, both in terms of the solvents and additives we might use in order to manufacture polymer-based solar cells, and in terms of the physical mixing of the domains and how that may affect efficiency," Ade says.
Explore further: Femtosecond 'snapshots' reveal a dramatic bond tightening in photo-excited gold complexes
More information: "From Binary to Ternary Solvent: Morphology Fine-tuning of D/A Blend in PDPP3T-based Polymer Solar Cells", Advanced Materials, 2012.
In the past decade, great success has been achieved in bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) in which donor/acceptor (D/A) bi-continuous interpenetrating networks can be formed and in some recent reports, power conversion efficiency (PCE) even approach 8%. In addition to the intrinsic properties of active layer materials, such as band gaps and molecular energy levels, morphological properties of the D/A blends including crystallinity of polymers, domain size, materials miscibility, hierarchical structures, and molecular orientation, are also of great importance for photovoltaic performance of the devices. Therefore, several strategies including slow growth, solvent annealing, thermal annealing, selection of solvent or mixed solvent have been applied to modify or control of the morphology of the D/A blends. Among these, binary solvent mixtures have been successfully used in morphology control. For example, the dichlorobenzene (DCB) or chlorobenzene (CB)/1, 8-diiodooctane (DIO) binary solvent system has been widely applied in PSC device fabrication process. By mixing a few volume percent of DIO with the host solvent (DCB or CB), efficiencies of many kinds of polymers can be improved dramatically. Besides DIO, other solvents, like 1, 8-octanedithiol (OT), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), chloroform (CF), can also be used. According to these works, it can be concluded that crystallinity, as well as domain size in the blends can be tuned effectively by using binary solvent mixtures, and thus binary solvent mixtures play a very important role in high performance PSCs.

Heel Bursitis is another type of heel pain. The sufferer of this kind of heel pain experiences pain at the back of the heel when the patient moves his joint of the ankle. In the heel bursitis type of heel pain there is swelling on the sides of the Achilles’ tendon. In this condition the sufferer may experience pain in the heel when his feet hit the ground. Heel bruises are also referred as heel bumps they are usually caused by improper shoes. The constant rubbing of the shoes against the heel.
What is bursitis?
Bursitis is the inflammation of a bursa. Normally, the bursa provides a slippery surface that has almost no friction. A problem arises when a bursa becomes inflamed. The bursa loses its gliding capabilities, and becomes more and more irritated when it is moved.
When the condition called bursitis occurs, the normally slippery bursa becomes swollen and inflamed. The added bulk of the swollen bursa causes more friction within an already confined space. Also, the smooth gliding bursa becomes gritty and rough. Movement of an inflamed bursa is painful and irritating.
“Itis” usually refers to the inflammation of a certain part of the body, therefore Bursitis refers to the constant irritation of the natural cushion that supports the heel of the foot (the bursa). Bursitis is often associated with Plantar Fasciitis, which affects the arch and heel of the foot.
What causes bursitis?
- Bursitis and Plantar Fasciitis can occur when a person increases their levels of physical activity or when the heel’s fat pad becomes thinner, providing less protection to the foot.
- Ill fitting shoes.
- Biomechanical problems (e.g. mal-alignment of the foot, including over-pronation).
- Rheumatoid arthritis.
Bursitis usually results from a repetitive movement or due to prolonged and excessive pressure. Patients who rest on their elbows for long periods or those who bend their elbows frequently and repetitively (for example, a custodian using a vacuum for hours at a time) can develop elbow bursitis, also called olecranon bursitis. Similarly in other parts of the body, repetitive use or frequent pressure can irritate a bursa and cause inflammation.
Another cause of bursitis is a traumatic injury. Following trauma, such as a car accident or fall, a patient may develop bursitis. Usually a contusion causes swelling within the bursa. The bursa, which had functioned normally up until that point, now begins to develop inflammation, and bursitis results. Once the bursa is inflamed, normal movements and activities can become painful.
Systemic inflammatory conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, may also lead to bursitis. These types of conditions can make patients susceptible to developing bursitis.
- Cold presses or ice packs.
- Anti-inflammatory tablets.
- Cushioning products.
- Massaging the foot / muscle stimulation.
- Stretching exercises.
- Insoles or orthotics.

EVEN a material 10 billion times as strong as steel has a breaking point. It seems neutron stars may shatter under extreme forces, explaining puzzling X-ray flares.
Neutron stars are dense remnants of stars gone supernova, packing the mass of the sun into a sphere the size of a city. Their cores may be fluid, but their outer surfaces are solid and extremely tough - making graphene, the strongest material on Earth, look like tissue paper by comparison.
These shells may shatter, though, in the final few seconds before a pair of neutron stars merges to form a black hole - a union thought to generate explosions known as short gamma-ray bursts.
David Tsang of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena and colleagues have calculated how the mutual gravitational pull of such stars will distort their shape, creating moving tidal bulges. As the stars spiral towards each other, orbiting ever faster, they squeeze and stretch each other ever faster too.
A few seconds before the stars merge, the frequency of this squeezing and stretching matches the frequency at which one of the stars vibrates most easily. This creates a resonance that boosts the vibrations dramatically, causing the star's crust to crack in many places - just as a wine glass may shatter when a certain note is sung, the team says (Physical Review Letters, DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.108.011102).
The star's gravity is too powerful to let the pieces fly away, but the sudden movement can disturb its magnetic field, accelerating electrons and leading to a powerful X-ray flare. That could explain observations by NASA's Swift satellite in which a blast of X-rays preceded some short gamma-ray bursts by a few seconds.
Combining observations of X-ray flares with those of gravitational waves emitted by the stars as they spiral together could fix the exact frequency at which the shattering occurs, which would reveal more about the stars' mysterious interiors, says Tsang.
If you would like to reuse any content from New Scientist, either in print or online, please contact the syndication department first for permission. New Scientist does not own rights to photos, but there are a variety of licensing options available for use of articles and graphics we own the copyright to.
Have your say
Only subscribers may leave comments on this article. Please log in.
Only personal subscribers may leave comments on this article

When he shot President Lincoln, John Wilkes Booth was 26 years old, and one of the nation’s most famous actors. (Charles DeForest Fredericks/National Portrait Gallery)
John Wilkes Booth, a Maryland native, spent the war performing in theatrical productions. But the conflict was never far from his mind. In a letter to his mother, he expressed chagrin that he hadn’t joined the Confederate army, writing, “I have … begun to deem myself a coward, and to despise my own existence.” He was outraged by the reelection of Lincoln, whom he viewed as the instigator of all the country’s woes. The month after the inauguration, Booth learned that Lincoln would be attending a performance at Ford’s Theatre on April 14. That night, he crept into Lincoln’s theater box and shot him in the back of the head. It was the first time a president had been murdered. “Wanted” posters were issued for Booth, and on April 26, he was cornered in a tobacco barn and shot by a federal sergeant, acting against orders to bring him in alive.
Several months later, Charles Creighton Hazewell, a frequent contributor, sought to make sense of the assassination—speculating that the plot may have been hatched in Canada (where a number of secessionist schemes had originated) and hinting at evidence that the plan had been endorsed at the highest levels of the Confederate government.—Sage Stossel
The assassination of President Lincoln threw a whole nation into mourning … Of all our Presidents since Washington, Mr. Lincoln had excited the smallest amount of that feeling which places its object in personal danger. He was a man who made a singularly favorable impression on those who approached him, resembling in that respect President Jackson, who often made warm friends of bitter foes, when circumstances had forced them to seek his presence; and it is probable, that, if he and the honest chiefs of the Rebels could have been brought face to face, there never would have been civil war,—at least, any contest of grand proportions; for he would not have failed to convince them that all that they had any right to claim, and therefore all that they could expect their fellow-citizens to fight for, would be more secure under his government than it had been under the governments of such men as Pierce and Buchanan, who made use of sectionalism and slavery to promote the selfish interests of themselves and their party … Ignorance was the parent of the civil war, as it has been the parent of many other evils,—ignorance of the character and purpose of the man who was chosen President in 1860–61, and who entered upon official life with less animosity toward his opponents than ever before or since had been felt by a man elected to a great place after a bitter and exciting contest …
That one of the most insignificant of [the secessionists’] number should have murdered the man whose election they declared to be cause for war is nothing strange, being in perfect keeping with their whole course. The wretch who shot the chief magistrate of the Republic is of hardly more account than was the weapon which he used. The real murderers of Mr. Lincoln are the men whose action brought about the civil war. Booth’s deed was a logical proceeding, following strictly from the principles avowed by the Rebels, and in harmony with their course during the last five years. The fall of a public man by the hand of an assassin always affects the mind more strongly than it is affected by the fall of thousands of men in battle; but in strictness, Booth, vile as his deed was, can be held to have been no worse, morally, than was that old gentleman who insisted upon being allowed the privilege of firing the first shot at Fort Sumter. Ruffin’s act is not so disgusting as Booth’s; but of the two men, Booth exhibited the greater courage,—courage of the basest kind, indeed, but sure to be attended with the heaviest risks, as the hand of every man would be directed against its exhibitor. Had the Rebels succeeded, Ruffin would have been honored by his fellows; but even a successful Southern Confederacy would have been too hot a country for the abode of a wilful murderer. Such a man would have been no more pleasantly situated even in South Carolina than was Benedict Arnold in England. And as he chose to become an assassin after the event of the war had been decided, and when his victim was bent upon sparing Southern feeling so far as it could be spared without injustice being done to the country, Booth must have expected to find his act condemned by every rational Southern man as a worse than useless crime, as a blunder of the very first magnitude. Had he succeeded in getting abroad, Secession exiles would have shunned him, and have treated him as one who had brought an ineffaceable stain on their cause, and also had rendered their restoration to their homes impossible. The pistol-shot of Sergeant Corbett saved him from the gallows, and it saved him also from the denunciations of the men whom he thought to serve. He exhibited, therefore, a species of courage that is by no means common; for he not only risked his life, and rendered it impossible for honorable men to sympathize with him, but he ran the hazard of being denounced and cast off by his own party … All Secessionists who retain any self-respect must rejoice that one whose doings brought additional ignominy on a cause that could not well bear it has passed away and gone to his account. It would have been more satisfactory to loyal men, if he had been reserved for the gallows; but even they must admit that it is a terrible trial to any people who get possession of an odious criminal, because they may be led so to act as to disgrace themselves, and to turn sympathy in the direction of the evil-doer … Therefore the shot of Sergeant Corbett is not to be regretted, save that it gave too honorable a form of death to one who had earned all that there is of disgraceful in that mode of dying to which a peculiar stigma is attached by the common consent of mankind.
Whether Booth was the agent of a band of conspirators, or was one of a few vile men who sought an odious immortality, it is impossible to say. We have the authority of a high Government official for the statement that “the President’s murder was organized in Canada and approved at Richmond”; but the evidence in support of this extraordinary announcement is, doubtless for the best of reasons, withheld at the time we write. There is nothing improbable in the supposition that the assassination plot was formed in Canada, as some of the vilest miscreants of the Secession side have been allowed to live in that country … But it is not probable that British subjects had anything to do with any conspiracy of this kind. The Canadian error was in allowing the scum of Secession to abuse the “right of hospitality” through the pursuit of hostile action against us from the territory of a neutral …
That a plan to murder President Lincoln should have been approved at Richmond is nothing strange; and though such approval would have been supremely foolish, what but supreme folly is the chief characteristic of the whole Southern movement? If the seal of Richmond’s approval was placed on a plan formed in Canada, something more than the murder of Mr. Lincoln was intended. It must have been meant to kill every man who could legally take his place, either as President or as President pro tempore. The only persons who had any title to step into the Presidency on Mr. Lincoln’s death were Mr. Johnson, who became President on the 15th of April, and Mr. Foster, one of the Connecticut Senators, who is President of the Senate … It does not appear that any attempt was made on the life of Mr. Foster, though Mr. Johnson was on the list of those doomed by the assassins; and the savage attack made on Mr. Seward shows what those assassins were capable of. But had all the members of the Administration been struck down at the same time, it is not at all probable that “anarchy” would have been the effect, though to produce that must have been the object aimed at by the conspirators. Anarchy is not so easily brought about as persons of an anarchical turn of mind suppose. The training we have gone through since the close of 1860 has fitted us to bear many rude assaults on order without our becoming disorderly. Our conviction is, that, if every man who held high office at Washington had been killed on the 14th of April, things would have gone pretty much as we have seen them go, and that thus the American people would have vindicated their right to be considered a self-governing race. It would not be a very flattering thought, that the peace of the country is at the command of any dozen of hardened ruffians who should have the capacity to form an assassination plot, the discretion to keep silent respecting their purpose, and the boldness and the skill requisite to carry it out to its most minute details: for the neglect of one of those details might be fatal to the whole project. Society does not exist in such peril as that.
john wilkes booth, a Maryland native, spent the war performing in theatrical productions. But the conflict was never far from his mind. In a letter to his mother, he expressed chagrin that he hadn’t joined the Confederate army, writing, “I have … begun to deem myself a coward, and to despise my own existence.” He was outraged by the reelection of Lincoln, whom he viewed as the instigator of all the country’s woes.
The month after the inauguration, Booth learned that Lincoln would be attending a performance at Ford’s Theatre on April 14. That night, he crept into Lincoln’s theater box and shot him in the back of the head. It was the first time a president had been murdered. “Wanted” posters were issued for Booth, and on April 26, he was cornered in a tobacco barn and shot by a federal sergeant, who acted against orders to bring him in alive.
Several months later, Charles Creighton Hazewell, a frequent Atlantic contributor, sought to make sense of the assassination—speculating that the plot may have been hatched in Canada (where a number of secessionist schemes had originated) and hinting at evidence that the plan had been endorsed at the highest levels of the Confederate government.
Read the full text of this article here.
This article available online at:

On January 9th, citizens living in southern Sudan will vote on a referendum to secede from the northern part of the country. A clock in the town of Juba, the political center of southern Sudan, counts down to this referendum, symbolical of the locals’ excitement to part from the hegemonic north. Nearby, the Darfur genocide crisis that continues to plague the area is not an isolated event. It’s all related, part of two brutal civil wars that have been for decades tearing the nation apart; as of late, literally.
Sudan has traditionally been seen by many as the bridge between the Arab and the African worlds—one not particularly easy to cross. The north and the south of Sudan are just about as culturally and religiously different from each other as you could possibly imagine. In the north, Arab culture dominates, and the majority religion is Islam. In the south, the predominant culture is more traditionally sub-Saharan African, and the primary religions are animist belief systems and Christianity. Ever since the country gained independence from Britain in 1956, the cultural and religious systems of the north have been heavily imposed on the whole of Sudan, resulting in southern resistance and the ongoing strife.
In particular, this imposition of a differing set of beliefs can in large part be attributed to the current Sudanese president, Omar al-Bashir. Al-Bashir arose to power in 1989 through a bloodless coup, and this past April, won the first ostensibly democratic election the nation has held in 24 years. I hesitate to call the election democratic because many believe that al-Bashir, who is notorious for his corruption, rigged it in his favor. While there is no proof, it is generally not unsafe to consider that leaders who are in power through a coup have significant sway in any following elections. Whether he is rightfully in power or not, al-Bashir has imposed northern ideals throughout the whole nation, a primary cause of the Sudanese civil wars. Many attribute the Darfur genocide, just a single episode of the extensive bloodshed since Sudan’s independence, to al-Bashir. Because of these accusations, he is currently on trial for war crimes, the only current head of state in such a predicament. To drive home his impositional tendencies further, al-Bashir has said that if the south secedes, he will impose Shari’a in the north, in an effort to make northern Sudan officially an Islamic state.
My first response to this situation was wondering: How did two peoples so immensely different from one another end up together in the first place? This is not the same as the American Civil War, where regional differences led to ideological differences, which in turn led to secession. In the Sudanese case, ideological and cultural differences existed long before the country gained independence. Thus, one should look to colonialism as the primary cause of Sudan’s problems. It seems to me that Sudan’s independence process was dangerously arbitrary; occurring at the time of mass European decolonization in Africa. It’s as if Britain backed out of the region and drew a national border at random. And now, after over half a century, the people want that to change.
Despite the referendum on schedule for next month, the potential new border still has not been set. Money, of course, is a factor. Sudan is one of the most oil-rich nations of Africa, but most of the country’s oil is found in the south. On the one hand, the north might not want to draw a new boundary where the south gets all of the resource wealth, a potential cause for even more strife. On the other hand, some see oil as a potential area that could keep the two sides friendly if they do end up splitting. Mutual desire for the oil wealth may bring the two sides together diplomatically if the split ends up happening peacefully.
As you can see, this situation is extremely complex, far more so than the south simply saying “we want to secede” and secession then happening. To better understand the context, one needs to consider the past, but one should also consider the future: what will happen if the current nation of Sudan does in fact split? I am wondering particularly about those who have their roots in the south but live in the north. Since the referendum was announced, many of these people have moved back to the south, but a fair number still remain in the north. What will happen to these primarily non-Muslim people (and Muslims alike) if the north does in fact impose Shari’a on al-Bashir’s whim? Al-Bashir will go from an imposer of northern Arab and Islamic values to being completely intolerant of this significant minority in his newly allotted half of Sudan, and the results would be tragic.
What message would a Sudanese split portray to the rest of Africa, the rest of the world? The African Union fears that a Sudanese split would incite other secessionists around the continent. Other nations undergoing similar domestic, regional conflicts of interest may feel not only that they have a right to secede, but may even feel encouraged to do so. Is this kind of outright division the right answer to such a complicated historical struggle?
Is there even a right answer? Experts seem to agree that the nation will inevitably split. Whether this bifurcation happens via a timely, democratic, and peaceful referendum or through continuing bloodshed is a matter that only time will tell. I will certainly be following this issue in the coming weeks, and I wrote this article before the scheduled referendum in the hope to spark more interest on the issue. I urge you to follow it in the news; the results affect a much wider area than simply Sudan.
Stay tuned for my next column, where I will compare and contrast two leaders in South America on opposite sides of the political spectrum and compare their respective political systems to that of the United States.
Latest posts by David Klayton (see all)
- Should Turkey be a part of "Europe?" - February 26, 2011
- Moderately Extreme: Ideological Flexibility in Latin American Politics - January 27, 2011
- When One Nation Becomes Two - December 31, 2010

Hanukkah begins this year on December 1st, at sundown. Be honest. When I say “Hanukkah,” the first thing you think of is the Adam Sandler song, talking about “eight crazy nights.” If you are a little more connected to Jewish culture, you may also think about a dreidel or potato latkes (pancakes). While it’s commonly called the “Festival of Lights,” a better translation is “Dedication.” Being Jewish (circumcised at 8 days, Bar Mitzvah at age 13) and a Christ-follower (for over 15 years), I’d like to give a brief explanation of this holiday, and why it’s a meaningful opportunity to help me worship the Lord.
Here’s the story of Hanukkah: In the 2nd century BC, Antiochus Epiphanes gained control over parts of the Middle East, including Judea (Israel). He erected an altar to Zeus in the Temple in Jerusalem, and sacrificed pigs there, which are unclean to Jews. The Maccabee family led a revolt, finally liberating Jerusalem and the Temple in 165 BC. Before God could be properly worshiped in the Temple, it had to be cleaned and dedicated. The menorah (lamp) had to burn continuously for 8 days for the purification process. Despite there only being enough olive oil for one day, the oil miraculously lasted for 8 days and nights. That is why Hanukkah is celebrated for 8 nights.
Most people consider this miracle to be the end in itself, and I think the bigger meaning is missed. The point isn’t just that God did a miracle, but that the miracle was the means to allow Him to be properly worshiped. The Temple needed to be purified in order for Yahweh to be worshiped, but it couldn’t be purified unless He worked a miracle. God worked a miracle so that His people could be near Him in worship.
Let us not miss that meaning, as we celebrate the Advent of Jesus Christ, the Light of the world (John 8:12). I don’t think we need merely to reflect on the birth of Jesus, but we need to consider why the Father sent His Son. God performed a miracle (the Incarnation) not as an end to itself, but as a means to allow us to be near Him in worship (through Christ’s redemptive sacrifice for our sins). Jesus did not come only to be marveled at as a baby, but to pour out His life and blood, to open the way for a new covenant with Him.

by Piter Kehoma Boll
Let’s expand the universe of Friday Fellow by presenting a plant for the first time! And what could be a better choice to start than the famous Grandidier’s Baobab? Belonging to the species Adansonia grandidieri, this tree is one of the trademarks of Madagascar, being the biggest species of this genus found in the island.
Reaching up to 30 m in height and having a massive trunk only branched at the very top, it has a unique look and is found only at southwestern Madagascar. However, despite being so attractive and famous, it is classified as an endangered species by IUCN Red List, with a declining population threatened by agriculture expansion.
This tree is also heavily exploited, having vitamin C-rich fruits which can be consumed fresh and seeds used to extract oil. Its bark can also be used to make ropes and many trees are found with scars due to the extraction of part of the bark.
Having a fibrous trunk, baoabs are able to deal with drought by apparently storaging water inside them. There are no seed dispersors, which can be due to the extiction of the original dispersor by human activities.
Originally occuring close to temporary water bodies in the dry deciduous forest, today many large trees are found in always dry terrains. This probably is due to human impact that changed the local ecosystem, letting it to become drier than it was. Those areas have no or very poor ability to regenerate and probably will never go back to what they were and, once the old trees die, there will be no more baobabs there.
- – -
Baum, D. A. (1995). A Systematic Revision of Adansonia (Bombacaceae) Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden, 82, 440-470 DOI: 10.2307/2399893
Wikipedia. Adamsonia grandidieri. Available online at <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adansonia_grandidieri>. Access on October 02, 2012.
World Conservation Monitoring Centre 1998. Adansonia grandidieri. In: IUCN 2012. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2012.1. <www.iucnredlist.org>. Access on October 02, 2012.

Ki Tisa (Mitzvot)
For more teachings on this portion, see the archives to this blog, below at March 2006.
This week’s parasha is best known for the dramatic and richly meaningful story of the Golden Calf and the Divine anger, of Moses’ pleading on behalf of Israel, and the eventual reconciliation in the mysterious meeting of Moses with God in the Cleft of the Rock—subjects about which I’ve written at length, from various aspects, in previous years. Yet the first third of the reading (Exod 30:11-31:17) is concerned with various practical mitzvot, mostly focused on the ritual worship conducted in the Temple, which tend to be skimmed over in light of the intense interest of the Calf story. As this year we are concerned specifically with the mitzvot in each parasha, I shall focus on this section.
These include: the giving by each Israelite [male] of a half-shekel to the Temple; the making of the laver, from which the priests wash their hands and feet before engaging in Divine service; the compounding of the incense and of the anointing oil; and the Shabbat. I shall focus here upon the washing of the hands.
Hand-washing is a familiar Jewish ritual: it is, in fact, the first act performed by pious Jews upon awakening in the morning (some people even keep a cup of water next to their beds, so that they may wash their hands before taking even a single step); one performs a ritual washing of the hands before eating bread; before each of the daily prayers; etc. The section here dealing with the laver in the Temple (Exod 30:17-21) is also one of the four portions from the Torah recited by many each morning, as part of the section of the liturgy known as korbanot, chapters of Written and Oral Torah reminiscent of the ancient sacrificial system, that precede Pesukei de-Zimra.
Sefer ha-Hinukh, at §106, explains the washing of hands as an offshoot of the honor due to the Temple and its service—one of many laws intended to honor, magnify, and glorify the Temple. Even if the priest was pure and clean, he must wash (literally, “sanctify”) his hands before engaging in avodah. This simple gesture of purification served as a kind of separation between the Divine service and everyday life. It added a feeling of solemnity, of seriousness, a sense that one was engaged in something higher, in some way separate from the mundane activities of regular life. (One hand-washing by kohanim, in the morning, was sufficient, unless they left the Temple grounds or otherwise lost the continuity of their sacred activity.) Our own netilat yadaim, whether before prayer or breaking bread, may be seen as a kind of halakhic carryover from the Temple service, albeit on the level of Rabbinic injunction.
What is the symbolism of purifying one’s hands? Water, as a flowing element, as a solvent that washes away many of the things with which it comes in contact, is at once a natural symbol of both purity, and of the renewal of life. Mayim Hayyim—living waters—is an age old association. Torah is compared to water; water, constantly flowing, is constantly returning to its source. At the End of Days, “the land will be filled with knowledge of the Lord, like waters going down to the sea.” A small part of this is hinted in this simple, everyday gesture.
“See that this nation is Your people”
But I cannot pass over Ki Tisa without some comment on the incident of the Golden Calf and its ramifications. This week, reading through the words of the parasha in preparation for a shiur (what Ruth Calderon, founder of Alma, a secularist-oriented center for the study of Judaism in Tel Aviv, called “barefoot reading”—that is, naïve, without preconceptions), I discovered something utterly simple that I had never noticed before in quite the same way.
At the beginning of the Calf incident, God tells Moses, who has been up on the mountain with Him, “Go down, for your people have spoiled” (32:7). A few verses later, when God asks leave of Moses (!) to destroy them, Moses begs for mercy on behalf of the people with the words “Why should Your anger burn so fiercely against Your people…” (v. 11). That is, God calls them Moses’ people, while Moses refers to them as God’s people. Subsequent to this exchange, each of them refers to them repeatedly in the third person, as “the people” or “this people” (העם; העם הזה). Neither of them refers to them, as God did in the initial revelation to Moses at the burning bush (Exodus 3:7 and passim) as “my people,” or with the dignified title, “the children of Israel”—as if both felt a certain alienation, of distance from this tumultuous, capricious bunch. Only towards the end, after God agrees not to destroy them, but still states “I will not go up with them,” but instead promises to send an angel, does Moses says “See, that this nation is Your people” (וראה כי עמך הגוי הזה; 33:13).
What does all this signify? Reading the peshat carefully, there is one inevitable conclusion: that God wished to nullify His covenant with the people Israel. It is in this that there lies the true gravity, and uniqueness, of the Golden Calf incident. We are not speaking here, as we read elsewhere in the Bible—for example, in the two great Imprecations (tokhahot) in Lev 26 and Deut 28, or in the words of the prophets during the First Temple—merely of threats of punishment, however harsh, such as drought, famine, pestilence, enemy attacks, or even exile and slavery. There, the implicit message is that, after a period of punishment, a kind of moral purgation through suffering, things will be restored as they were. Here, the very covenant itself, the very existence of an intimate connection with God, hangs in the balance. God tells Moses, “I shall make of you a people,” i.e., instead of them.
This, it seems to me, is the point of the second phase of this story. Moses breaks the tablets; he and his fellow Levites go through the camp killing all those most directly implicated in worshipping the Calf; God recants and agrees not to destroy the people. However, “My angel will go before them” but “I will not go up in your midst” (33:2, 3). This should have been of some comfort; yet this tiding is called “this bad thing,” the people mourn, and remove the ornaments they had been wearing until then. Evidently, they understood the absence of God’s presence or “face” as a grave step; His being with them was everything. That is the true importance of the Sanctuary in the desert and the Tent of Meeting, where Moses speaks with God in the pillar of cloud (33:10). God was present with them there in a tangible way, in a certain way continuing the epiphany at Sinai. All that was threatened by this new declaration.
Moses second round of appeals to God, in Exod 33:12-23, focuses on bringing God, as it were, to a full reconciliation with the people. This is the significance of the Thirteen Qualities of Mercy, of what I have called the Covenant in the Cleft of the Rock, the “faith of Yom Kippur” as opposed to that of Shavuot (see HY I: Ki Tisa; and note Prof. Jacob Milgrom’s observation that this chapter stands in the exact center, in a literary sense, of the unit known as the Hextateuch—Torah plus the Book of Joshua).
But I would add two important points. One, that this is the first place in the Torah where we read about sin followed by reconciliation. After Adam and Eve ate of the fruit of the Garden, they were punished without hope of reprieve; indeed, their “punishment “ reads very much like a description of some basic aspects of the human condition itself. Cain, after murdering Abel, was banished, made to wander the face of the earth. The sin of the brothers in selling Joseph, and their own sense of guilt, is a central factor in their family dynamic from then on, but there is nary a word of God’s response or intervention. It would appear that God’s initial expectation in the covenant at Sinai was one of total loyalty and fidelity. The act of idolatry was an unforgivable breach of the covenant—much as adultery is generally perceived as a fundamental violation of the marital bond.
Moses, in persuading God to recant of His jealousy and anger, to give the faithless people another chance, is thus introducing a new concept: of a covenant that includes the possibility of even the most serious transgressions being forgiven; of the knowledge that human beings are fallible, and that teshuvah and forgiveness are essential components of any economy of men living before a demanding God.
The second, truly astonishing point is the role played by Moses in all this. Moshe Rabbenu, “the man of God,” is not only the great teacher of Israel, the channel through which they learn the Divine Torah, but also, as it were, one who teaches God Himself. It is God who “reveals His Qualities of Mercy” at the Cleft of the Rock; but without Moses cajoling, arguing, persuading (and note the numerous midrashim around this theme), “were it not for my servant Moses who stood in the breach,” all this would not have happened. It was Moses who elicited this response and who, so to speak, pushed God Himself to this new stage in his relation with Israel—to give up His expectations of perfection from His covenanted people, and to understand that living within a covenant means, not rigid adherence to a set of laws, but a living relationship with real people, taking the bad with the good. (Again, the parallel to human relationships is obvious)

“A remote Indian village is responding to global warming-induced water shortages by creating large masses of ice, or “artificial glaciers,” to get through the dry spring months. (See a map of the region.)
Located on the western edge of the Tibetan plateau, the village of Skara in the Ladakh region of India is not a common tourist destination.
“It’s beautiful, but really remote and difficult to get to,” said Amy Higgins, a graduate student at the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies who worked on the artificial glacier project.
“A lot of people, when I met them in Delhi and I said I was going to Ladakh, they looked at me like I was going to the moon,” said Higgins, who is also a National Geographic grantee.
People in Skara and surrounding villages survive by growing crops such as barley for their own consumption and for sale in neighboring towns. In the past, water for the crops came from meltwater originating in glaciers high in the Himalaya.”
Read more: National Geographic

America's oil and natural gas industry is committed to protecting the environment and to continuously improving its hurricane preparation and response plans. After any hurricane or tropical storm, the goal is to return to full operations as quickly and as safely as possible. For the 2012 hurricane season, the industry continues to build upon critical lessons learned from 2008's major hurricanes, Gustav and Ike, as well as other powerful storms, such as 2005's Katrina and Rita and 2004's Ivan.
API plays two primary roles for the industry in preparing for hurricanes. First, it helps the industry gain a better understanding of the environmental conditions in and around the Gulf of Mexico during hurricane or tropical storm activity and then assists industry in using that knowledge to make offshore and onshore facilities less vulnerable. Second, API collaborates with member companies, other industries and with federal, state and local governments to prepare for hurricanes and return operations as quickly and as safely as possible.
API member companies also independently work to improve preparedness for hurricanes and other natural or manmade disasters. They have, for example, reviewed and updated emergency response plans, established redundant communication paths and made pre-arrangements with suppliers to help ensure they have adequate resources during an emergency.
The API Subcommittee on Offshore Stuctures, the International Association of Drilling Contractors, and the Offshore Operators Committee, serve as a liaison to regulatory agencies, coordinate industry review of critical design standards and provide a forum for sharing lessons learned from previous hurricanes.
These combined efforts are critical since the Gulf of Mexico accounted for about 23 percent of the oil and 8 percent of total natural gas produced in the United States (approximately 82 percent of the oil supply comes from deepwater facilities), and the Gulf Coast region is home to almost half of the U.S. refining capacity.
Upstream (Exploration and Production)
During the major 2005 hurricanes, waves were higher and winds were stronger than anticipated in deeper parts of the Gulf so the industry moved away from viewing it as a uniform body of water. Evaluating the effects of those and other storms, helped scientists discover that the Central Gulf of Mexico was more prone to hurricanes because it acts as a gathering spot for warm currents that can strengthen a storm.
The revised wind, wave and water current measurements ("metocean" data) prompted API to reassess its recommended practices (RPs) for industry operations in the region.
- The upstream segment continues to integrate the updated environmental (metocean) data on how powerful storms affect conditions in the Gulf of Mexico into its offshore structure design standards. This effort led to the publication in 2008 of an update to RP 2SK, Design and Analysis of Stationkeeping Systems for Floating Structures, that provides guidance for design and operation of Mobile Offshore Drilling Unit (MODU) mooring systems in the Gulf of Mexico during the hurricane season. API RP 95J, Gulf of Mexico Jack-up Operations for Hurricane Season, which recommends locating jack-up rigs on more stable areas of the sea floor, and positioning platform decks higher above the sea surface, was also updated.
API publications are available at our (Search and Order
API in the past six years also has issued a number of bulletins to help better prepare for and bring production back online after Gulf hurricanes. These include:
Production and Hurricanes (steps industry takes to prepare for and return after a storm)
- Bulletin 2TD, Guidelines for Tie-downs on Offshore Production Facilities for Hurricane Season, which is aimed at better-securing separate platform equipment.
- Bulletin 2INT-MET, Interim Guidance on Hurricane Conditions in the Gulf of Mexico, which provides updated metocean data for four regions of the Gulf, including wind velocities, deepwater wave conditions, ocean current information, and surge and tidal data.
- Bulletin 2INT-DG, Interim Guidance for Design of Offshore Structures for Hurricane Conditions, which explains how to apply the updated metocean data during design.
- Bulletin 2INT-EX, Interim Guidance for Assessment of Existing Offshore Structures for Hurricane Conditions, which assists owners/operators and engineers with existing facilities.
- Bulletin 2HINS, Guidance on Post-hurricane Structural Inspection of Offshore Structures, which provides guidance on determining if a structure sustained hurricane-induced damage that affects the safety of personnel, the primary structural integrity, or its ability to perform the purpose for which it was intended.
Refineries and Pipelines
- Days in advance of a tropical storm or hurricane moving toward or near their drilling and production operations, companies will evacuate all non-essential personnel and begin the process of shutting down production.
- As the storm gets closer, all personnel will be evacuated from the drilling rigs and platforms, and production is shut down. Drillships may relocate to a safe location. Operations in areas not forecast to take a direct hit from the storm often will be shut down as well because storms can change direction with little notice.
- After a storm has passed and it is safe to fly, operators will initiate "flyovers" of onshore and offshore facilities to evaluate damage from the air. For onshore facilities, these "flyovers" can identify flooding, facility damage, road or other infrastructure problems, and spills. Offshore "flyovers" look for damaged drilling rigs, platform damage, spills, and possible pipeline damage.
- Many offshore drilling rigs are equipped with GPS locator systems, which allow federal officials and drilling contractors to remotely monitor the rigs' location before, during and after a hurricane. If a rig is pulled offsite by the storm, locator systems allow crews to find and recover the rig as quickly and as safely as possible.
- Once safety concerns are addressed, operators will send assessment crews to offshore facilities to physically assess the facilities for damage.
- If facilities are undamaged, and ancillary facilities, like pipelines that carry the oil and natural gas, are undamaged and ready to accept shipments, operators will begin restarting production. Drilling rigs will commence operations.
Despite sustaining unprecedented damage and supply outages during the 2005 and 2008 hurricanes, the industry quickly and safely brought refining and pipeline operations back online, delivering to consumers near-record levels of gasoline and record levels of distillate (diesel and heating oil) in 2008. The oil and oil-product pipelines operating on or near the Gulf of Mexico continue to review their assets and operations to minimize the potential impacts of storms and shorten the time it takes to recover. While there have been some shortages caused by hurricanes, supply disruptions have been temporary despite extensive damage to supporting infrastructure, such as electric power generation and distribution, production shut-ins and refinery shutdowns. Pipelines need a steady supply of crude oil or refined products to keep product flowing to its intended destinations.
To prepare for future severe storms, refiners and pipeline companies have
Refineries and hurricanes (steps industry takes to prepare for and return after a storm)
- Worked with utilities to clarify priorities for electric power restoration critical to restarting operations and to help minimize significant disruptions to fuel distribution and delivery.
- Secured backup power generation equipment and worked with federal, state and local governments to ensure that pipelines and refineries are considered "critical" infrastructure for back-up power purposes.
- Established redundant communications systems to support continuity of operations and locate employees.
- Worked with vendors to pre-position food, water and transportation, and updated emergency plans to secure other emergency supplies and services.
- Provided additional training for employees who have participated in various exercises and drills.
- Reexamined and improved emergency response and business continuity plans.
- Strengthened onshore buildings and elevated equipment where appropriate to minimize potential flood damage.
- Worked with the states and local emergency management officials to provide documentation and credentials for employees who need access to disaster sites where access is restricted during an emergency.
- Participated in industry conferences to share best practices and improvement opportunities.
Pipelines and hurricanes (steps industry takes to prepare for and return after a storm)
- Refiners, in the hours before a large storm makes landfall, will usually evacuate all non-essential personnel and begin shutting down or reducing operations.
- Operations in areas not forecast to take a direct hit from the storm often are shut down or curtailed as a precaution because storms can change direction with little notice.
- Once safe, teams come in to assess damage. If damage or flooding has occurred, it must be repaired and dealt with before the refinery can be brought back on-line.
- Other factors that can cause delays in restarting refineries include the availability of crude oil, electricity to run the plant and water used for cooling the process units.
- Refineries are complex. It takes more than a flip of a switch to get a refinery back up and running. Once a decision has been made that it is safe to restart, it can take several days before the facility is back to full operating levels. This is because the process units and associated equipment must be returned to operation in a staged manner to ensure a safe and successful startup.
- If facilities are undamaged or necessary repairs have been made, and ancillary facilities - like pipelines that carry the oil and natural gas - are undamaged and ready to accept shipments, operators will begin restarting production.
- Pipeline operations can be impacted by storms, primarily through power outages, but also by direct damage.
- Offshore pipelines damaged require the hiring of divers, repairs and safety inspections before supplies can flow. Damaged onshore pipelines must be assessed, repaired and inspected before resuming operations.
- Without power, crude oil and petroleum products cannot be moved through pipelines. Operators routinely hold or lease back-up generators but need time to get them onsite.
- If there is no product put into pipelines because Gulf Coast/Gulf of Mexico crude or natural gas production has been curtailed, or because of refinery shutdowns, the crude and products already in the pipelines cannot be pushed out the other end.
- Wind damage to above ground tanks at storage terminals can also impact supplies into the pipeline.
: The 2008 hurricane season was very active, with 16 named storms, of which eight became hurricanes and five of those were major hurricanes. For the U.S. oil and natural gas industry, the two most serious storms of 2008 were Hurricane Ike, which made landfall in mid-September near Baytown, Texas, and Hurricane Gustav, which made landfall on September 1 in Louisiana.
Hurricane Gustav, a strong Category 2 storm, kept off-line oil and natural gas delivery systems and production platforms that had not yet been fully restored from a smaller storm two weeks earlier, and brought significant flooding as far north as Baton Rouge. Hurricane Ike, another strong Category 2 hurricane, caused significant portions of the production, processing, and pipeline infrastructure along the Gulf Coast in East Texas and Louisiana to shut down. Ike caused significant destruction to electric transmission and distribution lines, and these damages delayed the restart of major processing plants, pipelines, and refineries. As many as 3.7 million customers were without electric power following the storm, with about 2.5 million in Texas alone.
At the peak of disruptions, more than 20 percent of total U.S. refinery capacity was idled. The Minerals Management Service - now called Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE)
estimated that 2,127 of the 3,800 total oil and natural gas production platforms in the Gulf of Mexico were exposed to hurricane conditions, with winds greater than 74 miles per hour, from Hurricanes Gustav and Ike. A total of 60 platforms were destroyed as a result of Hurricanes Gustav and Ike. Some platforms which had been previously reported as having extensive damage were reassessed and determined to be destroyed. The destroyed platforms produced 13,657 barrels of oil and 96.5 million cubic feet of natural gas daily or 1.05 percent of the oil and 1.3 percent of the natural gas produced daily in the Gulf of Mexico.
: The 2005 hurricane season was the most active in recorded history, shattering previous records. According to the Department of Energy, refineries in the path of hurricanes Katrina and Rita accounting for about 29 percent of U.S. refining capacity were shut down at the peak of disruptions. Offshore, the Minerals Management Service (MMS) estimated 22,000 of the 33,000 miles of pipelines and 3,050 of the 4,000 platforms in the Gulf were in the direct paths of the two Category 5 storms. Together the storms destroyed 115 platforms and damaged 52 others.
Even so, there was no loss of life among industry workers and contractors. An MMS report found "no accounts of spills from facilities on the federal Outer Continental Shelf that reached the shoreline; oiled birds or mammals; or involved any discoveries of oil to be collected or cleaned up".
: Hurricane Ivan was the strongest hurricane of the 2004 season and among one of the most powerful Atlantic hurricanes on record. It moved across the Gulf of Mexico to make landfall in Alabama. Ivan then looped across Florida and back into the Gulf, regenerating into a new tropical system, which moved into Louisiana and Texas.
The MMS estimated approximately 150 offshore facilities and 10,000 miles of pipelines were in the direct path of Ivan. Seven platforms were destroyed and 24 others damaged. The oil and natural gas industry submitted numerous damage reports to MMS, including for mobile drilling rigs, offshore platforms, producing wells, topside systems including wellheads and production and processing equipment, risers, and pipeline systems that transport oil and gas ashore from offshore facilities.

This section provides a short description of all the major characters in the book. This can be printed out as a study guide for students, used as a "key" for leading a class discussion, or you can jump to the quiz/homework section to find worksheets that incorporate these descriptions into a variety of question formats.
Muhammad Bilal - This character is the son of a farmer who is stolen from Africa and sold as a slave.
Lizzy - This character is a slave on the Live Oaks plantation in South Carolina who never has a freedom dream.
Elijah Lewis - This character is intelligent and forward thinking and dreams of making enough money to help his family hold onto the Glory Field.
Luvenia Lewis - This character is tall and dark-skinned. He/she has ideas of his/her own and does not want to move to Curry Island with his/her...
This section contains 570 words|
(approx. 2 pages at 300 words per page)

Fun Learning with Printable Flash Cards
Here you will find our selection of free printable flash cards for preschool learning (and beyond!). Flash cards are a great way for kids to learn the basic elements and memorize them through short repeat sessions. You’ll find helping them learn their first abc, animal names and numbers incredibly rewarding.
A few minutes here, a few minutes there, whether at home, traveling, in the park or at Auntie’s it’s learning on the go. These lovely cards turn learning into playing (… but we also love decorating kids’ rooms by sticking them on the wall or putting them in picture frames.)
We’ve made all our printable flash cards here free for everybody and of course you can print them as many times as you like!
Alphabet Flash Cards
Helping the little one’s first learning fun and sweet!
Vocabulary Flash Cards
Learning new words and concepts is great fun!
Number & Math Flash Cards
Various flash cards for all your math activities.
Shapes & Colors Flash Cards
Try combining abstract shapes and pretty colors with various colorful activities.
We have a growing selection of children’s resources for preschool, homeschool & classroom learning activities. Please check back soon to see what’s new. Thank you!
We’d also love to hear from parents and teachers with suggestions.

• Incubation: 18-20 days
• Clutch Size: 4 eggs
• Young Fledge: 16-21 days after hatching
• Typical Foods: insects, aquatic invertebrates and seeds
Female red phalaropes are stunning -- they are a rich chestnut color with a dark crown and white face. However, virtually all Ohio birds are in drab non-breeding plumage.
Habitat and Habits
This species prefers the open waters of Lake Erie. It is most typically found along stone jetties and breakwalls in sheltered harbors. The flight call is similar to that of the red-necked phalarope, but generally higher pitched.
Reproduction and Care of the Young
Breeding takes place in Alaska and northern Canada. Nests are hollows in the ground of marshy tundra. The male raises the young.

Learn something new every day More Info... by email
A predicate is part of a sentence or clause in English and is one of two primary components that serves to effectively complete the sentence. Sentences consist of two main components: subjects and predicates. Subjects are the primary “thing” in a sentence which the rest of the words then describe through either a direct description or by indicating what type of action that subject is performing. The predicate is this secondary aspect of the sentence and usually consists of a verb or adjective, though complicated sentences may have multiple verbs and a number of descriptions affecting the subject.
It can be easiest to understand predicates by first understanding subjects and how sentences are constructed. A sentence just about always has a subject, though it can be implied in some way and not necessarily directly stated. In a simple sentence like “The cat slept,” the subject is “the cat,” which is a noun phrase consisting of the direct article “the” and the noun “cat.” Subjects can be longer and more complicated, but they are usually fairly simple in nature.
The predicate of a sentence is then basically the rest of the sentence, though this is not always the case for longer and more complicated sentences. In “The cat slept,” the predicate is quite simple and merely consists of the word “slept.” This is simple because “slept” is an intransitive verb, which means that it requires no further description or objects to make it complete. The sentence could be expanded as “The cat slept on the bed,” but this is not necessary and merely adds a descriptive component to the predicate through the prepositional phrase “on the bed.”
In a somewhat more complicated sentence, such as “The man gave the ball to his son,” the subject of the sentence is still quite simple: “The man.” The predicate in this sentence, however, has become substantially more complicated and consists of the rest of the sentence: “gave the ball to his son.” This has been made more complicated because the verb “gave” is transitive, specifically ditransitive, which indicates both a direct object and an indirect object.
The act of “giving” requires that there is a direct object, which is the item given, and an indirect object, which is who or what it is given to. In this instance, the predicate consists of the verb “gave” and the direct object “the ball” with a connecting preposition “to” and the indirect object “his son.” Predicates can become even more complicated as an idea expands, such as a sentence like “The rock rolled off the table, landed on top of a skateboard, and proceeded to roll down the hill until it was stopped by a wall.” In this sentence, the subject is only “The rock,” which means that the rest of the sentence is the predicate.

History of Initiative & Referendum in Arizona
|Laws • History|
|List of measures|
The History of Initiative & Referendum in Arizona began when acquired statewide initiative, referendum, and recall rights at the time of statehood in 1912. The first initiative in the state was for women's suffrage. It was a landslide victory, passing by a margin of greater than two to one on Nov. 5, 1912.
Then, in 1914, Arizona saw of 15 qualified initiatives, which held the record until 2006 when 19 initiatives were passed. Four of the 1914 initiatives passed because of the efforts of organized labor. One prohibited blacklisting of union members; a second established an "old age and mothers' pension"; another established a state government contract system, and a fourth limited businesses employment of non-citizens. Lastly, the voters in 1914 passed an initiative that barred the governor and legislature from amending or repealing initiatives.
In response, the legislature tried to pass a constitutional amendment that would make it more difficult to pass initiatives. Because this amendment needed the approval of voters, the Arizona Federation of Labor waged a campaign against the measure. The amendment was narrowly defeated in 1916.
- This chart includes all ballot measures to appear on the Arizona ballot in the year indicated, not just initiated measures. See also Arizona ballot measures.
|Year||Propositions on ballot||How many were approved?||How many were defeated?|
Arizonans owe many of their reforms to John Kromko. Kromko, like most Arizonans, is not a native; he was born near Erie, Pennsylvania, in 1940 and moved to Tucson in the mid-1960s. He was active in protests against the Vietnam War, and in the 1970s and 1980s he was elected to the lower house of the state legislature several times. By night, he was a computer-programming instructor; by day, he was Arizona’s "Mr. Initiative."
Kromko’s first petition was a referendum drive to stop a Tucson city council ordinance banning topless dancing, arguing for free speech. In 1976 Kromko was among the handful of Arizonans who, in cooperation with the People’s Lobby Western Bloc campaign, succeeded in putting on the state ballot an initiative to phase out nuclear power. The initiative lost at the polls, but Kromko’s leadership on the issue got him elected to his first term in the legislature.
Repealing the sales tax on food
Once elected, Kromko set his sights on abolishing the sales tax on food, a "regressive" tax that hits the poor hardest. Unsuccessful in the legislature, Kromko launched a statewide initiative petition and got enough signatures to put food tax repeal on the ballot. The legislature, faced with the initiative, acted to repeal the tax.
After the food tax victory, Kromko turned to voter registration reform. Again the legislature was unresponsive, so he launched an initiative petition. He narrowly missed getting enough signatures in 1980, and he failed to win re-election that year.
Undaunted, he revived the voter registration campaign and turned to yet another cause: Medicaid funding. Arizona in 1981 was the only state without Medicaid, since the legislature had refused to appropriate money for the state's share of this federal program.
In 1982, with an initiative petition drive under way and headed for success, the legislature got the message and established a Medicaid program. Kromko and his allies on this issue, the state’s churches, were satisfied and dropped their petition drive.
Motor Voter initiative
The voter registration initiative, now under the leadership of Les Miller, a Phoenix attorney, and the state Democratic Party, gained ballot placement and voter approval. In the ensuing four years, this "Motor Voter" initiative increased by over 10 percent the proportion of Arizona’s eligible population who were registered to vote.
Late legislative career
Kromko, re-elected to the legislature in 1982, took up his petitions again in 1983 to prevent construction of a freeway in Tucson that would have smashed through several residential neighborhoods. The initiative was merely to make freeway plans subject to voter approval, but Tucson officials, seeing the campaign as the death knell for their freeway plans, blocked its placement on the ballot through various legal technicalities. Kromko and neighborhood activists fighting to save their homes refused to admit defeat. They began a new petition drive in 1984, qualified their measure for the ballot, and won voter approval for it in November 1985.
Arizona’s moneyed interests poured funds into a campaign to unseat Kromko in 1986. Kromko not only survived but also fought back by supporting a statewide initiative to limit campaign contributions, sponsored by his colleague in the legislature, Democratic State Representative Reid Ewing of Tucson. Voters passed the measure by a two to one margin.
Kromko’s initiative exploits have made him the most effective Democratic political figure, besides former governor Bruce Babbitt, in this perennially Republican-dominated state. And Babbitt owes partial credit for one of his biggest successes - enactment of restrictions on the toxic chemical pollution of drinking water - to Kromko. Early in 1986 Kromko helped organize an environmentalist petition drive for an anti-toxic initiative, while Babbitt negotiated with the legislature for passage of a similar bill. When initiative backers had enough signatures to put their measure on the ballot, the legislature bowed to the pressure and passed Babbitt's bill. Even today, Kromko is still active in politics, writing letters to the editor about immigration policies.
Petition drive problems in 2008
2008 was a tough year for ballot initiatives in Arizona. Nine citizen initiatives filed signatures to qualify for the November 2008 Arizona ballot by the state's July 3 petition drive deadline. In the end, only six of the initiatives were certified, with three initiatives disqualified as a result of an historically high number of problems with flawed petition signatures. When the November vote was held, of the six that qualified for the ballot, only one was approved.,
Criticisms of process
After 19 were proposed in 2006, legislators were worried about "ballot fatigue" or overuse of the initiative system. This led to legislators considering steps to limit or otherwise exert more control over the initiative process. Ironically, any attempt to alter the initiative and referendum process would require an amendment to the state constitution, and thus in itself be put forth as a referendum.
This article is significantly based on an article published by the Initiative & Referendum Institute, and is used with their permission. Their article, in turn, relies on research in David Schmidt's book, Citizen Lawmakers: The Ballot Initiative Revolution.
Also portions of this article were taken from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia under the GNU license.
- ↑ Arizona Daily Star, "'Clown' takes some serious initiative", July 20, 2007
- ↑ Arizona Republic, "'Flawed' election petitions face review", September 13, 2008
- ↑ Phoenix New Times, "Citizen initiatives have been kicked off the ballot this year in record numbers, and the problems could go much deeper than invalid signatures", August 21, 2008
- ↑ Legislators seeking more control over initiatives, Arizona Republic, Feb. 13, 2007
- ↑ History of Arizona's initiative
- ↑ Citizen Lawmakers: The Ballot Initiative Revolution Temple University Press, 352 pp., ISBN-10: 0877229031, October 1991
History of I&R
Alaska · Arizona · Arkansas · California · Colorado · Florida · Idaho · Illinois · Kentucky · Maine · Maryland · Massachusetts · Michigan · Mississippi · Missouri · Montana · Nebraska · Nevada · New Mexico · North Dakota · Ohio · Oklahoma · Oregon · South Dakota · Utah · Washington · Wyoming
Direct Legislation by the Citizenship Through the Initiative and Referendum · Citizen Lawmakers: The Ballot Initiative Revolution · Direct Legislation: Voting on Ballot Propositions in the United States

General Chemistry/Periodicity and Electron Configurations
Blocks of the Periodic Table 
The Periodic Table does more than just list the elements. The word periodic means that in each row, or period, there is a pattern of characteristics in the elements. This is because the elements are listed in part by their electron configuration. The Alkali metals and Alkaline earth metals have one and two valence electrons (electrons in the outer shell) respectively. These elements lose electrons to form bonds easily, and are thus very reactive. These elements are the s-block of the periodic table. The p-block, on the right, contains common non-metals such as chlorine and helium. The noble gases, in the column on the right, almost never react, since they have eight valence electrons, which makes it very stable. The halogens, directly to the left of the noble gases, readily gain electrons and react with metals. The s and p blocks make up the main-group elements, also known as representative elements. The d-block, which is the largest, consists of transition metals such as copper, iron, and gold. The f-block, on the bottom, contains rarer metals including uranium. Elements in the same Group or Family have the same configuration of valence electrons, making them behave in chemically similar ways.
Causes for Trends 
There are certain phenomena that cause the periodic trends to occur. You must understand them before learning the trends.
Effective Nuclear Charge 
The effective nuclear charge is the amount of positive charge acting on an electron. It is the number of protons in the nucleus minus the number of electrons in between the nucleus and the electron in question. Basically, the nucleus attracts an electron, but other electrons in lower shells repel it (opposites attract, likes repel).
Shielding Effect 
The shielding (or screening) effect is similar to effective nuclear charge. The core electrons repel the valence electrons to some degree. The more electron shells there are (a new shell for each row in the periodic table), the greater the shielding effect is. Essentially, the core electrons shield the valence electrons from the positive charge of the nucleus.
Electron-Electron Repulsions 
When two electrons are in the same shell, they will repel each other slightly. This effect is mostly canceled out due to the strong attraction to the nucleus, but it does cause electrons in the same shell to spread out a little bit. Lower shells experience this effect more because they are smaller and allow the electrons to interact more.
Coulomb's Law 
Coulomb's law is an equation that determines the amount of force with which two charged particles attract or repel each other. It is , where is the amount of charge (+1e for protons, -1e for electrons), is the distance between them, and is a constant. You can see that doubling the distance would quarter the force. Also, a large number of protons would attract an electron with much more force than just a few protons would.
Trends in the Periodic table 
Most of the elements occur naturally on Earth. However, all elements beyond uranium (number 92) are called trans-uranium elements and never occur outside of a laboratory. Most of the elements occur as solids or gases at STP. STP is standard temperature and pressure, which is 0° C and 1 atmosphere of pressure. There are only two elements that occur as liquids at STP: mercury (Hg) and bromine (Br).
Bismuth (Bi) is the last stable element on the chart. All elements after bismuth are radioactive and decay into more stable elements. Some elements before bismuth are radioactive, however.
Atomic Radius 
Leaving out the noble gases, atomic radii are larger on the left side of the periodic chart and are progressively smaller as you move to the right across the period. Conversely, as you move down the group, radii increase.
Atomic radii decrease along a period due to greater effective nuclear charge. Atomic radii increase down a group due to the shielding effect of the additional core electrons, and the presence of another electron shell.
Ionic Radius 
For nonmetals, ions are bigger than atoms, as the ions have extra electrons. For metals, it is the opposite.
Extra electrons (negative ions, called anions) cause additional electron-electron repulsions, making them spread out farther. Fewer electrons (positive ions, called cations) cause fewer repulsions, allowing them to be closer.
|Ionization energy is the energy required to strip an electron from the atom (when in the gas state).
Ionization energy is also a periodic trend within the periodic table organization. Moving left to right within a period or upward within a group, the first ionization energy generally increases. As the atomic radius decreases, it becomes harder to remove an electron that is closer to a more positively charged nucleus.
Ionization energy decreases going left across a period because there is a lower effective nuclear charge keeping the electrons attracted to the nucleus, so less energy is needed to pull one out. It decreases going down a group due to the shielding effect. Remember Coulomb's Law: as the distance between the nucleus and electrons increases, the force decreases at a quadratic rate.
It is considered a measure of the tendency of an atom or ion to surrender an electron, or the strength of the electron binding; the greater the ionization energy, the more difficult it is to remove an electron. The ionization energy may be an indicator of the reactivity of an element. Elements with a low ionization energy tend to be reducing agents and form cations, which in turn combine with anions to form salts.
Electron Affinity 
|Electron affinity is the opposite of ionization energy. It is the energy released when an electron is added to an atom.
Electron affinity is highest in the upper left, lowest on the bottom right. However, electron affinity is actually negative for the noble gasses. They already have a complete valence shell, so there is no room in their orbitals for another electron. Adding an electron would require creating a whole new shell, which takes energy instead of releasing it. Several other elements have extremely low electron affinities because they are already in a stable configuration, and adding an electron would decrease stability.
Electron affinity occurs due to the same reasons as ionization energy.
Electronegativity is how much an atom attracts electrons within a bond. It is measured on a scale with fluorine at 4.0 and francium at 0.7. Electronegativity decreases from upper right to lower left.
Electronegativity decreases because of atomic radius, shielding effect, and effective nuclear charge in the same manner that ionization energy decreases.
Metallic Character 
Metallic elements are shiny, usually gray or silver colored, and good conductors of heat and electricity. They are malleable (can be hammered into thin sheets), and ductile (can be stretched into wires). Some metals, like sodium, are soft and can be cut with a knife. Others, like iron, are very hard. Non-metallic atoms are dull, usually colorful or colorless, and poor conductors. They are brittle when solid, and many are gases at STP. Metals give away their valence electrons when bonding, whereas non-metals take electrons.
The metals are towards the left and center of the periodic table—in the s-block, d-block, and f-block . Poor metals and metalloids (somewhat metal, somewhat non-metal) are in the lower left of the p-block. Non-metals are on the right of the table.
Metallic character increases from right to left and top to bottom. Non-metallic character is just the opposite. This is because of the other trends: ionization energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity.

Cori spezzati (kor' ee spetz ah' tee), Italian for "separated choirs," is the term used to describe a musical composition that uses spatial effects to emphasize the interplay between its various voices. Typically, this means placing two or more choirs or groups of instruments in various places around a performance space. Music that is intended to be performed cori spezatti is by nature antiphonal; in fact, some consider these two terms to be synonymous, at least when they refer to instrumental music.
Cori spezzati isn't a particularly common form of music, and for obvious reasons. In order for it to work out right, it must be performed in a specific type of space; namely, one which is both big enough to accomodate the separation of the instrumental/vocal groups and acoustically suited to the kind of call and answer phrasing that characterizes antiphonal music. (If the space is too echoey, the interplay among the groups just becomes muddled. If it's just moderately echoey, though, it sounds great.) And even in concert halls which meet these specifications, there's a certain awkwardness to the idea of putting half the ensemble onstage and sending the rest up to the balcony or (as I have seen done) forsaking the stage altogether and having half the group stand in the left-hand balcony and the other half in the right-hand one.
The type of performance space which is most obviously suited to cori spezzati is the cathedral; in churches, the problem of the stage is eliminated, and there are generally balconies and nooks and crannies galore in Renaissance-style basilicas. Unsurprisingly, a Renaissance basilica was the formal birthplace of cori spezzati: in the late 1500's, Giovanni Gabrieli, the music director, organist, and composer-in-residence at St. Mark's Basilica in Venice, began experimenting with the idea of separating his choirs and putting them in different places around the church. Gabrieli is considered to be the father of cori spezzati, and probably the only composer to write a serious volume of work in this style. He wrote both choral and instrumental pieces (mostly sacred, because of the nature of his job), some of which are still performed today and shouldn't be too hard to find recordings of. (I, unfortunately, do not own recordings of any of Gabrieli's music, although I heard his Sonata Octavi Toni for two brass choirs performed live, and it was gorgeous. I recommend it highly if you happen to like Renaissance/Baroque music.)
This writeup was made possible by a little bit of help from www.naxos.com/composer/gabrieli.htm, and Virginia Tech's Online Music Dictionary, found at www.music.vt.edu/musicdictionary

Most people still think of Web sites such as Google as places to go. Wrong. That's the old media model. In reality, every click is a command for some computer somewhere in the world. (...) Indeed, CEO Eric Schmidt says that Google essentially is a huge, distributed supercomputer "doing all sorts of things over a fiber-optic network that eventually are services available to end-users." Before long, Googling will mean not just searching for something, but getting ALMOST anything done online.
The New York Times estimated last year that the Googleplex and its server farms contain 450,000 servers. "The rate at which the Google computing system has grown is as remarkable as its size. In March 2001, when the company was serving about 70 million Web pages daily, it had 8,000 computers, according to a Microsoft researcher granted anonymity to talk about a detailed tour he was given at one of Google's Silicon Valley computing centers. By 2003 the number had grown to 100,000."

One of the greatest composers of all time, Franz JosephHaydn made an enormous contribution in the creation and development of virtually all musical forms and genres. 1760, Haydn was appointed the official musician for the Esterhazy Princes. Only in 1790, Haydn was released and allowed to travel. Haydn went to London where he became the most important and influential musician. Haydn retired in Vienna still being in the service of Prince Nikolaus. Haydn remains one of the most popular musicians.

Since 1993, RAN’s Protect-an-Acre program (PAA) has distributed more than one million dollars in grants to more than 150 frontline communities, Indigenous-led organizations, and allies, helping their efforts to secure protection for millions of acres of traditional territory in forests around the world.
Rainforest Action Network believes that Indigenous peoples are the best stewards of the world’s rainforests and that frontline communities organizing against the extraction and burning of dirty fossil fuels deserve the strongest support we can offer. RAN established the Protect-an-Acre program to protect the world’s forests and the rights of their inhabitants by providing financial aid to traditionally under-funded organizations and communities in forest regions.
Indigenous and frontline communities suffer disproportionate impacts to their health, livelihood and culture from extractive industry mega-projects and the effects of global climate change. That’s why Protect-an-Acre provides small grants to community-based organizations, Indigenous federations and small NGOs that are fighting to protect millions of acres of forest and keep millions of tons of CO2 in the ground.
Our grants support organizations and communities that are working to regain control of and sustainably manage their traditional territories through land title initiatives, community education, development of sustainable economic alternatives, and grassroots resistance to destructive industrial activities.
PAA is an alternative to “buy-an-acre” programs that seek to provide rainforest protection by buying tracts of land, but which often fail to address the needs or rights of local Indigenous peoples. Uninhabited forest areas often go unprotected, even if purchased through a buy-an-acre program. It is not uncommon for loggers, oil and gas companies, cattle ranchers, and miners to illegally extract resources from so-called “protected” areas.
Traditional forest communities are often the best stewards of the land because their way of life depends upon the health of their environment. A number of recent studies add to the growing body of evidence that Indigenous peoples are better protectors of their forests than governments or industry.
Based on the success of Protect-an-Acre, RAN launched The Climate Action Fund (CAF) in 2009 as a way to direct further resources and support to frontline communities and Indigenous peoples challenging the fossil fuel industry.
Additionally, RAN has been a Global Advisor to Global Greengrants Fund (GGF) since 1995, identifying recipients for small grants to mobilize resources for global environmental sustainability and social justice using the same priority and criteria as we use for PAA and CAF.
Through these three programs each year we support grassroots projects that result in at least:

Per Square Meter
Warm-up: Relationships in Ecosystems (10 minutes)
1. Begin this lesson by presenting the powerpoint, “Per Square Meter”.
2. After the presentation, ask students to think of animal relationships that correspond to each of the following types; Competition, Predation, Parasitism, and Mutualism
a. For example, two animals that compete for food are lions and cheetahs (they compete for zebras and antelopes)
3. Record the different types of relationships on the board.
Activity One: My Own Square Meter (30 minutes)
1. Have students go outside and pick a small area (about a square meter each) to explore. It is preferable that this area be grassy or ‘natural’. The school playground might be a good spot.
2. Each student should keep a list of both the living organisms and man-made products found in their area (i.e grass, birds, insects, flowers, sidewalk etc.) Students are allowed to collect a few specimens from this area to show to the class. If students do not have jars, they can draw their observations. *See Reproducible #1
Activity Two: Who lives in our playground? (10 minutes)
1. After listing, collecting, and drawing specimens, students should return to the classroom and present their findings.
a. Have the students sit in a circle. Each student should read his or her list of findings out loud. If they collected specimens or drew observations, have them present them to the class.
2. Make a list of these findings on the board. Only write repeated findings once (to avoid writing grass as many times as there are students). Keep one list of living organisms and one list of man-made products.
3. For now, focus on the list of living organisms. As a class, help students name possible relationships between the organisms. See if they can find one of each type of relationship. For example, a bee on a flower is an example of mutualism because the nectar from the flower nourishes the bee and in return, the bee pollinates the flower.
Activity Three: Humans and the Environment: Human Effect on one Square Meter (15 minutes)
1. Now that students have focused on the animal relationships of their square meter, it is time to examine the effect of humans on the natural environment. Focus on the human-made product list. Ask students to consider the possible relationships between the human-made products and the environment. Prompt a brief class discussion on the effects of man-made products on the environment. Use the following questions as guidelines.
a. What is the effect of an empty drink bottle (or any other piece of trash) in a grassy field? Will it decompose? Will it be used by an animal as a habitat or food?
Answer: Trash is an invasive man-made product. Most trash is non-bio degradable and is harmful to the environment and to eco-system relations.Therefore, it is a harmful addition to the square meter.
b. Who left the bottle there? Do you think they are still thinking about it? Did they leave it there on purpose? Why did they leave it there?
Answer: Most people litter thoughtlessly. They are not thinking about their actions and how they may effect the environment or eco-systems. It is important that people recognize that litter has a major effect on the environment.
c. What about a bench? Does a park bench have the same effect on the environment as a piece of trash?
Answer: A park bench can be considered as a positive human-made product. A park bench has little negative effect on the environment and even helps humans further appreciate eco-systems. The Park Bench may even provide shelter or a perch for the eco-systems living organisms.
d. Is there a difference between positive human-made products and negative ones? What are some examples of each?
Answer: Yes, there is a difference between positive and negative human-made products. Positive products have minimal effect on the functioning of eco systems whereas negative products have major effects on eco systems. An example of a positive human-made product would be a solar powered house. An example of a negative human-made product would be a car that produces a lot of pollution.
Wrap Up: Our Classroom Eco-Web (20-30 minutes)
1. Have students create classroom artwork by illustrating the relationships between their eco-systems.
2. Each student should draw at least two components of his or her square meter.
3. After everyone has finished their illustrations, create a web relating the illustrations. Draw arrows between illustrated components with written indications of the type of relationship exemplified.
4. Post the finished product in the classroom so that students can see the interconnectedness of the earth’s eco-systems.
Extension: Exploring Aquatic Eco-Systems (On-going Activity)
Students can explore another type of eco-system by creating a classroom aquarium or terrarium. The supplies for both of these mini eco-systems can be found at your local pet store. Students should help set up and maintain the aquarium or terrarium throughout the year. Periodically, students should observe how the mini-ecosystem is progressing, note changes, and assess the relationships between the organisms of the eco-system. This way, students are able to directly participate in the functioning of a natural system.
Another related activity might be to take your students on a field trip to a different eco-system from that of your school. If you live near a river, lake, or ocean take them there to explore different ecological relations. If you live in a city, examples of diverse eco-systems can be found at the local zoo or aquarium.

From the time of Aristotle (384-322 BC) until the late 1500’s, gravity was believed to act differently on different objects.
- Drop a metal bar and a feather at the same time… which one hits the ground first?
- Obviously, common sense will tell you that the bar will hit first, while the feather slowly flutters to the ground.
- In Aristotle’s view, this was because the bar was being pulled harder (and faster) by gravity because of its physical properties.
- Because everyone sees this when they drop different objects, it wasn’t questioned for almost 2000 years.
Galileo Galilei was the first major scientist to refute (prove wrong) Aristotle’s theories.
- In his famous (at least to Physicists!) experiment, Galileo went to the top of the leaning tower of Pisa and dropped a wooden ball and a lead ball, both the same size, but different masses.
- They both hit the ground at the same time, even though Aristotle would say that the heavier metal ball should hit first.
- Galileo had shown that the different rates at which some objects fall is due to air resistance, a type of friction.
- Get rid of friction (air resistance) and all objects will fall at the same rate.
- Galileo said that the acceleration of any object (in the absence of air resistance) is the same.
- To this day we follow the model that Galileo created.
ag = g = 9.81m/s2
ag = g = acceleration due to gravity
Since gravity is just an acceleration like any other, it can be used in any of the formulas that we have used so far.
- Just be careful about using the correct sign (positive or negative) depending on the problem.
Examples of Calculations with Gravity
Example 1: A ball is thrown up into the air at an initial velocity of 56.3m/s. Determine its velocity after 4.52s have passed.
In the question the velocity upwards is positive, and I’ll keep it that way. That just means that I have to make sure that I use gravity as a negative number, since gravity always acts down.
vf = vi + at
= 56.3m/s + (-9.81m/s2)(4.52s)
vf = 12.0 m/s
This value is still positive, but smaller. The ball is slowing down as it rises into the air.
Example 2: I throw a ball down off the top of a cliff so that it leaves my hand at 12m/s. Determine how fast is it going 3.47 seconds later.
In this question I gave a downward velocity as positive. I might as well stick with this, but that means I have defined down as positive. That means gravity will be positive as well.vf = vi + at
= 12m/s + (9.81m/s2)(3.47s)
vf = 46 m/s
Here the number is getting bigger. It’s positive, but in this question I’ve defined down as positive, so it’s speeding up in the positive direction.
Example 3: I throw up a ball at 56.3 m/s again. Determine how fast is it going after 8.0s.
We’re defining up as positive again.
vf = vi + at
= 56.3m/s + (-9.81m/s2)(8.0s)
vf = -22 m/s
Why did I get a negative answer?
- The ball reached its maximum height, where it stopped, and then started to fall down.
- Falling down means a negative velocity.
There’s a few rules that you have to keep track of. Let’s look at the way an object thrown up into the air moves.
As the ball is going up…
- It starts at the bottom at the maximum speed.
- As it rises, it slows down.
- It finally reaches it’s maximum height, where for a moment its velocity is zero.
- This is exactly half ways through the flight time.
As the ball is coming down…
- The ball begins to speed up, but downwards.
- When it reaches the same height that it started from, it will be going at the same speed as it was originally moving at.
- It takes just as long to go up as it takes to come down.
Example 4: I throw my ball up into the (again) at a velocity of 56.3 m/s.
a) Determine how much time does it take to reach its maximum height.
- It reaches its maximum height when its velocity is zero. We’ll use that as the final velocity.
- Also, if we define up as positive, we need to remember to define down (like gravity) as negative.
a = (vf - vi) / t
t = (vf - vi) / a
= (0 - 56.3m/s) / -9.81m/s2
t = 5.74s
b) Determine how high it goes.
- It’s best to try to avoid using the number you calculated in part (a), since if you made a mistake, this answer will be wrong also.
- If you can’t avoid it, then go ahead and use it.
vf2 = vi2 + 2ad
d = (vf2 = vi2) / 2a
= (0 - 56.32) / 2(-9.81m/s2)
d = 1.62e2 m
c) Determine how fast is it going when it reaches my hand again.
- Ignoring air resistance, it will be going as fast coming down as it was going up.
You might have heard people in movies say how many "gee’s" they were feeling.
- All this means is that they are comparing the acceleration they are feeling to regular gravity.
- So, right now, you are experiencing 1g… regular gravity.
- During lift-off the astronauts in the space shuttle experience about 4g’s.
- That works out to about 39m/s2.
- Gravity on the moon is about 1.7m/s2 = 0.17g

March 30, 2011 by Valerie Elkins
The short answer is keizu. The longer answer is not so easy. There several reasons why it is difficult for those of Japanese ancestry living outside of Japan to trace their lineage. One of the main reasons is a lack of understanding of the language. I am not going to sugar coat it, learning Japanese is hard, BUT learning how to pronounce it is not.
There are 5 basic vowel sounds in Japanese. They are always pronounced the same unlike in English! Vowel lengths are all uniformly short:
|a||as in ‘father’|
|e||as in ‘bet’|
|i||as in ‘beet’|
|u||as in ‘boot’|
|o||as in ‘boat’|
You do not need to know everything in Japanese but learning some genealogical terms is helpful.
Glossary of Japanese genealogical terms to begin building your vocabulary.
- koseki ~ household register, includes everyone in a household under the head of house (who usually was male)
- koseki tohon ~ certified copy which recorded everything from the original record.
- koseki shohon ~ certified copy which recorded only parts from the original.
- joseki ~ expired register in which all persons originally entered have been removed because of death, change of residence, etc. A joseki file is ordinarily available for 80 years after its expiration.
- kaisei genkoseki ~ revised koseki
- honseki ~ permanent residence or registered address (i.e. person may move to Tokyo but their records remain in hometown city hall).
- genseki ~ another name for honseki
- kakocho ~ Buddist death register
- kaimyo ~ Buddist name given to deceased person and recorded in kakocho.
- homyo ~ Buddist name given to living converts, similar to homyo.
- kuni ~ country or nation
- ken ~ prefecture
- shi ~ city
- gun ~ county
- to ~ metropolitan prefecture (Tokyo-to). Similar to ken.
- do ~ urban prefecture (Hokkaido). Similar to ken.
- fu ~ urban prefecture (Kyoto-fu, Osaka-fu) similar to ken.
- ku ~ ward in some large cities (Sapparo, Sendai, Tokyo) divided in to town (cho).
- cho ~ town
- aza ~unorganized district
- machi ~ town within a city (cho) or ward (ku), town within a county (gun).
- chome ~ smaller division of a town (cho) in some neighborhoods.
- mura or son ~ village within a county (gun).
- koshu or hittousha or stainushi ~ head of household, the head of the family
- zen koshu ~ former head of household
- otto ~ husband
- tsuma ~ wife
- chichi or fu ~ father
- haha or bo ~ mother
- sofu ~ grandfather
- sobo ~ grandmother
- otoko or dan or nan ~ male, man, son
- onna or jo ~ female, woman, daughter
- ani or kei or kyou ~ older brother
- otouto or tei ~ younger brother
- ane or shi ~ older sister
- imouto or mai ~ younger sister
- mago or son ~ grandchild
- himago or souson ~ great-grandchild
- oi ~ nephew
- mei ~ niece
- youshi ~ adopted child or son
- youjo ~ adopted daughter
- muko youshi ~ a man without sons may adopt his eldest daughter’s husband as his own son and the young man will take his wife’s surname and be listed on her family’s koseki
- seimei or shime ~ full name, family name
- shussei or shusshou ~ birth
- shibou ~ deceased
- nen or toshi ~ year
- gatsu, getsu or tsuki ~ month
- hi or nichi or ka ~ day
- ji or toki ~ hour, time
- sai or toshi ~ age
- issei ~ person born in Japan and later immigrate elsewhere
- nisei ~ child/generation of issei and born outside of Japan
- sansei ~ child/generation of nisei and born outside of Japan
- yonsei ~ child/generation of sansei and born outside of Japan
- gosei ~ child/generation of yonsei and born outside of Japan
There is another Japanese term you really need to know. It is ganbatte which means ‘hang in there’ or ‘do your best’ and either one is will work.
Category Uncategorized | Tags:

Writing An Acceptable Use Policy For Your School
A helpful guide to creating an Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) for a school's use of services provided by the Internet. The author notes that an AUP is the most important document a school will create since it states the terms, conditions, and rules of Internet use determined by a school or district. Topics include: What is an AUP; Why Establish an AUP; Objectives of an AUP; Components; Distribution; Samples (web based); Resources (web based). Additional coverage is given to writing policy statements and consent forms, and maintaining copyrights, netiquette, privacy, and user responsibility.
Books & Booklets; Internet Resources
Administration & Leadership
Administrator, Teacher, Board Member / Trustee

A Brief Description of Islam as the Shi'ites Believe
5- MONOTHEISM IS THE VERY SOUL OF ALL THE ISLAMIC COMMANDMENTS
WE BELIEVE that one of the most important subjects of the knowledge of God, is the MONOTHEISM, i.e. the belief that there is but one God. As a matter of fact Monotheism (TOWHID) is not only a principle of the religion, but the most important of the tenets. It is the very soul and the base of all the Islamic ideas and beliefs. We can say that the roots, as well as the branches of Islam take their forms in the monotheism.
The UNITY and ONENESS is a general topic of conversation everywhere and in every field:- UNITY OF GOD'S ESSENCE, Unity of His attributes, and actions. In other word, also the unity of prophets and their teachings, the unity of the LAW, GHIBLEH, and the books. And after all, the unity of Moslims through their brotherhood and the unity of the resurrection day. From this point of view the HOLY QURØ·N declares POLYTHEISM as an unforgiveable SIN:-
"Allah does not forgive those who set up partners with Him, but He may forgive any sin inferior to that, of whom he wills.
He that sets up CO-SHARERS with Allah is guilty of a SIN which is most heinous indeed."
THE HOLY QURAN - S4: 48
"It has already been revealed to you as it was revealed to those before you that:-" If you join gods with Allah, your deeds shall be fruitless, and you surely will be one of those who lose. (all spiritual goodnesses)
THE HOLY QURAN - S39: 65
6- THE BRANCHES OF MONOTHEISM
WE BELIEVE that MONOTHEISM, (TOWHID) has many branches among which four are the most important ones:-

What we ship things in makes a difference.
Take the banana, for example. In 1876, at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition, the banana was a delicacy (and very black). Millions of bunches could only be sent to U.S. shores if they were refrigerated. By 1901, as I describe in Econ 101 1/2, United Fruit was distributing 14 million bunches of bananas in the U.S. One reason, in addition to the railroad and the steamboat, was a banana vessel that could maintain a 53 degree temperature for its cargo.
Just like refrigerated banana vessels transformed world trade, so too has the cargo container. Introduced in 1956, now one ship can carry 3,000 forty foot containers with 100,000 tons of shoes, electronics and clothing. Imagine the potential efficiency. Put everything in the container, arrive at a port, and just slip it onto a truck or a railroad car for it to move to its next stop. Journalist Marc Levinson says the result is more variety for consumers, lower freight bills, less shipping time, lower inventory costs and longer supply chains.
This takes us back to yesterday’s supership post and the expansion of the Panama Canal. Larger ships mean more containers on board. The NY Times said that the newest generation of superships could hold 15,000 containers that are 20 feet long.
The Economic Lesson
Adam Smith would have been delighted to see his ideas about mass production and regional specialization extend around the world. Describing the productivity of factory pin production in The Wealth of Nations, he told us that one worker, functioning alone, could produce 1 pin per day. However, when that worker specialized through a division of labor in a factory, 4,800 pins per worker per day were made.
Adam Smith used the term “distant sale” to explain the transport of goods from a factory to a distant market. He could have been describing a container ship moving from China to the U.S.

ASL Literature and Art
This section is a collection of ASL storytelling, poetry, works of art, and other creative works. It also consists of posts on literary aspects of ASL.
Speech language can convey sound effects in storytelling, whereas sign language can convey cinematic effects in storytelling.
Poetry in sign language has its own poetic features such as rhymes, rhythms, meters, and other features that charactierize poetry which is not limited to speech.
Explore ASL literary arts in this section including some visual-linguistic literary works in ASL and discussion.
Selected works of interest
Deconstruct W.O.R.D.: an original poetry performance.
Knowing Fish: poetic narrative video.
Compare three versions of the poem "Spring Dawn" originally written by Meng Hao-jan. The poem is translated by the literary artist Jolanta Lapiak into ASL in video and unique one-of-a-kind photograph print. Watch how ASL rhymes arise in this signed poem.

May 19, 2008 A vaccine created by University of Rochester Medical Center scientists prevents the development of Alzheimer's disease-like pathology in mice without causing inflammation or significant side effects.
Vaccinated mice generated an immune response to the protein known as amyloid-beta peptide, which accumulates in what are called "amyloid plaques" in brains of people with Alzheimer's. The vaccinated mice demonstrated normal learning skills and functioning memory in spite of being genetically designed to develop an aggressive form of the disease.
The Rochester scientists reported the findings in an article in the May issue of Molecular Therapy, the journal of The American Society of Gene Therapy.
"Our study demonstrates that we can create a potent but safe version of a vaccine that utilizes the strategy of immune response shaping to prevent Alzheimer's-related pathologies and memory deficits," said William Bowers, associate professor of neurology and of microbiology and immunology at the Medical Center and lead author of the article. "The vaccinated mice not only performed better, we found no evidence of signature amyloid plaque in their brains."
Alzheimer's is a progressive neurodegenerative disease associated with dementia and a decline in performance of normal activities. Hallmarks of the disease include the accumulation of amyloid plaques in the brains of patients and the loss of normal functioning tau, a protein that stabilizes the transport networks in neurons. Abnormal tau function eventually leads to another classic hallmark of Alzheimer's, neurofibrillary tangle in nerve cells. After several decades of exposure to these insults, neurons ultimately succumb and die, leading to progressively damaged learning and memory centers in the brain.
The mice that received the vaccines were genetically engineered to express large amounts of amyloid beta protein. They also harbored a mutation that causes the tau-related tangle pathology. Prior to the start of the vaccine study, the mice were trained to navigate a maze using spatial clues. They were then tested periodically during the 10-month study on the amount of time and distance traveled to an escape pod and the number of errors made along the way.
"What we found exciting was that by targeting one pathology of Alzheimer's -- amyloid beta -- we were able to also prevent the transition of tau from its normal form to a form found in the disease state," Bowers said.
The goal of the vaccine is to prompt the immune system to recognize amyloid beta protein and remove it. To create the vaccine, Bowers and the research group use a herpes virus that is stripped of the viral genes that can cause disease or harm. They then load the virus container with the genetic code for amyloid beta and interleukin-4, a protein that stimulates immune responses involving type 2 T helper cells, which are lymphocytes that play an important role in the immune system.
The research group tested several versions of a vaccine. Mice were given three injections of empty virus alone, a vaccine carrying only the amyloid beta genetic code, or a vaccine encoding both amyloid beta and interlueikin-4, which was found to be the most effective.
"We have learned a great deal from this ongoing project," Bowers said. "Importantly, it has demonstrated the combined strengths of the gene delivery platform and the immune shaping concept for the creation of customized vaccines for Alzheimer's disease, as well as a number of other diseases. We are currently working on strategies we believe can make the vaccine even safer."
Bowers expects the vaccine eventually to be tested in people, but due to the number of studies required to satisfy regulatory requirements, it could be three or more years before human trials testing this type of Alzheimer's vaccine occur.
Grants from the National Institutes of Health supported the study. In addition to Bowers, authors of the Molecular Therapy article include Maria E. Frazer, Jennifer E. Hughes, Michael A. Mastrangelo and Jennifer Tibbens of the Medical Center and Howard J. Federoff of Georgetown University Medical Center.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Saint ZachariasArticle Free Pass
Saint Zacharias, English Zachary (born , San Severino, duchy of Benevento [Italy]—died March 14/22, 752, Rome; feast day March 15), pope from 741 to 752.
The last of the Greek popes, Zacharias was supposedly a Roman deacon when he succeeded Pope St. Gregory III in November/December 741. His pontificate was devoted to diplomatic relations with the Lombard and Frankish kingdoms and with the Byzantine Empire. He initiated a policy of conciliation with the Lombards while endeavouring to dissuade their rulers, Liutprand and Rachis, from conquering the Byzantine exarchate of Ravenna. Successful, he thus made peace with the Lombards. He maintained amiable relations with the Byzantine emperor Constantine V Copronymus, whom he advised to restore the veneration of icons.
Zacharias’s relations with the Franks were similarly cordial, and his correspondence with St. Boniface, the apostle of Germany, shows how great his influence was on contemporary events in the Frankish kingdom. In 741 he made Boniface legate and charged him with the reformation of the whole Frankish church. He supported the deposition (751–752) of Childeric III, the last Merovingian king, and authorized the Frankish church to anoint Pippin III the Short as king of the Franks. Zacharias’s action in the transference of the royal crown from the Merovingians to the house of Pippin (Carolingians) began a new era for church and state by establishing the Carolingian-papal alliance, which was to be of the greatest significance in future relations between pope and emperor and was of extreme importance to the theorists and controversialists of the Investiture Controversy (11th and 12th centuries). The latter dispute concerned secular rulers’ right to invest bishops and abbots, which right became one of the paramount aspects in the struggle for power between the papacy and the Holy Roman Empire.
Zacharias is known especially in the East for his Greek translation of the Dialogues of Pope St. Gregory I the Great.
What made you want to look up "Saint Zacharias"? Please share what surprised you most...

Nephila jurassica: The biggest spider fossil ever found
Spiders are small arthropods, famous for their elasticity, strength and web-making abilities. For some people, spiders are not welcome in the home; as soon as they see one crawling on the ceiling, the first thought that comes to mind is to swat it at once.
But spiders predate us humans by a long way. And while sometimes spiders are tiny creatures, a team of scientists has discovered the largest spider fossil ever in a layer of volcanic ash in Ningcheng County, Inner Mongolia, China. The research was carried out by Paleontologist Professor Paul Selden, of the University of Kansas, with his team.
Named Nephila jurassica, this 165-million-year-old fossil is 2.5 cm in length and has a leg span of almost 9 cm. It is currently the largest known fossilized spider, and is from the family known as Nephilidae, the largest web-weaving spiders alive today.
According to research published online in the 20th April, 2011 issue of Biology Letters, this prehistoric spider was female and shows characteristics of the golden orb weaver. Widespread in warmer regions, the golden silk orb weavers are well-known for the fabulous webs they weave. Females of this family weave the largest orb webs known.
"When I first saw it, I immediately realized that it was very unique not only because of its size, but also because the preservation was excellent," said ChungKun Shih, study co-author, and a visiting professor at Capital Normal University in Beijing, China.
According to a press release: “This fossil finding provides evidence that golden orb-webs were being woven and capturing medium to large insects in Jurassic times, and predation by these spiders would have played an important role in the natural selection of contemporaneous insects.”

Cleopatra, queen of Egypt and lover of Julius Caesar and Mark Antony, takes her life following the defeat of her forces against Octavian, the future first emperor of Rome.
Cleopatra, born in 69 B.C., was made Cleopatra VII, queen of Egypt, upon the death of her father, Ptolemy XII, in 51 B.C. Her brother was made King Ptolemy XIII at the same time, and the siblings ruled Egypt under the formal title of husband and wife. Cleopatra and Ptolemy were members of the Macedonian dynasty that governed Egypt since the death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. Although Cleopatra had no Egyptian blood, she alone in her ruling house learned Egyptian. To further her influence over the Egyptian people, she was also proclaimed the daughter of Re, the Egyptian sun god. Cleopatra soon fell into dispute with her brother, and civil war erupted in 48 B.C.
Rome, the greatest power in the Western world, was also beset by civil war at the time. Just as Cleopatra was preparing to attack her brother with a large Arab army, the Roman civil war spilled into Egypt. Pompey the Great, defeated by Julius Caesar in Greece, fled to Egypt seeking solace but was immediately murdered by agents of Ptolemy XIII. Caesar arrived in Alexandria soon after and, finding his enemy dead, decided to restore order in Egypt.
During the preceding century, Rome had exercised increasing control over the rich Egyptian kingdom, and Cleopatra sought to advance her political aims by winning the favor of Caesar. She traveled to the royal palace in Alexandria and was allegedly carried to Caesar rolled in a rug, which was offered as a gift. Cleopatra, beautiful and alluring, captivated the powerful Roman leader, and he agreed to intercede in the Egyptian civil war on her behalf.
In 47 B.C., Ptolemy XIII was killed after a defeat against Caesar's forces, and Cleopatra was made dual ruler with another brother, Ptolemy XIV. Julius and Cleopatra spent several amorous weeks together, and then Caesar departed for Asia Minor, where he declared "Veni, vidi, vici" (I came, I saw, I conquered), after putting down a rebellion. In June 47 B.C., Cleopatra bore a son, whom she claimed was Caesar's and named Caesarion, meaning "little Caesar."
Upon Caesar's triumphant return to Rome, Cleopatra and Caesarion joined him there. Under the auspices of negotiating a treaty with Rome, Cleopatra lived discretely in a villa that Caesar owned outside the capital. After Caesar was assassinated in March 44 B.C., she returned to Egypt. Soon after, Ptolemy XIV died, likely poisoned by Cleopatra, and the queen made her son co-ruler with her as Ptolemy XV Caesar.
With Julius Caesar's murder, Rome again fell into civil war, which was temporarily resolved in 43 B.C. with the formation of the second triumvirate, made up of Octavian, Caesar's great-nephew and chosen heir; Mark Antony, a powerful general; and Lepidus, a Roman statesman. Antony took up the administration of the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire, and he summoned Cleopatra to Tarsus, in Asia Minor, to answer charges that she had aided his enemies.
Cleopatra sought to seduce Antony, as she had Caesar before him, and in 41 B.C. arrived in Tarsus on a magnificent river barge, dressed as Venus, the Roman god of love. Successful in her efforts, Antony returned with her to Alexandria, where they spent the winter in debauchery. In 40 B.C., Antony returned to Rome and married Octavian's sister Octavia in an effort to mend his strained alliance with Octavian. The triumvirate, however, continued to deteriorate. In 37 B.C., Antony separated from Octavia and traveled east, arranging for Cleopatra to join him in Syria. In their time apart, Cleopatra had borne him twins, a son and a daughter. According to Octavian's propagandists, the lovers were then married, which violated the Roman law restricting Romans from marrying foreigners.
Antony's disastrous military campaign against Parthia in 36 B.C. further reduced his prestige, but in 34 B.C. he was more successful against Armenia. To celebrate the victory, he staged a triumphal procession through the streets of Alexandria, in which he and Cleopatra sat on golden thrones, and Caesarion and their children were given imposing royal titles. Many in Rome, spurred on by Octavian, interpreted the spectacle as a sign that Antony intended to deliver the Roman Empire into alien hands.
After several more years of tension and propaganda attacks, Octavian declared war against Cleopatra, and therefore Antony, in 31 B.C. Enemies of Octavian rallied to Antony's side, but Octavian's brilliant military commanders gained early successes against his forces. On September 2, 31 B.C., their fleets clashed at Actium in Greece. After heavy fighting, Cleopatra broke from the engagement and set course for Egypt with 60 of her ships. Antony then broke through the enemy line and followed her. The disheartened fleet that remained surrendered to Octavian. One week later, Antony's land forces surrendered.
Although they had suffered a decisive defeat, it was nearly a year before Octavian reached Alexandria and again defeated Antony. In the aftermath of the battle, Cleopatra took refuge in the mausoleum she had commissioned for herself. Antony, informed that Cleopatra was dead, stabbed himself with his sword. Before he died, another messenger arrived, saying Cleopatra still lived. Antony had himself carried to Cleopatra's retreat, where he died after bidding her to make her peace with Octavian. When the triumphant Roman arrived, she attempted to seduce him, but he resisted her charms. Rather than fall under Octavian's domination, Cleopatra committed suicide on August 30, 30 B.C., possibly by means of an asp, a poisonous Egyptian serpent and symbol of divine royalty.
Octavian then executed her son Caesarion, annexed Egypt into the Roman Empire, and used Cleopatra's treasure to pay off his veterans. In 27 B.C., Octavian became Augustus, the first and arguably most successful of all Roman emperors. He ruled a peaceful, prosperous, and expanding Roman Empire until his death in 14 A.D. at the age of 75.

From Abracadabra to Zombies | View All
N'kisi & the N'kisi Project
N'kisi (pronounced ‘‘in-key-see’’) is a captive bred eight or nine-year-old hand raised African Grey Parrot whose owner, Aimée Morgana, thinks uses language. She doesn't think he just sounds out words. She thinks he communicates with her in language, which would in effect make N'kisi a rational parrot. For example, N'kisi utters "pretty smell medicine" when he wants to describe the aromatherapy oils that Aimée uses.* Furthermore, Aimée says her parrot has a fine sense of humor and knows how to laugh. Imagine having conversations with a humorous parrot. Think of all the things you could talk and joke about, besides aromatherapy. You could discuss the fame that would come to anyone who had a parrot that can think and converse in intelligent discourse, like pretty smell medicine and look at my pretty naked body.* And when some nasty skeptic makes fun of you, the two of you can joke about it.
I'm afraid that this story stretches the boundaries of reasonable credibility, though stories of rational parrots go back at least to the 17th century. John Locke, for example, relates a tale of a Portuguese-speaking parrot of some note in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding (II.xxvii.8). These cases are more likely cases of self-deception, delusion, and gullibility than of language-using parrots. Listen to this audio clip of N'kisi, Aimée, and a toy that "talks" when a button is pushed. First listen without reading the transcript. Some of it is intelligible, especially after the fourth or fifth repetition, but it is difficult to understand the "conversation," especially with the toy making its sounds as Aimée stimulates her parrot. Some of the tape sounds like gibberish until you are told what to listen for. When you listen while reading the transcript something amazing happens: you can hear just what you're reading. Why is that? The same thing happens when you listen to audio tapes played backward. When you just listen without anyone telling you what to listen for, you usually don't understand anything intelligible. But as soon as someone shows or tells you what to listen for, you can hear the message. Such is the power of suggestion and the way of audio perception. Hearing is a constructive process, like vision, in that bits of sensory data are "filled in" by the brain to produce a visual or auditory perception that is clear and distinct, and in accord with your expectations. Consider the following from an interview with Dr. Irene Pepperberg, Morgana's inspiration, who has been studying Alex, an African Grey Parrot, for many years:
We were doing demos at the Media Lab [at MIT] for our corporate sponsors; we had a very small amount of time scheduled and the visitors wanted to see Alex work. So we put a number of differently colored letters on the tray that we use, put the tray in front of Alex, and asked, "Alex, what sound is blue?" He answers, "Ssss." It was an "s", so we say "Good birdie" and he replies, "Want a nut."
Well, I don't want him sitting there using our limited amount of time to eat a nut, so I tell him to wait, and I ask, "What sound is green?" Alex answers, "Ssshh." He's right, it's "sh," and we go through the routine again: "Good parrot." "Want a nut." "Alex, wait. What sound is orange?" "ch." "Good bird!" "Want a nut." We're going on and on and Alex is clearly getting more and more frustrated. He finally gets very slitty-eyed and he looks at me and states, "Want a nut. Nnn, uh, tuh."
Not only could you imagine him thinking, "Hey, stupid, do I have to spell it for you?" but the point was that he had leaped over where we were and had begun sounding out the letters of the words for us. This was in a sense his way of saying to us, "I know where you're headed! Let's get on with it," which gave us the feeling that we were on the right track with what we were doing.*
Dr. Pepperberg thinks the bird is responding cognitively to her questions rather than simply responding to a stimulus. She thinks the bird is getting frustrated, but she has stipulated earlier in the interview:
I never claim that Alex has full-blown language; I never would. I'm not going to be able to put Alex on a "T" stand and have you interview him the way you interview me.
So, whereas you or I might say "give me the nut or this interview is over" were we parrots with intentionality and language, the parrot's movements and sounds have to be less direct and more complex, so that they have to be interpreted for us by Pepperberg. In her view, Alex is "clearly getting more frustrated" and his frustration culminates with a "very slitty-eyed" expression. But this is Pepperberg's interpretation, as is her hearing the bird sound out the letters of the word 'nut'. It could have been a stutter for all we know, but Pepperberg is facilitating Alex's communication by telling us what she hears. The final paragraph indicates that Pepperberg is having a hard time drawing the line between imagining what a parrot might be thinking and projecting those thoughts into the parrot's movements and sounds. She's also having a hard time getting grant money (NIH turned her down), so she started her own private foundation, the Alex Foundation.
When news of N'kisi broke on the pages of BBC online, there was no mention in the article by Alex Kirby of the parrot having conversations with people other than Aimée Morgana. (The story was originally told in USA Today in the February 12, 2001, edition.) Despite the headline "Parrot's oratory stuns scientists," there was no evidence given that the parrot had stunned anyone during a conversation. It seems that Aimée is to her parrot what the facilitator is to her client in facilitated communication, except that the parrot is actually providing data to interpret and is more like clever Hans, the horse that responded to unconscious movements of his master, than a disabled human who may not be providing any content or direction at all to the facilitator. It is Aimée who gives intentionality to the parrot's sounds. She is the one who attributes 'laughter' to his shrieks and conscious awareness to his responses, though those responses could be due to any one of many stimuli, consciously or unconsciously provided by Aimée or items in the immediate environment. Nevertheless, Dr. Jane Goodall, who studies chimpanzees, met N'kisi and said that he provides an "outstanding example of interspecies communication." There is some evidence, however, that much of the work with language-using primates also mistakes subjective validation by scientists for complex linguistic abilities of their animal subjects (Wallman 1992).
According to Mr. Kirby, N'kisi not only uses language but has been tested for telepathy and he passed the test with flying colors:
In an experiment, the bird and his owner were put in separate rooms and filmed as the artist opened random envelopes containing picture cards.
Analysis showed the parrot had used appropriate keywords three times more often than would be likely by chance.
Kirby doesn't provide any details about the experiment, so a reader might misinterpret this claim as implying that this parrot did about twice as well as people did in the ganzfeld telepathy experiments. In those experiments, subjects in separate rooms were monitored as one tried to telepathically send information from a picture or video to the other. Typically, there was a 20% chance of guessing what the item was but results as high as 38% were reported in some meta-analyses. If the parrot scored three times better than chance, then he would have gotten 60% correct. The odds of a parrot randomly blurting out words that match up 60% of the time with pictures being looked at simultaneously in another room are so high that there is virtually no way that this could happen by chance. However, as you might suspect, Kirby's claim is a bit misleading.
I assume that Kirby was writing about an experiment that was part of the N'kisi project, a joint effort by Morgana and Rupert Sheldrake to test not only the parrot's language-using abilities but his telepathic talents as well. Sheldrake has already validated the telepathic abilities of a dog and thinks the "findings [of this experiment] are consistent with the hypothesis that N'kisi was reacting telepathically to Aimée's mental activity."*
The full text of Sheldrake's study published in the peer reviewed Journal of Scientific Exploration is available online. The title of the paper would send most journal editors to their grave, killed by laughter: "Testing a Language-Using Parrot for Telepathy." Fortunately for Sheldrake and his associates there will always be a sympathetic editor for another story like that of J. B. Rhine and the telepathic horse, "Lady Wonder." At least Sheldrake's protocols show some measure of sophistication, unlike Rhine's. Even so, as the editor at the Journal of Scientific Exploration commented: "once again, we have suggestive results, a level of statistical significance that is less than compelling, and the devout wish that further work with refined protocols will ensue."* So, we'll just have to wait and see whether further study of N'kisi supports the telepathic hypothesis.
Anyway, here is how Sheldrake set up the experiment. He first compiled a list of 30 words from the bird's vocabulary that "could be represented by visual images." A package of 167 photos from a stock supplier was used for the test. Since only 20 of the photos corresponded to words on the list, the word list was reduced to 20. The word 'camera' was removed from the list because 'N’kisi "used it so frequently to comment on the cameras used in the tests themselves." Thus, they were left with 19 words.
During the tests, N’kisi remained in his cage in Aimée’s apartment in Manhattan, New York. There was no one in the room with him. Meanwhile, Aimée went to a separate enclosed room on a different floor. N’kisi could not see or hear her, and in any case, Aimée said nothing, as confirmed by the audio track recorded on the camera that filmed her continuously. The distance between Aimée and N’kisi was about 55 feet. Aimée could hear N’kisi through a wireless baby monitor, which she used to gain ‘‘feedback’’ to help her to adjust her mental state as image sender.
Both Aimée and N’kisi were filmed continuously throughout the test sessions by two synchronized cameras on time-coded videotape. The cameras were mounted on tripods and ran continuously without interruption throughout each session. N’kisi was also recorded continuously on a separate audio tape recorder. (Sheldrake and Morgana 2003)
According to Sheldrake:
We conducted a total of 147 two-minute trials. The recordings of N’kisi during these trials were transcribed blind by three independent transcribers....He scored 23 hits: the key words he said corresponded to the target pictures....If N’kisi said a key word that did not correspond to the photograph, that was counted as a miss, and if he said a key word corresponding to the photograph, that was a hit. (Sheldrake and Morgana 2003)
However, sixty of the trials were discarded because in those trials N'kisi either was silent or uttered things that were not key words, i.e., showed no signs of telepathy. A few other trials were discarded because the transcribers did not agree on what N'kisi said. In short, Sheldrake's statistical conclusions are based on the results of 71 of the trials. I'll let the reader decide whether it was proper to omit 40% of the data because the parrot didn't utter a word on the key word list during those trials. Some might argue that those sessions should be counted as misses and that by ignoring so much data where the parrot clearly did not indicate any sign of telepathy is strong evidence that Sheldrake was more interested in confirming his biases than in getting at the truth.
N'kisi's misses were listed at 94. Ten of the 23 hits were on the picture that corresponded to the word 'flower', which N'kisi uttered 23 times during the trials. The flower image, selected randomly, was used in 17 trials. The image corresponding to water was used in 10 of the trials. The bird said 'water' in twelve trials and got 2 hits. It seems oddly biased that almost one-third of the images and more than half the hits came from just 2 of the 19 pictures.
One of the peer reviewers thought that the fact that the flower word and picture played so heavy a role in the outcome that the paper's results were distorted and that the paper should not be published. The other reviewer accepted Sheldrake's observation that even if you throw out the flower data, you still get some sort of statistical significance. This may be true. However, since the bird allegedly had a vocabulary of some 950 words at the time of the test, omitting sessions where the bird said nothing or said something not on the key list, is unjustifiable. Furthermore, there is no evidence that it is reasonable to assume that when the parrot is by itself uttering words that it is trying to communicate telepathically with Morgana. Or are we to accept Sheldrake's assumption that the parrot turns his telepathic interest off and on, and it was on only when he uttered a word on the key list? That assumption is no more valid that Morgana's belief that the telepathy doesn't work as well when she makes an effort to send a telepathic message to her parrot. In any case, I wonder why Sheldrake didn't do a baseline study, where the parrot was videotaped for two-minutes at a time while Morgana was taking an aromatherapy bath or meditating or doing something unrelated to the key word pictures. Had he made several hundred such clips, he could then have randomly selected 71 and compared them to the 71 clips he used for his analysis. If there was no significant difference between the randomly selected clips and the ones that emerged during the experiment, then the telepathy hypothesis would not be supported. On the other hand, if he found a robust statistically significant difference, then the telepathy hypothesis would be supported. I suggest he do something along these lines when he attempts to replicate his parrot telepathy test.
In some trials, N’kisi repeated a given key word. For example, in one trial N’kisi said ‘‘phone’’ three times, and in another he said ‘‘flower’’ ten times, and in the tabulation of data the numbers of times he said these words are shown in parentheses as: phone (3); flower (10). For most of the statistical analyses, repetitions were ignored, but in one analysis the numbers of words that were said more than once in a given trial were compared statistically with those said only once for both hits and misses. For each trial, the key word or words represented in the photograph were tabulated. Some images had only one key word, but others had two or more. For example, a picture of a couple hugging in a pool of water involved two key words, ‘‘water’’ and ‘‘hug.’’ (Sheldrake and Morgana 2003)
He calculated 51 hits and 126 misses when repetitions were included. I'm not going to bother with any more detail because by now the overall picture should be clear. Once the statisticians went to work on the data, they were able to provide support for the claim that the data were consistent with the telepathic hypothesis. But nowhere in Sheldrake's paper can I find a claim that the parrot did three times better than expected by chance. In any case, I have to agree with the editor who published Sheldrake's parrot paper: the results have a statistical significance that is less than compelling. However, unlike that editor, my devout wish is that when such studies as these are published in the future, responsible journalists continue to ignore them and recognize them for the rubbish they are. On the other hand, if you happen to think your parrot is psychic, drop Dr. Sheldrake a line. He's set up a page just for you.
Sheldrake has responded to this article. His comments and my responses are posted here.
books and articles
new Grey parrots use reasoning where monkeys and dogs can’t "Christian Schloegl and his team at the University of Vienna, let six parrots choose between two containers, one containing a nut. Both containers were shaken, one eliciting a rattling sound and the other nothing. The parrots preferred the container that rattled, even if only the empty container was shaken....Thus, grey parrots seem to possess ape-like reasoning skills...." [/new]
Last updated 16-Aug-2012

Five new names have been approved for Mars: Angustus Labyrinthus, Chronius Mons, Promethei Mons, Sisyphi Tholus, and Thyles Montes. The names Australis Patera, Angusta Patera, and Cavi Frigores have been marked as dropped in the database. New imagery has shown that the two paterae were named using the wrong descriptor term, and the area previously named Cavi Frigores has been incorporated into the adjacent Cavi Angusti.
The definition of the descriptor term labyrinthus has been expanded from "Complex of intersecting valleys" to "Complex of intersecting valleys or ridges."
See the Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature for more information.

This is the second book wrote by Lee Lehman and presents in a very detailed manner the astrological dignities. It was published in 1989 by Whitford Press.
In Chapter 1 - Two Unsung Revolutions in Astrology the author explains how the Copernican Revolution changed the way astrologers understand dignities. At page 18 one can find a table with traditional and modern essential dignities.
Chapter 2 - Using Traditional Rulerships
Here you'll find many practical examples of charts analyzed using traditional dignities. There are presented five countries (Confederate States of America, Italy, Iran, Switzerland, USSR), five corporations (General Motors, Ford, Chrysler, Coca-Cola, Pepsi), five individuals (Jane Austen, Lewis Carroll, Doyle Arthur, Niccolo Machiavelli, Mark Twain) and one horary chart.
Of course, it is always nice to see how the theory applies in practice, but I was expecting from these examples to emphasize the different results which appears when analyzing the charts with traditional and modern dignities. Unfortunately, this is not happening, the charts are analyzed using only traditional dignities.
In Chapter 3 - The Origin of Rulerships: A Botanical Interlude you can find out which planer or sign rules every planet. You'll see that onion is ruled by Mars, beans by Venus, holly by Saturn etc. Also, there is a table with the medicinal uses of Jupiter- ruled plants. I didn't test these, but it may be helpful.
Chapter 4 - Modern “Rulerships”: Do They Work?
The author is trying to prove that modern rulerships aren't working well and to find arguments. She points out that:
“when modern astrologers discuss the modern rulerships the criterion appears to be: Which body (planet, asteroid or comet) has qualities which most resembles the sign in question?”
So, modern rulerships are assigned counting if a planet qualities are similar with the sign qualities and not looking at the planet strength in a sign. See another quotation:
“We haven't any evidence that the ancients thought that Pisces and Jupiter were synonymous. It was a question of the strength of Jupiter in Pisces, not the similarity of Jupiter and Pisces.”
Now, I think the idea is pretty clear. I must say that I totally agree with this point of view.
Then the charts of Marie Curie, Jeddu Krishnamurti, Adolf Hitler and Death of Dracula are analyzed. This time, Lee Lehman makes an analogy between the charts interpretations with modern and traditional rulerships. The results are pretty good and the lecture enjoyable.
Only one problem, from my point of view. It is analyzed the chart “Death of Dracula”, where Lee writes things like: “I have been fascinated by charts of people who are, so to speak, energy sucks”, “Scorpio Sun (life of the vampire)”, etc. Hei, I am from Romania and I tell you there is no vampire. Dracula is just a myth assigned to a Romanian prince, Vlad III of Wallachia. It is true that he was cruel and liked to kill people by impaling them on a sharp pole, but everything else is imagination.
Chapter 5 – The Meaning of Each of the Essential Dignities
In this chapter you'll find some general characteristics for the five essential dignities: ruler, exaltation, triplicity, term and face. At page 127 is a table with key words associated with these dignities. Starting from these key words Lee Lehman gives many descriptive explanations for dignities, but it just seems to much! There are the same things explained over and over again, it seemed pretty boring to me.
In Chapter 6 – A Statistical Interlude the author is trying to determine the influence of terms (both Chaldean and Egyptian) making a few tests. She selected a number of charts from different categories (suicide, scientist, sport champions) and counted the terms for each planet.
In the final, we can see that the planet that rules the category (for example, Mars for sport champions) obtained more points that usually, on a normal pattern. Even the results apparently validates the importance of terms I won't give to much credit to such a test. Why? Because I don't see terms so important to determine a person belong to a category or another. For example, more points in the term of Saturn won't drive you to suicide because can be many other (not even major) aspects that can change this influence.
Probably, I just don't believe terms are so important an if Lee Lehman is making those test it is clear that she also has doubts.
Chapter 7 – Detriment, Falls and Peregrines means several pages where you can find short descriptions for every planet detriment and fall.
In Chapter 8 – Conclusions there are the final words.
MY EVALUATION: 6
Conclusion. If I would have to say quickly, at my first impression, some words about this book I think would be: “too much noise for nothing”. But, then, if you think for a moment you realize that you can't say “for nothing” because dignities are a very important part in astrology and one could write a whole interesting book about this subject.
So, back to my reasoning, why this impression? Why “too much noise for nothing?”. Maybe, because this book presents shortly the five dignities associated with some main characteristics, ideas repeated in different chapters, but the rest of the book is somewhat near the subject.
You can read about history, botany, statistics, all connected with dignities, but the book doesn't seem to touch the essential points. It is a surface play. It doesn't have those clear, rational statements that gives you a better understanding of the subject.
If a medium astrologer reads this book I don't think will have much to learn and to integrate in his astrological system. Maybe I am a little too harsh, but it is my purpose here to criticize and to present a clear point of view about the astrological books I read. My evaluation is 6.

Mali has been engrossed in civil war since January 2012, when separatists in Mali’s northern Azawad region began demanding independence from the southern, Bamako-based government. After forcing the Malian military from the north, however, the separatist forces soon became embroiled in a conflict of their own, between the original Mouvement National pour la Libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and extremist Islamist splinter factions closely linked with Al-Qaeda. On 11 January 2013, France responded to Mali’s urgent request for international assistance and initiated ‘Operation Serval’ to aid the recapture of Azawad and defeat the extremist group. From the 18th, West African states began reinforcing French forces with at least 3,300 extra troops.
In a BBC ’From Our Own Correspondent’ editorial, Hugh Schofield wrote of ‘la Francafrique’, or France’s considerable interests in West Africa held over from the end of formal empire. In fits and spurts, France has sought to extract itself from la Francafrique and to seek a new relationship with the continent. But in the complex world of post-colonial relationships, such a move is difficult. France retains strong economic, political, and social links with West Africa. Paris, Marseille, and Lyon are home to large expatriate African communities. Opinions at l’Elycée Palace, too, have wildly shifted over the years. Jacques Chirac, at least according to Schofield, was ‘a dyed-in-the-wool Guallist’, and an ideological successor to a young François Mitterand who, in 1954, defiantly pronounced that ‘L’Algérie, c’est la France’. Nicolas Sarkozy, on the other hand, dramatically distanced himself both from Chirac and from the la Francafrique role.
The problem is, at least in part, topographical in nature. West Africa’s geography is dangerous, vast, and difficult to subordinate. On the eve of much of West Africa’s independence from France in 1961, R J Harrison Church spoke of the so-called Dry Zone, the area running horizontally from southern Mauritania across central Mali and Niger, as the great “pioneer fringe” of the region’s civilization. David Hilling, in his 1969 Geographical Journal examination, added that by “taming” the Saharan interior, France gained an important strategic advantage over their British rivals in the early twentieth century, enjoying access to resources unavailable along the coast.
But, as A T Grove discussed in his 1978 review, “colonising” West Africa was much easier said than done, and the French left a West Africa mired in dispute, open to incursions, and still heavily reliant on the former imperial power. The French relationship with the region’s extreme geography was difficult at best; political boundaries were similar to those of the Arabian Peninsula and the Rub ‘al-Khali in particular: fluid, ill-defined, and not always recognised by local peoples. European-set political boundaries only exacerbated tensions between indigenous constituencies who had little or no say in the border demarcations.
French and African efforts to dam the Niger River, for instance, were hampered by high costs, arduous terrain, and political instability well into the 1960s. On independence, the French left what infrastructure they could, mostly in West Africa’s capital and port cities; the vast interiors were often left to their own devices. As a result of these events, France has maintained a large military, economic, and social presence in the region ever since. The difficulty is that such areas under weak political control, such as the Malian, Somalian, and Sudanese deserts, have become havens for individuals who wish to operate outside international and national law.
R J Harrison Church, 1961, ‘Problems and Development of the Dry Zone of West Africa‘, The Geographical Journal 127 187-99.
David Hilling, 1969, ‘The Evolution of the Major Ports of West Africa‘, The Geographical Journal 135 365-78.
A T Grove, 1978, ‘Geographical Introduction to the Sahel‘, The Geographical Journal 144 407-15.
Ieuan Griffiths, 1986, ‘The Scramble for Africa: Inherited Political Boundaries‘, The Geographical Journal 152 204-16.
‘Le Mali attend le renfort des troupes ouest-africaines‘, Radio France Internationale, 19 January 2013, accessed 19 January 2013.
Hugh Schofield, ‘France and Mali: An “ironic” relationship’, BBC News, 19 January 2013, accessed 19 January 2013.

- Join The Movement
- Media & More
- About Us
Types of Builds
Millard Fuller used to say that a home is the foundation on which human development occurs. It is also an important, positive step in working on a safer, healthier and more responsible future. Many people struggling to put food on the table, pay bills, purchase school supplies and clothing and maintain transportation to work are not thinking about repairing their homes, even though those homes might be dangerous, literally crumbling around them and their children.
The Fuller Center is an organization devoted to partnership, renewed opportunity and providing a hand up instead of a hand out. The construction and rehabilitation of simple, decent houses are the two basic ways we do this.
The work of The Fuller Center allows the elderly to live out their rest of their days comfortably in their own homes, gives families a fresh start, enables the handicapped to maintain a level of independence in accessible homes and, in some cases, transforms entire neighborhoods.

A fossilised little finger discovered in a cave in the mountains of southern Siberia belonged to a young girl from an unknown group of archaic humans, scientists say.
The missing human relatives are thought to have inhabited much of Asia as recently as 30,000 years ago, and so shared the land with early modern humans and Neanderthals.
The finding paints a complex picture of human history in which our early ancestors left Africa 70,000 years ago to rub shoulders with other distant relatives in addition to the stocky, barrel-chested Neanderthals.
The new ancestors have been named “Denisovans” after the Denisova cave in the Altai mountains of southern Siberia where the finger bone was unearthed in 2008.
A “Denis” is thus a member of an archaic human subspecies.

Tips to Facilitate Workshops Effectively
Facilitators play a very important role in the creation of a respectful, positive learning environment during a workshop. Here you will find some tips to facilitate workshops effectively.
- Make sure everybody has a chance to participate. For example, through small group activities or direct questions to different participants. Help the group to avoid long discussions between two people who may isolate the rest of the/other participants. Promote the importance of sharing the space and listening to different voices and opinions.
- Be prepared to make adjustments to the agenda – sometimes you have to cross out activities, but the most important thing is to achieve the general goals of the workshop.
- Make every possible thing to have all the logistics ready beforehand to then be able to focus on the workshop’s agenda.
- Pay attention to the group’s energy and motivation – Plan activities where everyone is able to participate and to stay active and engaged.
- Provide space for the participants to be able to share their own experiences and knowledge. Remember that each one of us has a lot to learn and a lot to teach.
- Relax and have fun! Be a part of the process – You are learning, too, so you don’t have to know it all nor do everything perfect.
- Be prepared for difficult questions. Get familiarized with the topic, know the content of the workshop but remember you don’t have to know all the answers! You can ask other participants what they know about the topic, or you can find out the answers later and share them with the participants after the workshop.
- Focus on giving general information – Avoid answering questions about specific cases. Usually, this can change the direction of the conversation and might be considered as providing legal advice without a license to do so.
- Your work as facilitator is to help the group learn together, not necessarily to present all the information and be the “expert” in the topic.
- Try to be as clear as possible – especially when you are giving the exercises’ instructions. Work as a team with the other facilitators during the whole workshop.

This Dawn FC (framing camera) image shows some of the undulating terrain in Vesta’s southern hemisphere. This undulating terrain consists of linear, curving hills and depressions, which are most distinct in the right of the image. Many narrow, linear grooves run in various directions across this undulating terrain. There are some small, less than 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) diameter, craters in the bottom of the image. These contain bright material and have bright material surrounding them. There are fewer craters in this image than in images from Vesta’s northern hemisphere; this is because Vesta’s northern hemisphere is generally more cratered than the southern hemisphere.
This image is located in Vesta’s Urbinia quadrangle and the center of the image is 63.0 degrees south latitude, 332.2 degrees east longitude. NASA’s Dawn spacecraft obtained this image with its framing camera on Oct. 25, 2011. This image was taken through the camera’s clear filter. The distance to the surface of Vesta is 700 kilometers (435 miles) and the image has a resolution of about 70 meters (230 feet) per pixel. This image was acquired during the HAMO (high-altitude mapping orbit) phase of the mission.
The Dawn mission to Vesta and Ceres is managed by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, a division of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, Washington D.C. UCLA is responsible for overall Dawn mission science. The Dawn framing cameras have been developed and built under the leadership of the Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research, Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany, with significant contributions by DLR German Aerospace Center, Institute of Planetary Research, Berlin, and in coordination with the Institute of Computer and Communication Network Engineering, Braunschweig. The Framing Camera project is funded by the Max Planck Society, DLR, and NASA/JPL.
More information about Dawn is online at http://dawn.jpl.nasa.gov.
Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA

|Freshwater Mussels of the Upper Mississippi River System|
Mussel Conservation Activities
2005 Highlights: Possible fish predation of subadult Higgins eye was observed in the Upper Mississippi River, Pools 2 and 4.
Subadult Higgins eye pearlymussels (Lampsilis higginsii) from the Upper Mississippi River, Pools 2 and 4. Shell damage may be due to predation by fish (i.e. common carp or freshwater drum). Top photo by Mike Davis, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources; bottom photo by Gary Wege, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Species Identification and Location • Threatened and Endangered Mussels • Life History • Ecology • Mussel Harvest on the River • Current Threats • Mussel Conservation Activities • Ongoing Studies and Projects • Multimedia • Teacher Resources • Frequently Asked Questions • Glossary • References • Links to Other Mussel Sites
Privacy • FOIA • FirstGov • Contact
Department of the Interior • U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service • U.S. Geological Survey
|Last updated on
December 21, 2006

Overcoming perceived GIS resource limitations
This module (Teaching with GIS) is designed to highlight GIS concepts that may be added to many geoscience topics and exercises. In particular, we focus on using GIS at the level of introductory geoscience; however, many of the exercises and concepts may be applied in upper level courses as well. We will attempt to answer the following questions:
Do I need to be a GIS wizard to introduce GIS concepts in my courses?
Answer: No! There are numerous web-based mapping utilities, some of which are specifically designed for geoscience applications. In addition, consumer-grade GPS devices and mapping software are both cheaper and easier to learn than the professional GIS/GPS tools.
Many students new to geoscience are unfamiliar with mapping concepts that we take for granted as professional scientists. Even simple geographic and cartographic concepts can help them understand more complex GIS tasks at a later stage. The introduction of hands-on map creation/interpretation exercises and the associated terminology can greatly enhance the learning experience of the students.
Aren't the hardware and software requirements of GIS prohibitive at the introductory level?
Answer: No! There are many options that may be pursued despite resource limitations or student difficulties with computer tasks. Below are some ideas on what can be accomplished with different levels of resource availability or student background. Keep in mind that this site is focused on how we can introduce GIS within existing introductory geoscience courses:
Hardware-limited options—There is little or no access to computers/internet or GPS receivers by students and/or instructor within the classroom. The students often have access to computers and the internet in public labs or have personal computers. Faculty usually have access to the internet on their computers and may have access to some GIS software.
- Instructor generates maps for exercises/labs utilizing online resources
- Utilize traditional paper maps (e.g. geologic maps) to introduce concepts of data-driven maps
- Assign homework exercises that access online resources from student-owned or campus computer labs
Software-limited options—Some access to computers/internet and GPS receivers, but little or no GIS software for student/instructor use in or out of the classroom.
- Instructor generates maps for exercises/labs from online sources or GIS software. Note that there is GIS shareware available (e.g. GRASS (more info) ).
- GPS use in lab exercises, particulary field labs
- Shareware utilities to download GPS data to computer
- MS Excel or other software used to analyze and plot data in x-y coordinates (convert from lat/lon in GPS software)
- Manual digitization of data locations
- Paper maps or using graphics editing software
No hardware/software limitations—easy access to computers/internet, GPS receivers, and GIS software in and out of the classroom.
- All of the more limited options listed above are possible
- Student use of GIS hardware/software/data in classroom or lab
- Possibilities limited only by time for GIS within the syllabus

Karuk Tribe: Learning from the First Californians for the Next California
Editor's Note: This is part of series, Facing the Climate Gap, which looks at grassroots efforts in California low-income communities of color to address climate change and promote climate justice.
This article was published in collaboration with GlobalPossibilities.org.
The three sovereign entities in the United States are the federal government, the states and indigenous tribes, but according to Bill Tripp, a member of the Karuk Tribe in Northern California, many people are unaware of both the sovereign nature of tribes and the wisdom they possess when it comes to issues of climate change and natural resource management.
“A lot of people don’t realize that tribes even exist in California, but we are stakeholders too, with the rights of indigenous peoples,” says Tripp.
Tripp is an Eco-Cultural Restoration specialist at the Karuk Tribe Department of Natural Resources. In 2010, the tribe drafted an Eco-Cultural Resources Management Plan, which aims to manage and restore “balanced ecological processes utilizing Traditional Ecological Knowledge supported by Western Science.” The plan addresses environmental issues that affect the health and culture of the Karuk tribe and outlines ways in which tribal practices can contribute to mitigating the effects of climate change.
Before climate change became a hot topic in the media, many indigenous and agrarian communities, because of their dependence upon and close relationship to the land, began to notice troubling shifts in the environment such as intense drought, frequent wildfires, scarcer fish flows and erratic rainfall.
There are over 100 government recognized tribes in California, which represent more than 700,000 people. The Karuk is the second largest Native American tribe in California and has over 3,200 members. Their tribal lands include over 1.48 million acres within and around the Klamath and Six Rivers National Forests in Northwest California.
Tribes like the Karuk are among the hardest hit by the effects of climate change, despite their traditionally low-carbon lifestyles. The Karuk, in particular have experienced dramatic environmental changes in their forestlands and fisheries as a result of both climate change and misguided Federal and regional policies.
The Karuk have long depended upon the forest to support their livelihood, cultural practices and nourishment. While wildfires have always been a natural aspect of the landscape, recent studies have shown that fires in northwestern California forests have risen dramatically in frequency and size due to climate related and human influences. According to the California Natural Resources Agency, fires in California are expected to increase 100 percent due to increased temperatures and longer dry seasons associated with climate change.
Some of the other most damaging human influences to the Karuk include logging activities, which have depleted old growth forests, and fire suppression policies created by the U.S. Forest Service in the 1930s that have limited cultural burning practices. Tripp says these policies have been detrimental to tribal traditions and the forest environment.
“It has been huge to just try to adapt to the past 100 years of policies that have led us to where we are today. We have already been forced to modify our traditional practices to fit the contemporary political context,” says Tripp.
Further, the construction of dams along the Klamath River by PacifiCorp (a utility company) has impeded access to salmon and other fish that are central to the Karuk diet. Fishing regulations have also had a negative impact.
Though the Karuk’s dependence on the land has left them vulnerable to the projected effects of climate change, it has also given them and other indigenous groups incredible knowledge to impart to western climate science. Historically, though, tribes have been largely left out of policy processes and decisions. The Karuk decided to challenge this historical pattern of marginalization by formulating their own Eco-Cultural Resources Management Plan.
The Plan provides over twenty “Cultural Environmental Management Practices” that are based on traditional ecological knowledge and the “World Renewal” philosophy, which emphasizes the interconnectedness of humans and the environment. Tripp says the Plan was created in the hopes that knowledge passed down from previous generations will help strengthen Karuk culture and teach the broader community to live in a more ecologically sound way.
“It is designed to be a living document…We are building a process of comparative learning, based on the principals and practices of traditional ecological knowledge to revitalize culturally relevant information as passed through oral transmission and intergenerational observations,” says Tripp.
One of the highlights of the plan is to re-establish traditional burning practices in order to decrease fuel loads and the risk for more severe wildfires when they do happen. Traditional burning was used by the Karuk to burn off specific types of vegetation and promote continued diversity in the landscape. Tripp notes that these practices are an example of how humans can play a positive role in maintaining a sound ecological cycle in the forests.
“The practice of utilizing fire to manage resources in a traditional way not only improves the use quality of forest resources, it also builds and maintains resiliency in the ecological process of entire landscapes” explains Tripp.
Another crucial aspect of the Plan is the life cycle of fish, like salmon, that are central to Karuk food traditions and ecosystem health. Traditionally, the Karuk regulated fishing schedules to allow the first salmon to pass, ensuring that those most likely to survive made it to prime spawning grounds. There were also designated fishing periods and locations to promote successful reproduction. Tripp says regulatory agencies have established practices that are harmful this cycle.
“Today, regulatory agencies permit the harvest of fish that would otherwise be protected under traditional harvest management principles and close the harvest season when the fish least likely to reach the very upper river reaches are passing through,” says Tripp.
The Karuk tribe is now working closely with researchers from universities such as University of California, Berkeley and the University of California, Davis as well as public agencies so that this traditional knowledge can one day be accepted by mainstream and academic circles dealing with climate change mitigation and adaptation practices.
According to the Plan, these land management practices are more cost effective than those currently practiced by public agencies; and, if implemented, they will greatly reduce taxpayer cost burdens and create employment. The Karuk hope to create a workforce development program that will hire tribal members to implement the plan’s goals, such as multi-site cultural burning practices.
The Plan has a long way to full realization and Federal recognition. According to the National Indian Forest Resources Management Act and the National Environmental Protection Act, it must go through a formal review process. Besides that, the Karuk Tribe is still solidifying funding to pursue its goals.
The work of California’s environmental stewards will always be in demand, and the Karuk are taking the lead in showing how community wisdom can be used to generate an integrated approach to climate change. Such integrated and community engaged policy approaches are rare throughout the state but are emerging in other areas. In Oakland, for example, the Oakland Climate Action Coalition engaged community members and a diverse group of social justice, labor, environmental, and business organizations to develop an Energy and Climate Action Plan that outlines specific ways for the City to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and create a sustainable economy.
In the end, Tripp hopes the Karuk Plan will not only inspire others and address the global environmental plight, but also help to maintain the very core of his people. In his words: “Being adaptable to climate change is part of that, but primarily it is about enabling us to maintain our identity and the people in this place in perpetuity.”
Dr. Manuel Pastor is Professor of Sociology and American Studies & Ethnicity at the University of Southern California where he also directs the Program for Environmental and Regional Equity and co-directs USC’s Center for the Study of Immigrant Integration. His most recent books include Just Growth: Inclusion and Prosperity in America’s Metropolitan Regions (Routledge 2012; co-authored with Chris Benner) Uncommon Common Ground: Race and America’s Future (W.W. Norton 2010; co-authored with Angela Glover Blackwell and Stewart Kwoh), and This Could Be the Start of Something Big: How Social Movements for Regional Equity are Transforming Metropolitan America (Cornell 2009; co-authored with Chris Benner and Martha Matsuoka).

John Langley Howard was a revolutionary regionalist painter known for depicting labor and industry in California as well as his reverence for the natural world. Howard took a strong stance on social and environmental issues and used his art to communicate his strong emotional response toward each of his subjects.
Table of Contents
John Langley Howard was born in 1902 into a respected family of artists and architects. His father, John Galen Howard relocated the family to California in 1904 to become campus architect of the University of California, Berkeley. It was only after attending the very same campus his father helped to create, that Howard suddenly decided he wanted to pursue a career as an artist and not an engineer as previously planned. Following this decision, Howard enrolled in the California Guild of Arts and Crafts in Oakland and then transferred to the Arts Students’ League in New York City.
At the school, he met Kenneth Hayes Miller who supported Howard’s attitude because the “taught the bare rudiments of painting and composition, and stressed the cultivation of the ultra-sensitive, intuitive approach” (Hailey 56). After saving his money, Howard travelled to Paris for six months to seek out his own artistic philosophy. However, it quickly became apparent to Howard that he placed more value on pure talent than professional training. In 1924, Howard left art school to pursue his career and marry his first wife, Adeline Day. He had his first one-person exhibition at the Modern Gallery in San Francisco in 1927. Shortly after, he attempted portraiture.
Following the start of the Depression, Howard found himself appalled by the social conditions and began to follow “his own brand of Marxism.” Howard and his wife began to attend meetings of the Monterey John Reed Club, discussing politics and social concerns. Soon, the artist became determined to communicate society’s needs for the betterment of the future. His landscapes began to include industry and its effects to the surrounding region. In 1934, Howard was hired through the New Deal Public Works Art Project to create a mural for the inside of Coit Tower on Telegraph Hill in San Francisco depicting California industry. The project called for twenty-seven artists to be hired to paint frescos inside the newly erected monument funded by philanthropist Lillie Hitchcock Coit. Each artist was to depict a scene central to California living, including industry, agriculture, law, and street scenes of San Francisco.
Howard’s completed fresco drew notorious attention for showing an unemployed worker reading Marxist materials, a gathered group of unemployed workers, and a man panning for gold while watching a wealthy couple outside of their limousine. In a nearby mural by Bernard Zakheim (1896-1985), Howard himself was used as a model. He is shown crumpling a newspaper and grabbing a Marxist book from a library shelf. This soon led to the artists being linked to a local group of striking dock workers. They were accused of attempting to lead a Communist revolution. Howard’s murals as well as the work of Clifford Wight (1900-1960) and Zakheim became highly scrutinized, and the uproar over the works led to a delay in opening Coit Tower. In order to protect their work from being defaced or completely destroyed, the muralists chose to sleep outside the tower. The SF Art Commission ultimately cancelled the opening of Coit Tower as a result of the controversy and did not open it until months later.
During this time, Howard relocated his family to Santa Fe, New Mexico citing his son’s health concerns for almost two years before returning to Monterey in 1940. Following the onset of World War II, he had a renewed interest in landscape and soon ceased to include social commentary within his work, thus removing the human figure from his paintings. The artist divorced his first wife in 1949. In 1951, Howard’s art took another turn when the artist painted The Rape of the Earth which rallied against the destruction of nature by technology, making Howard one of the first “eco-artists.” During the same year he also married sculptor Blanche Phillips (1908-1976). He began illustrating for Scientific American Magazine and used this medium to refine his technique.
Howard’s landscapes began turning to “magic realism” or “poetic realism” as Howard preferred to call it. This method is described as the use of naturalistic images and forms “to suggest relationships that cannot always be directly described in words” (Aldrich 184). His aim was to communicate a poetic and spiritual connection with the landscape depicted. Overall, Howard lived in more than 20 different locations during his career.
In 1997, Howard attended the dedication of Pioneer Park at Coit Tower and was the only surviving member of the twenty-seven muralists included in the original project. The murals were restored by the City of San Francisco in 1990 after water damage and age dictated the need for restoration. Howard died at the age of 97 in his sleep at his Potrero Hill home in 1999.
II. AN ANALYSIS OF THE ARTIST'S WORK
“I think of painting as poetry and I think of myself as a representational poet. I want to describe my subject minutely, but I also way to describe my emotional response to it…what I’m doing is making a self-portrait in a peculiar kind of way.” – John Langley Howard
John Langley Howard was widely considered a wanderer and a free spirit. While Howard did receive academic training from the California Guild of Arts and Crafts in Oakland and the Arts Students’ League in New York City, he chose to align himself with instructors whose opinions of art education matched his predetermined beliefs. These teachers included Kenneth Hayes Miller (1876-1952) who valued an analytical, bare bones approach to art instruction and supported greater personal development of intuitive talent. Howard expressed this viewpoint stating that:
“I want everything to be meaningful in a descriptive way. I want expression and at the same time I want to control it down to a gnat’s eyebrow. I identify with my subject. I empathize with my subject” (Moss 62).
In the 1920s, Howard became known as a Cezanne-influenced landscape artist and portraitist. Tempera, oil, and etching became his primary media while his subject matter turned to poetic and often spiritually infused imagery which would resurface later in his career. Earth tones and very small brushstrokes were utilized, allowing Howard to refine his images.
Howard exhibited frequently with his brothers Charles Howard (1899-1978) and Robert Howard (1896-1983). Critic Jehanne Bietry wrote of their joint Galerie Beaux Arts show that: “of (the Howard brothers), John Langley is the poet, the mystic and the most complex…there predominates in his work a certain quality, an element of sentiment that escapes definition but is the unmistakable trait by which one recognizes deeper art” (Hailey 60). It is significant that a critic would accurately take note of Howard artistic aims at such an early stage because what Bietry describes ultimately became the primary focus of Howard’s career.
Howard experienced a dramatic change in medium when he was commissioned to paint a mural for the Coit Tower WPA project in 1934. The project was Howard’s first and only mural and provided the artist with an outlet for his newly discovered Marxist social beliefs. While Howard supported a political agenda rather explicitly in his image, his focus on deeper subject matter permeates throughout the work. Most important to Howard is “the idea of human conflict that [he] pictorializes and deplores – man’s tragic flaw manifest again in this particular situation” (Nash 79). Howard’s work had progressed steadily into the realm of social realism until the backlash against the Coit Tower murals led him in a new direction.
Howard abandoned explicit statements of social commentary and returned to his roots as a landscape painter. However, this did not prevent the artist from illustrating important issues because he then became one of the first “eco-artists.” Through his painting, Howard investigated the role of technology on the environment and used the San Francisco Bay Area as well as Monterey to demonstrate his point of view. He continued following his original artistic tendencies by delving into “magic realism” or “poetic realism” which utilized the spiritual connection that Howard sought to find within his work. Art critic Henrietta Shore recognized the balance that Howard achieved within his work, stating that he “is modern in that he is progressive, yet his work proves that he does not discard the traditions from which all fine art has grown” (Hailey 65). Overall, Howard’s career presents a unique portrait of individual expression and spiritual exploration.
1902 Born in Montclair, New Jersey
1920 Enrolls as an Engineering major at UC Berkeley
1922 Realizes he wants to be an artist
1923-24 Attends Art Students’ League in New York
1924 Leaves art school
1924 Marries first wife, Adeline Day
1927 First one-person exhibition held at The Modern Gallery, San Francisco
1928 First child, Samuel born
1930 Daughter Anne born
1934 Commissioned to Paint Coit Tower mural, San Francisco
1940 Studies ship drafting and worked as a ship drafter during World War II
1942 Serves as air raid warden in Mill Valley, CA
1949 Divorces his first wife
1950 Teaches at California School of Fine Arts, San Francisco
1951 Marries second wife, sculptor Blanche Phillips
1951 Moves to Mexico
1951 Paints The Rape of the Earth communicating his eco-friendly stance
1953-1965 Illustrates for Scientific American magazine
1958 Teaches at Pratt Institute Art School, Brooklyn, NY
1965 Moves to Hydra, Greece
1967 Moves to London
1970 Returns to California
1979 Blanche Phillips dies
1980 Marries Mary McMahon Williams
1999 Died in his sleep at home San Francisco, California
California Palace of the Legion of Honor, CA
City of San Francisco, CA
IBM Building, New York, NY
The Oakland Museum, CA
The Phillips Collection, Washington D.C.
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, CA
Security Pacific National Bank Headquarters, Los Angeles, CA
Springfield Museum of Fine Arts
University of Utah, UT
1927 Modern Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1928 Beaux Arts Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1928 East-West Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1928-51 San Franciso Art Association, CA
1935 Paul Elder Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1936 Cincinnati Art Museum, OH
1936 Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, CA
1939 Golden Gate International Exposition, Department of Fine Arts, Treasure Island, CA
1939 Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, CA
1941 Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh, PA
1943 Corcoran Gallery, Washington D.C.
1943 M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco, CA
1946-47 Whitney Museum, NY
1947 Rotunda Gallery, City of Paris, San Francisco, CA
1952 Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh, PA
1956 Santa Barbara Museum of Art, CA
1973 Capricorn Asunder Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1974 Lawson Galleries, San Francisco, CA
1976 de Saisset Art Gallery and Museum, CA
1982 San Francisco Museum of Modern Art Rental Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1983 California Academy of Sciences, CA
1983 Monterey Museum of Art, CA
1986 Charles Campbell Gallery, San Francisco, CA
1987 Martina Hamilton Gallery, NY
1988 Oakland Museum, CA
1989 Tobey C. Moss Gallery, CA
1991 M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco, CA
1992 Tobey C. Moss Gallery, CA
1993 Tobey C. Moss Gallery, CA
California Society of Mural Painters’ and Writers’ and Artists’ Union
Carmel Art Association
Club Beaux Arts
San Francisco Art Association
Society of Mural Painters
Marin Society of Artists
Monterey John Reed Club
Anne Bremer Memorial Award for Painting, San Francisco Art Association
First Prize, Pepsi-Cola Annual “Portrait of America”
First Prize, San Francisco Art Association
Award, City of San Francisco Art Festival
Citation for Merit, Society of Illustrators, New York
- 1. Aldrich, Linda. “John Langley Howard.” American Scene Painting: California, 1930s and 1940s. Irvine, Westphal Publishing: 1991.
- 2. Hailey, Gene. “John Langley Howard…Biography and Works.” California Art Research Monographs, v. 17, p.54-92. San Francisco: Works Progress Administration: 1936-1937.
- 3. Moss, Stacey. The Howards, First Family of Bay Area Modernism. Oakland Museum: 1988.
- 4. Nash, Steven A. Facing Eden: 100 Years of Landscape Art in Bay Area. University of California Press: 1995.
IX. WORKS FOR SALE BY THIS ARTIST

June 22, 1976. North Atlantic. At 21:13 GMT a pale orange glow behind a bank of towering cumulus to the west was observed. Two minutes later a white disc was observed while the glow from behind the cloud persisted.
High probability that this may have been caused by interferometry using 3-dimensional artificial scalar wave? Fourier expansions? as the interferers.
Marine Observer. 47(256), Apr. 1977. p. 66-68.
"Unidentified phenomenon, off Barbados, West Indies."
August 22, 1969. West Indies. Luminous area bearing 310 degrees grew in size and rose in altitude, then turned into an arch or crescent.
High probability that this may have been caused by interferometry using artificial scalar wave? ((Fourier expansions.))
Marine Observer. 40(229), July, 1970. p. 107-108.
"Optical phenomenon: Caribbean Sea; Western North Atlantic."
Mar. 20, 1969. Caribbean Sea and Western North Atlantic. At 23:15 GMT, a semicircle of bright, milky-white light became visible in the western sky and rapidly expanded upward and outward during the next 10 minutes, dimming as it expanded.
High probability that this may be caused by interferometry using artificial scalar wave? Fourier expansions?.
Marine Observer, 40(227), Jan. 1970. p.17; p. 17-18.
7B.21 - Electricity
13.06 - Triple Currents of Electricity
14.35 - Teslas 3 6 and 9
((16.04 - Nikola Nikola Tesla describing what electricity is))
16.07 - Electricity is a Polar Exchange
16.10 - Positive Electricity
16.16 - Negative Electricity - Russell
16.17 - Negative Electricity - Tesla
16.29 - Triple Currents of Electricity
((Figure 16.04.05 and Figure 16.04.06 - Nikola Nikola Tesla and Lord Kelvin))
Part 16 - Electricity and Magnetism
Tesla - Electricity from Space
What Electricity Is - Bloomfield Moore
Page last modified on Wednesday 19 of May, 2010 05:23:05 MDT

Freighter (or barge) was the term given to any spacecraft that was used to transport freight or cargo (such as parts and supplies). Both legitimate businesspersons and smugglers could be found captaining such transports. Freighters were needed from the time space travel began because of the need for supplies to all reaches of the galaxy. Freighters usually traveled with hyperdrives because people would often pay more for quick delivery.
For obvious reasons, freighters were used mainly for trade. Although very few fought in great battles, many freighters did see action. Smugglers and legitimate traders alike had some tangles now and then, but freighters were often armed and shielded so that they could resist attempts on their cargo.
Smuggling was a very prominent criminal fringe activity in the galaxy that involved the transportation of contraband between planets. To do this, a freighter generally of small size such as the Millennium Falcon, was required to transport the contraband past planetary security forces. Some examples of contraband include spice, blasters and medical supplies.
Smugglers often added upgrades to their ships so that they could beat competitors and outwit planetary security forces. Almost every smugglers vessel had improved light speed and sub-light speed drives for increased speed as well as boosted weapons systems to fight their way out of tough situations. Another of the most prevalent modifications to a smugglers freighter were numerous secret compartments to hide contraband from security checks while legitimate cargo occupied the cargo bays. On the Millennium Falcon, these consisted of removable floor plates.
Some freighters became so heavily modified that the mess of cross wired and non traditional parts prevented starship mechanics from working on them effectively. The smugglers themselves were therefore required to have a detailed knowledge of freighter mechanics and electronics to be able to keep their vessels in working order. Most smugglers preferred it this way as they didn't trust anyone tampering with their prized possessions.
Most smugglers freighters required a crew of more than one and as such most smugglers hired a copilot, such as Chewbacca on the Millennium Falcon or the droid LE-BO2D9 aboard the Outrider. To a smuggler, their freighter was everything; their job, their home, their lives. Many smugglers lived in their freighters as they had no terrestrial home.
- Star Wars: The Old Republic
- Tempest Feud
- The Clone Wars: Decide Your Destiny: Crisis on Coruscant
- "The Heart"
- "Maze Run"—Star Wars Insider 131
- Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope (First appearance)
- Choices of One
- Star Wars: Empire at War
- Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption
- "Sandbound on Tatooine" — Star Wars Galaxy 10
- "Slaying Dragons"—Star Wars Adventure Journal 9
- Slave Ship
- Hard Merchandise
- The New Rebellion
- Vision of the Future
- Emissary of the Void
- Force Heretic I: Remnant
- X-Wing Miniatures Mission 4: Den of Thieves
In other languages
- freighter on Wikipedia

Constantinople AgreementArticle Free Pass
Constantinople Agreement, (March 18, 1915), secret World War I agreement between Russia, Britain, and France for the postwar partition of the Ottoman Empire. It promised to satisfy Russia’s long-standing designs on the Turkish Straits by giving Russia Constantinople (Istanbul), together with a portion of the hinterland on either coast in Thrace and Asia Minor. Constantinople, however, was to be a free port. In return, Russia consented to British and French plans for territories or for spheres of influence in new Muslim states in the Middle Eastern parts of the Ottoman Empire. This first of a series of secret treaties on the “Turkish question” was never carried out because the Dardanelles campaign failed and because, when the British navy finally did reach Istanbul in 1918, Russia had made a separate peace with Germany and declared itself the enemy of all bourgeois states, France and Britain prominent among them.
What made you want to look up "Constantinople Agreement"? Please share what surprised you most...

A new tool to identify the calls of bat species could help conservation efforts.
Because bats are nocturnal and difficult to observe or catch, the most effective way to study them is to monitor their echolocation calls. These sounds are emitted in order to hear the echo bouncing back from surfaces around the bats, allowing them to navigate, hunt and communicate.
Many different measurements can be taken from each call, such as its minimum and maximum frequency, or how quickly the frequency changes during the call, and these measurements are used to help identify the species of bat.
However, a paper by an international team of researchers, published in the Journal of Applied Ecology, asserts that poor standardisation of acoustic monitoring limits scientists’ ability to collate data.
Kate Jones, chairwoman of the UK-based Bat Conservation Trust
told the BBC that “without using the same identification methods everywhere, we cannot form reliable conclusions about how bat populations are doing and whether their distribution is changing.
"Because many bats migrate between different European countries, we need to monitor bats at a European - as well as country - scale.”
The team selected 1,350 calls from 34 different European bat species from EchoBank, a global echolocation library containing more than 200,000 bat call recordings. This raw data has allowed them to develop the identification tool, iBatsID
, which can identify 34 out of 45 species of bats.
This free online tool works anywhere in Europe, and its creators claim can identify most species correctly more than 80% of the time.
There are 18 species of bat residing in the UK, including the common pipistrelle and greater horseshoe bat.
Monitoring bats is vital not just to this species, but also to the whole ecosystem. Bats are extremely sensitive to changes in their environment, so if bat populations are declining, it can be an indication that other species might be affected in the future.

8. Scurrula buddleioides (Desrousseaux) G. Don, Gen. Hist. 3: 421. 1834.
滇藏梨果寄生 dian zang li guo ji sheng
Shrubs 0.5-2 m tall, young branchlets, leaves, and inflorescences with dense short grayish yellow, rarely brown, verticillate and stellate hairs. Branches brownish, glabrous, scattered lenticellate. Leaves opposite; petiole 4-12 mm, pilose; leaf blade ovate, ovate-oblong to oblong, 6-10 × 3.5-8 cm, papery or thinly leathery, abaxial surface minutely tomentose, adaxial surface glabrous, lateral veins 4 or 5 pairs, base obtuse to rounded, apex acute. Racemes 2-5-fascicled, axillary, sometimes at leafless nodes, 3-5(-7)-flowered; peduncle and rachis 1.5-5 mm, brownish or grayish yellow tomentose. Flowers densely alternate; bracts ovate, ca. 1 mm. Pedicel 1-1.5 mm. Calyx pyriform, 2-3 mm, limb annular, ciliate. Mature bud tubular, 1.5-2 cm, tip ellipsoid. Corolla red, slightly curved and inflated, tomentose, lobes lanceolate, ca. 5 mm, reflexed. Style red; stigma subcapitate. Berry pyriform, 8-10 × 3.5-4 mm, pilose, base tapering into stalk. Fl. and fr. Jan-Dec.
Forests, thickets, mountain slopes, valleys; 1100-2200 m. Sichuan, Xizang, Yunnan [India].
Recorded hosts include species of Caprifoliaceae, Coriariaceae, Fagaceae, Moraceae, Rosaceae, Rutaceae, and Tiliaceae.

The length of amyloid fibrils found in diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson appears to play a role in the degree of their toxicity, according to researchers at the University of Leeds. Their findings are published in The Journal of Biological Chemistry in a paper titled “Fibril Fragmentation Enhances Amyloid Cytotoxicity.”
Sheena Radford, Ph.D., and colleagues systematically analyzed the effects of fragmentation on three of the 30 or so proteins that form amyloid in human diseases. Their results showed that in addition to the expected relationship between fragmentation and the ability to seed, the length of fibrils also correlated with their ability to disrupt membranes and reduce cell viability. This was evident even when there were no other changes in molecular architecture.
Co-author, Eric Hewitt, Ph.D., says that while the findings provide scientists with unexpected new insights for the development of therapeutics against amyloid deposit-related diseases, the next stage of research will involve looking at a greater numbers of the proteins that form amyloid fibrils. “We anticipate that when we look at amyloid fibers formed from other proteins, they may well follow the same rules.”
“It may be that because they’re smaller it’s easier for them to infiltrate cells,” Dr. Hewitt suggests. “We’ve observed them killing cells, but we’re not sure yet exactly how they do it. Nor do we know whether these short fibers form naturally when amyloid fibers assemble or whether some molecular process makes them disassemble or fragment into shorter fibers. These are our next big challenges.”

People vary in their reactions to mosquito bites. Most people develop itchy, raised bumps on the skin that last several days. No treatment is necessary, but calamine lotion or over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream can reduce itching.
A few people have a significant allergy to mosquito bites. The bites can result in what’s called a large local reaction: swelling, blistering, itching, and pain affecting a wide area of the body (such as an entire arm or leg). Oral antihistamines like cetirizine (Zyrtec), diphenhydramine (Benadryl), or hydroxyzine (Atarax, Vistaril) can help ease itching. Topical hydrocortisone may also help.
Rarely, people with a severe allergy to mosquito bites develop anaphylaxis, a whole-body life-threatening allergic reaction. Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:
• Itching or rash, especially hives, in areas of skin away from the bite.
• Hoarseness or shortness of breath.
Anaphylaxis requires emergency medical attention. People who have had anaphylaxis-like symptoms previously should always have injectable epinephrine (an Epi-Pen) nearby.
This answer should not be considered medical advice...This answer should not be considered medical advice and should not take the place of a doctor’s visit. Please see the bottom of the page for more information or visit our Terms and Conditions.
Thanks for your feedback.
37 of 42 found this helpful

These LEDs are connected to a thermistor that’s running just a little bit hotter than the ambient room temperature. So, by blowing on the thermistor, the birthday boy or girl is cooling it down, thus increasing the resistence. The microcontroller senses this and turns off a few of the LEDs as a result. Make one of these guys and you’ll never again have to worry about melted wax on your cake. For detailed instructions, head on over to Instructables.

This tutorial shows how to send modifications of code in the right way: by using patches.
The word developer is used here for someone having a KDE SVN account.
We suppose that you have modified some code in KDE and that you are ready to share it. First a few important points:
Now you have the modification as a source file. Sending the source file will not be helpful, as probably someone else has done other modifications to the original file in the meantime. So your modified file could not replace it.
That is why patches exist. Patches list the modifications, the line numbers and a few other useful information to be able to put that patch back into the existing code. (This process is called "patching" or also "applying a patch.")
The main tool for creating patches is a tool called diff, which makes the difference between two files. This tool has a mode called unified diff, which KDE developers use. Unified diffs have not just the difference between the file but also the neighborhood around the differences. That allows to patch even if the line numbers are not the same anymore.
The most simple patch is created between the modified file (here called source.cpp) and the non-modified version of the file (here called source.cpp.orig.)
diff -u -p source.cpp.orig source.cpp
That lists the difference between the two files in the unified diff format (and with function name information if possible.) However it only displays it to screen, which is of course not the goal. So you need to redirect the output.
diff -u -p source.cpp.orig source.cpp > ~/patch.diff
~/patch.diff is here an example and you can create the file where you prefer with the name that you prefer. (You will soon find out that it is probably not a good idea to create a patch where the source is.)
But normally, you do not just change one file and you do not keep the original version around to be able to make the difference later. But here too, there is a solution.
The program svn, which is used on the command line interact with the SVN server, has a diff function too: svn diff.
You can run it like this and it will give you the difference of the current directory and all sub-directories below it. Of course, here too, you want to redirect the output.
svn diff > ~/patch.diff
There are useful variants too (shown here without redirection)
Note: even if svn can make the difference of another directory (svn diff mydirectory), it is not recommended to do it for a patch that should be applied again. (The problem is that the person that will apply the patch will have to be more careful about how he applies it.)
Note: for simple diff, like those shown in the examples above, svn diff can be used offline, therefore without an active connection to the KDE SVN server. This is possible, as svn keeps a copy of the original files locally. (This feature is part of the design of SVN.)
By default, svn diff does not have a feature like the -p parameter of diff. But svn allows that an external diff program is called, so you can call diff:
svn diff --diff-cmd diff --extensions "-u -p"
The procedures described above work very well with text files, for example C++ source code. However they do not work with binary files, as diff is not made to handle them. And even if SVN can internally store binary differences, svn diff is not prepared to do anything similar yet, mainly because it currently uses the unified diff format only, which is not meant for binary data.
Therefore, unfortunately, there is little choice but to attach binary files separately from the patch, of course attached in the same email.
First, you need to make svn aware of files you have added.
svn add path/to/new/file /path/to/another/new/file
Then run svn diff as before.
Note that if you do svn revert, for example, the files you created will NOT be deleted by svn - but svn will no longer care about them (so they won't show up when you do svn diff, for example). You will have to rm them manually.
(TODO: are there any other issues with adding new files if you don't have commit access?)
Now you are ready to share the patch. If your patch fixes a bug from KDE Bugs, then the easiest way is to attach it there, see next section.
The main way of sharing a patch is to email to a mailing list. But be careful not to send big patches to a mailing list, a few 10KB is the limit.
If you find that the patch is too big to send to a mailing list, the best is to create a bug report in KDE Bugs and to attach the patch there, after having created the bug report.
Another possibility, however seldom used, is to post the patch on a public Web server (be it by HTTP or FTP) and to send an email to the mailing list, telling that the patch is waiting there.
Another variant is to ask on the mailing list which developer is ready to get a big patch. (Try to give its size and ask if you should send it compressed, for example by bzip2.)
A last variant, if you know exactly which developer will process the patch and that you know or that you suppose that he currently has time, is to send the patch to a developer directly. (But here too, be careful if your patch is big. Some KDE developers have still analog modems.)
In this section we assume that you have chosen to add your patch to an existing KDE bug or that you have created a bug report just for your patch.
Even if this tutorial is more meant to send patches to a mailing list, most of it can be applied to adding a patch to KDE Bugs.
You have two ways to do it:
To send an email to a bug report, you can use an email address of the form firstname.lastname@example.org where 12345 is the bug number. Please be sure to attach your patch and not to have it inlined in your text. (If it is inlined, it would be corrupted by KDE Bugs, as HTML does not respect spaces.)
Note: if you send an email to KDE Bugs, be careful to use as sender the same email address as your login email address in KDE Bugs. Otherwise KDE Bugs will reject your email.
Note: if you create a new bug report just for your patch, be careful that you cannot attach a patch directly when creating a new bug. However as soon as the new bug is created, you can then attach files, one-by-one, therefore also patches.
Warning: sometimes your patch will be forgotten because the developers do not always closely monitor the bug database. In this case, try sending your patch by email as described below. If that also does not help, you can always talk to the developers on IRC
Assuming that you have chosen to send the patch to a mailing list, you might ask yourself: to which one?
The best destination for patches is the corresponding developer mailing list.
In case of doubt, you can send any patch for KDE to the kde-devel mailing list. (However with an increased risk that you would miss the right developer.)
Of course, if you know exactly which developer will process the patch and that you know or that you suppose that he currently has time, then you can send the patch to him directly.
Now you have a patch redirected into a file (for this example called patch.diff), you are ready to send it by email. But the first question: where?
Now that you have entered an email address, a good practice is to attach the patch to your file before writing anything else in the email. So you will not forget to attach it.
A little note here: yes, in KDE (unlike for the Linux Kernel for example), we prefer to have the patches sent as attachments.
Now you are ready to write the rest of the email. Please think of a title that matches your patch. (Think of having to find it again in the archives in a few months or even years.) A good habit is to precede the title by [PATCH]. So for example a title could be [PATCH] Fix backup files.
As for the body of the email, please tell to which file or directory your patch applies. For example for a file: The attached patch applies to the file koffice/kword/kwdoc.cpp or for a directory: The attached patch applies to the directory koffice/kword. This help the developers to have an overview of which code has been modified. Also tell for which branch it is meant, for example for trunk.
Then tell what your patch does. If it fixes a bug, then please give the bug number too. If the bug was not registered in KDE Bugs, then please describe instead the bug that is fixed. Similarly, if you know that the patch fixes a bug introduced from a precise SVN revision, please add the revision number.
Tell also what could be useful to the developers, for example if you could not completely test the patch (and why), if you need help to finish fixing the code or if it is a quick&dirty solution that should be fixed better in long-term.
Now check the email again to see if you have not forgotten anything (especially to attach the patch) and you can send the email.
One popular way of submitting patches is KDE's reviewboard. A big advantage over using the bugtracker of KDE is that the patches are less likely to be forgotten here. Also, the reviewboard allows inline review of diffs and other gimmicks.
First you need to check if the project you've created the patch for is actually using reviewboard. For this, go to the groups section and see if the project's group is listed there. If it is listed there, you should use the reviewboard, otherwise send the patch by other means.
For sending a patch, you first need to register. Then simply click New Review Request and fill out the form. The most important parts of the form are:
After you completed the form, a notification mail will be sent to the developers and they will answer you.
Now you have to wait that a developer reacts on your patch. (If you are not subscribed to the mailing lists where you have sent the patch, then monitor the mailing list archives] for such a message.)
The reaction is normally one of the following:
The first case is when nobody has answered. That perhaps means that you have chosen the wrong mailing list. Perhaps you have not explained correctly what the patch fixes or you have given a title that is not precise enough. If this happens, the developer might have overlooked the patch. Perhaps the developer that should have answered has not any time currently. (That too happens unfortunately.) The best is to try to work a little more on the patch, make a better description and try again a second time, perhaps to another mailing list or to use KDE Bugs instead.
If the developer tells you that your patch conflicts with changes that he is currently doing, you could probably not do much against it. Maybe you can discuss with him how you can effectively work with him on this piece of code.
If your patch was not accepted, you could work further on it. Probably you should discuss the problem on the mailing list to know in which direction you should work further.
If a developer wants a few changes, then work on the code to make the changes according to the critic. If you need help because you do not understand how to do the needed change, then ask it on the mailing list.
If your patch was accepted, congratulations! :)

The authoritative source of information about all types of bottled waters, IBWA members include U.S. and International bottlers, distributors and suppliers. IBWA represents our industry’s uncompromising commitment to the safety and availability of bottled water worldwide.
Bottled water companies work hard to protect the environment, and play an important role in promoting recycling of plastic containers and groundwater management.
The bottled water industry is one of thousands of food, beverage and commercial water users. Bottled Water companies actively support comprehensive ground water management practices that are science-based, treat all users equitably, multi-jurisdictional, and provide for future needs of this important resource. Learn more.
Bottled water is a safe, healthy, and convenient packaged food product, which is comprehensively regulated at both the federal and state level.
Strictly regulated as a packaged food product by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), bottled water is a safe, refreshing, convenient, and consistently reliable beverage choice. Did you know that by mandate of federal law, the FDA regulations governing the safety and quality of bottled water must be as stringent as the EPA regulations which govern tap water? Learn more.
MYTH: Bottled water isn't as regulated as tap water.
FACT: By federal law, the FDA regulations governing the safety and quality of bottled water must be as stringent as the EPA regulations which govern tap water.
To suggest in any way that bottled water is less stringently regulated than tap water is simply not true...

Started conversation May 4, 2004
It's incorrect to say that "gyratory system" is just the name for a roundabout that has got too big for its boots. In fact it's the original term which was soon displaced when they became common.
I'm not sure if the term "gyratory circus" was ever really used. There are a number of junctions in London known as circuses after the circular range of buildings around them. This was a particularly 18th century fashion, so of course the most famously beautiful one is in Bath.
The OED says of "gyratory":
Applied to a system of directing road traffic round a roundabout or through a system of one-way streets to avoid the need for one line of traffic to intersect another.
1909 Westm. Gaz. 7 Aug. 4/2 The gyratory principle, by which vehicles are directed into circular lines ingeniously devised to avoid intersection. 1926 Rep. Comm. Police Metropolis, 1925 16 in Parl. Papers (Cmd. 2660) XV. 239 Gyratory systems for the circulation of traffic, after years of discussion, reached the point of practical demonstration this year. 1928 Observer 5 Feb. 13/7 Now that every week dedicates a new bunch of streets to the Gyratory System. 1966 Guardian 8 Sept. 5/4 A new gyratory road system to ease traffic congestion..is to be built..at Stretford.
And of "roundabout":
A junction at which traffic moves one way round a central island. Cf. RONDPOINT b, ROTARY n. 3.
1927 Glasgow Herald 3 Jan. 7/2 There is only one draw~back to the roundabout, and that is the inconvenience caused to pedestrians. 1937 Times 13 Apr. (British Motor No.) p. viii/1 Roundabouts..have the advantage of keeping vehicles on the move. 1947 Daily Mail 22 May 3/4 Removal of the Mansion House to make room for a big round-about. 1955 Times 2 Aug. 9/7 Makeshift tactics are particularly evident in the proposed treatment at Hyde Park Corner which includes an extremely complicated roundabout. 1967 Listener 28 Sept. 398/1 People make only occasional use of their speedometer..on such critical occasions as the approach to roundabouts. 1977 Belfast Tel. 14 Feb. 5/9, 12 shots were fired at an armoured police vehicle near the roundabout at Narrow~water Castle.
And of "circus":
A circular range of houses. Also, a traffic roundabout. Often in proper names as Oxford Circus, Regent Circus.
1714 POPE Rape Lock IV. 117 Sooner shall Grass in Hide-Park Circus grow. 1766 ANSTEY Bath Guide II. ix. 57 To breathe a purer Air In the Circus or the Square. 1771 SMOLLETT Humph. Cl. 23 Apr., The same artist who planned the Circus has likewise projected a crescent [at Bath]. Ibid. The Circus is a pretty bauble..and looks like Vespasian's amphitheatre turned outside in. 1794 Looker-on No. 89 The squares and circuses are no longer the only scenes of dignified dissipation. 1898 Tit-Bits 15 Jan. 300/3 Bridges, of light and tasty design, across all the main thoroughfares, and at the various ‘circuses’ and cross roads.
Posted Sep 2, 2004
I'm a little confused. The definitions you gave seem to support the idea that there *is* a difference between a roundabout and a gyratory.
Those definitions say that a roundabout is a junction, while a gyratory is a particular kind of one way system.
Of course a roundabout could be viewed as a very small one way system, so you could argue that all roundabouts are gyratories. But not all gyratories are really roundabouts according to the definitions you produced. (Specifically, a gyratory consisting of more than one junction is, by definition, not a roundabout.)
But in practice, isn't the common usage pretty much as I suggested? I'm only actually aware of two road systems commonly referred to as gyratories - one is the subject of this article, and the other is in Reading. And both of them are distinctly on the large side. In particular, they both have multiple junctions.
So the common usage of the word seems to be to describe overgrown roundabouts (and more specifically, multi-junction ones) in practice.
Can you point to any counterexamples in real use? I'm just going on the gyratories I know - I've not done any exhaustive research on gryatories across the nation.
Posted Aug 12, 2005
There is a gyratory system at Park Gate near Southampton that consists of a pair of roundabouts connected by a pair of one way carriage ways.
Posted Aug 12, 2005
I have to correct my previous entry because, while I have heard it called the Park Gate gyratory system, it is not recorded as a gyratory system on Hampshire's register of adopted roads. It is recorded as the following separate components... Botley Road roundabout, the Bridge Road dual carriageway and the Brook Lane roundabout.
However, I find there is a gyratory system just east of Park Gate on the A27 at Titchfield and this is a large roundabout with traffic lights and many junctions.
Complain about this post

A notch or groove cut into a piece of material to allow two sections to be combined with a flush joint.
A woodcutting tool used to cut an L-shaped groove into a piece of material. see also Rabbet
A strong current in a stream or river.
1. An enclosed metal channel, usually fire-resistant, installed in a building to hold electrical wiring.
2. A chute that directs the flow of a material to a specific location in a device.
A channel holding electrical wiring that is designed to look like a piece of decorative trim or molding.
A channel holding electrical wiring designed to be installed on a floor. The unit has a low profile and sloping edges to facilitate walking over it.
The illegal practice of directing certain races away from some neighborhoods and into others.
1. A storage unit designed to hold various objects.
2. To cause a structure to shift so that it is out of plumb.
1. A force that causes a structure to shift so that it is out of plumb.
2. Installation of bricks or other masonry units so that each course is stepped back from the previous one.
Straight-line outward movement from a circle's center.
A power saw with a circular blade that is mounted on a moveable arm. The arm is lowered or raised to move the cutting blade to or away from the material to be cut.
A drill press with a moveable arm that can be swung to various positions on the work table.
An HVAC system with ductwork running outward from a central heating and/or cooling unit.
The surface of a log cut down the center.
Heating system where electrical or hot-water heating elements are installed in a concrete slab floor.
see Radiant heating
Use of radiation to generate heat such as with baseboard heating where the circulating hot water is radiated through conduction by thin metal fins at the bottom of the wall. The room is warmed by air circulating around the heating unit using convention.
Heating unit that is exposed and which transfers heat generated by hot eater or steam through conduction. When the air circulates around the radiator using convention, the room is heated.
The distance from the center of a circle to the circumference. One-half of the diameter of a circle.
A tool used for checking the radii of convex and concave surfaces.
Radioactive gas that seeps into some homes, from the ground, through sump pumps, cracks in the foundation, etc., it is considered a health hazard.
Any of the beams that slope from the ridge of a roof to the eaves to serve as support for the roof.
A metal fastener attached to the top plate of a wall to hold a rafter.
A rafter parallel to the gable end that projects out to form an overhang.
The end of a rafter extending beyond the line of a building's walls.
A guide used when cutting rafters.
The top plate of a building's walls. The rafters rest on the rafter plate.
The vertical cut made into a rafter so it will rest on the wall plate. see also Rafter Seat Cut
The horizontal cut made into a rafter so it will rest on the wall plate. see also Rafter Plumb Cut
Cutting a section off of the end of a rafter equal to one-half of the thickness of the ridge board (the rafter on the other side of the ridge board receives a similar cut).
Tables, often printed on a framing square, containing the data required to calculate angles and lengths of rafters for various roof types.
see Rafter Overhang
A horizontal structure used as a handhold or to block off a drop or other unsafe area.
1. Continuous metal bars on which wheeled vehicles travel (i.e. railroads).
2. The horizontal sections of a panel door.
3. The top and bottom sections of a window sash.
Waterproof cap, also called weatherheads, mast heads or entrance caps, which is placed at the upper part of an electrical mast at the point where the wires are run to the inside electrical meter. Wires hang from the pole to the entrance cap so that the entrance cap is not the low point in the downhill run from the pole because water will run to the low point before dripping to the ground. Wires enter the entrance cap at an upward angle through a tight insulator. Water is further stopped from getting through the entrance cap because of this entrance angle.
Wood where the fibers have swelled, usually because of becoming wet. Wood is often sanded with the grain raised to achieve an extremely smooth finished surface.
1. A fork-like tool used for gathering materials (i.e. leaves) or smoothing an area of soil.
2. A roof overhang on a building's gable end.
3. An angle between objects.
A masonry joint where a portion of mortar has been removed, creating a groove between masonry units. A raked joint if often used in brickwork.
Mortgage, most commonly used by the elderly who have substantial equity in their homes. A periodic payment is made to the borrower from the lender thus, increasing the loan balance, causing negative amortization.
A hydraulically powered piston used for driving a weight.
A sloping surface used to move from one elevation to another.

What Is Air Pollution?
in its great magnitude has existed in the 20th century from the
coal burning industries of the early century to the fossil burning technology in
the new century. The problems of
air pollution are a major problem for highly developed nations whose large
industrial bases and highly developed infrastructures generate much of the air
Every year, billions of tonnes of pollutants are released into the
atmosphere; the sources include power plants burning fossil fuels to the effects
of sunlight on certain natural materials. But
the air pollutants released from natural materials pose very little health
threat, only the natural radioactive gas radon poses any threat to health.
So much of the air pollutants being released into the atmosphere are all
results of man’s activities.
In the United Kingdom, traffic
is the major cause of air pollution in British cities. Eighty six percent of families own either one or two
vehicles. Because of the
high-density population of cities and towns, the number of people exposed to air
pollutants is great. This had led
to the increased number of people getting chronic diseases over these past years
since the car ownership in the UK has nearly trebled. These include asthma and respiratory complaints ranging
through the population demographic from children to elderly people who are most
at risk. Certainly those who are
suffering from asthma will notice the effects more greatly if living in the
inner city areas or industrial areas or even near by major roads.
Asthma is already the fourth biggest killer, after heart diseases and
cancers in the UK and currently, it affects more than three point four million
In the past, severe pollution in London during 1952 added with low winds
and high-pressure air had taken more than four thousand lives and another seven
hundred in 1962, in what was called the ‘Dark Years’ because of the dense
dark polluted air.
is also causing devastation for the environment; many of these causes are by man
made gases like sulphur dioxide that results from electric plants burning fossil
fuels. In the UK, industries and
utilities that use tall smokestacks by means of removing air pollutants only
boost them higher into the atmosphere, thereby only reducing the concentration
at their site.
These pollutants are often transported over the North Sea and produce
adverse effects in western Scandinavia, where sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide
from UK and central Europe are generating acid rain, especially in Norway and
Sweden. The pH level, or relative
acidity of many of Scandinavian fresh water lakes has been altered dramatically
by acid rain causing the destruction of entire fish populations.
In the UK, acid rain formed by subsequent sulphur dioxide atmospheric
emissions has lead to acidic erosion in limestone in North Western Scotland and
marble in Northern England.
In 1998, the
London Metropolitan Police launched the ‘Emissions Controlled Reduction’
scheme where by traffic police would monitor the amount of pollutants being
released into the air by vehicle exhausts.
The plan was for traffic police to stop vehicles randomly on roads
leading into the city of London, the officer would then measure the amounts of
air pollutants being released using a CO2 measuring reader fixed in
the owner's vehicle's exhaust. If the
exhaust exceeded the legal amount (based on micrograms of pollutants) the driver
would be fined at around twenty-five pounds.
The scheme proved unpopular with drivers, especially with those driving
to work and did little to help improve the city air quality.
In Edinburgh, the main causes of bad air quality were from the vast
number of vehicles going through the city centre from west to east.
In 1990, the Edinburgh council developed the city by-pass at a cost of
nearly seventy five million pounds. The
by-pass was ringed around the outskirts of the city where its main aim was to
limit the number of vehicles going through the city centre and divert vehicles
to use the by-pass in order to reach their destination without going through the
city centre. This released much of
the congestion within the city but did little very little in solving the
city’s overall air quality.
To further decrease the number of vehicles on the roads, the government
promoted public transport. Over two
hundred million pounds was devoted in developing the country's public transport
network. Much of which included the development of more bus lanes in
the city of London, which increased the pace of bus services.
Introduction of gas and electric powered buses took place in Birmingham
in order to decrease air pollutants emissions around the centre of the city.
Because children and the elderly are at most risk to chronic diseases,
such as asthma, major diversion roads were build in order to divert the vehicles
away from residential areas, schools and elderly institutions.
In some councils, trees were planted along the sides of the road in order
to decrease the amount of carbon monoxide emissions.
Other ways of improving the air quality included the restriction on the
amounts of air pollutants being released into the atmosphere by industries;
tough regulations were placed whereby if the air quality dropped below a certain
level around the industries area, a heavy penalty would be wavered against them.
© Copyright 2000, Andrew Wan.

A crowd awaits a ship at Station Pier, Port Melbourne.
Source: Italian Historical Society - Co.As.It.
Find out why this landmark has become such an evocative symbol of Victoria's immigration history.
Station Pier is one of Australia's longest operating passenger piers. It holds iconic significance in Victoria's heritage, and is particularly significant to Victoria's post-war immigrants for whom it is an ongoing symbol of their arrival and the start of their new life.
The exhibition provides an historical overview of Station Pier, including its early days as Railway Pier in the 1850s, and its upgrade in the 1920s in response to the growing needs of the city and port of Melbourne.

a combination of one or more elementary reaction steps which start with the appropriate reactants and end with the appropriate product(s)
a description of the path, or sequence of steps, by which a reaction occurs
a description of the path that a reaction takes
a detailed description of how a chemical reaction occurs
a detailed description of the way a reaction occurs and is based on the known experimental data about the reaction
a detailed (theoretical) description of how we think the chemical reaction proceeds
a series of elementary reactions or elementary steps that lead from reactants to products
a set of steps at the molecular level
a step by step description of the separate steps that occur during a chemical reaction
a stepwise description of the reaction path
mechanism. A list of all elementary reactions that occur in the course of an overall chemical reaction.
In chemistry, a reaction mechanism is the step by step sequence of elementary reactions by which overall chemical change occurs.

It is fair to say that the struggle for power in the USSR between 1924 and 1929 was partially to do with the economic policy because the way in which different members of the Communist Party treated the economic policy depended how much support they got from fellow members of the Communist party. However, there were other factors involved such as a lack of democratic elections, the nature of leadership and fear of a divided party.
You could argue that the struggle for power was due to the differing economic policies, this is because different key players in the power struggle wanted different things. For example, the Bukharinite model wanted gradualism – to allow market forces to drive the economy forward and so letting the peasants gain wealth individually. He believed this would lead to a prosperous consumer market and heavy industry that is centrally controlled, planned economy run by a proletariat dictatorship. This would please the peasantry and results in political and economic growth as well as increased trade. Trotsky and his leftist model agreed that the party must recognise the role of the market forces during the gradual change to socialism. However, in 1926 he became increasingly critical of the gradualist approach and didn’t approve of peasants who had no obligation to sell if the market wasn’t right and therefore wanted a slightly more capitalist approach to the economic policy so that the government had greater control over produce. This created a power struggle because different people wanted different things and approached economic policy in certain ways and whilst Bukharin was trying to ensure the happiness of the public, Trotsky was trying to ensure the wealth and growth of the USSR as a trade nation. Although these two models were important in why there was a power struggle in those years it is not the most important reason.
Secondly, you could say it... [continues]
Cite This Essay
(2012, 05). The Struggle for Power in the Ussr. StudyMode.com. Retrieved 05, 2012, from http://www.studymode.com/essays/The-Struggle-For-Power-In-The-994323.html
"The Struggle for Power in the Ussr" StudyMode.com. 05 2012. 05 2012 <http://www.studymode.com/essays/The-Struggle-For-Power-In-The-994323.html>.
"The Struggle for Power in the Ussr." StudyMode.com. 05, 2012. Accessed 05, 2012. http://www.studymode.com/essays/The-Struggle-For-Power-In-The-994323.html.

Nausea and vomiting - adults
Nausea is the feeling of having an urge to vomit. It is often called being sick to your stomach.
Vomiting or throwing up is forcing the contents of the stomach up through the esophagus and out of the mouth.
Emesis; Vomiting; Stomach upset; Upset stomach
Many common problems may cause nausea and vomiting:
Nausea and vomiting may also be early warning signs of more serious medical problems, such as:
Once you and your doctor find the cause, you will want to know how to treat your nausea or vomiting
. You may be asked to take medicine, change your diet, or try other things to make you feel better.
It is very important to keep enough fluids in your body. Try drinking frequent, small amounts of clear liquids
If you have morning sickness during pregnancy, ask your doctor about the many possible treatments.
The following may help treat motion sickness:
- Lying down
- Over-the-counter antihistamines (such as Dramamine)
- Scopolamine prescription skin patches (such as Transderm Scop) are useful for extended trips, such as an ocean voyage. Place the patch 4 - 12 hours before setting sail. Scopolamine is effective but may produce dry mouth, blurred vision, and some drowsiness. Scopolamine is for adults only. It should NOT be given to children.
Call your health care provider if
Call 911 or go to an emergency room if:
- You think vomiting is from poisoning
- You notice blood or dark, coffee-colored material in the vomit
Call a health care provider right away or seek medical care if you or another person has:
Been vomiting for longer than 24 hours
Been unable to keep any fluids down for 12 hours or more
Headache or stiff neck
Not urinated for 8 or more hours
Severe stomach or belly pain
Vomited three or more times in 1 day
Signs of dehydration include:
- Crying without tears
- Dry mouth
- Increased thirst
- Eyes that appear sunken
- Skin changes -- for example, if you touch or squeeze the skin, it doesn't bounce back the way it usually does
- Urinating less often or having dark yellow urine
What to expect at your health care provider's office
Your health care provider will perform a physical examination, and will look for signs of dehydration.
Your health care provider will ask questions about your symptoms, such as:
- When did the vomiting begin? How long has it lasted? How often does it occur?
- Does it occur after you eat, or on an empty stomach?
- What other symptoms are present -- abdominal pain, fever, diarrhea, or headaches?
- Are you vomiting blood
- Are you vomiting anything that looks like coffee grounds?
- Are you vomiting undigested food?
- When was the last time you urinated?
Other questions you may be asked include:
- Have you been losing weight?
- Have you been traveling? Where?
- What medications do you take?
- Did other people who ate at the same place as you have the same symptoms?
- Are you pregnant or could you be pregnant?
The diagnostic tests may be performed:
Depending on the cause and how much extra fluids you need, you may have to stay in the hospital or clinic for a period of time. You may need fluids given through your veins (intravenous or IV).
Malagelada J-R, Malagelada C. Nausea and vomiting. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 9th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2010:chap 14.
Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine. 24th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 134.
This article uses information by permission from Alan Greene, M.D., © Greene Ink, Inc.
George F. Longstreth, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program, San Diego, California. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.

Cardio and weight training are two important components of well-balanced fitness plans. Knowing which types of exercises fall into which category can help you construct your workouts more effectively, and can give you more options so you don’t get bored with your workouts. When designing your fitness plan, consider adding some stretching and flexibility training. Simply add a few minutes of stretching at the end of your cardio and weight training workouts.
Cardio, or aerobic, exercises require you to move the large muscle groups in your hips, legs and arms. The movement must be continuous and rhythmic, and you must move for a sustained period. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that adults get at least 2 1/2 hours of moderate-intensity cardio exercise each week. Alternately, you can perform an hour and 15 minutes of vigorous cardio exercise. By regularly performing cardio exercise, you can improve your cardiovascular health, manage your weight more easily and enjoy a sense of well-being.
Examples of Cardio Exercises
Examples of cardio exercise include basketball, biking, brisk walking, dancing, jogging, jumping rope, rowing, running, swimming, tennis and water aerobics. Even some household chores -- such as mowing the lawn -- can count as cardio. The intensity with which you perform these activities determines whether they are moderate or vigorous. Moderate-intensity cardio exercises will raise your heart rate and make you breathe faster, while still allowing you to talk. When performing vigorous cardio exercises, you will find it difficult to say more than just a few words before pausing to breathe.
Weight Training Exercises
In weight-training exercises, you generally focus on one muscular group at a time, doing enough repetitions of the exercise to tire the muscles. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that adults do weight-training exercises at least twice a week. Ideally, target all your major muscle groups: chest, shoulders, arms, abdomen, back, hips and legs. By performing weight-training exercises, you can build strength in your muscles, increase the amount of lean muscle in your body, manage your weight more easily and lower your risk of injury.
Examples of Weight-Training Exercises
You can perform weight-training exercises with free weights -- dumbbells and barbells. Examples of these exercises include biceps curls and squats. Weight machines offer other options for weight training. You can perform leg presses, standing calf raises, chest flyes and pull-down exercises on these machines. Other types of weight-training exercises require you to move your own body weight. These include triceps dips, situps and pushups. Although technically not weight-training exercises, resistance band exercises offer more options for strength training. You can perform variations on traditional weight-training exercises -- such as biceps curls, lunges, chest flyes and overhead presses -- with these resistance bands.

Download Full Text (640 KB)
Decision-making problems in water resources are often associated with multiple objectives and multiple stakeholders. To enable more effective and acceptable decision outcome, it is required that more participation is ensured in the decision making process. This is particularly relevant for flood management problems where the number of stakeholders could be very large. Although application of multi-objective decision-making tools in water resources is very wide, application with the consideration of multiple stakeholders is much more limited. The solution methodologies adapted for multi-objective multi-participant decision problems are generally based on aggregation of decisions obtained for individual decision makers. This approach seems somewhat inadequate when the number of stakeholders is very large, as often is the case in flood management.
The present study has been performed to have an overview of existing solution methodologies for multi-objective decision making approaches in water resources. Decision making by single and multiple stakeholders has been considered under both deterministic and uncertain conditions. It has been found that the use of fuzzy set theory to represent various uncertainties associated with decision making situations under multi-objective multiple-participant environment is very promising. Coupled with multi-objective methods (e. g. compromise programming and goal programming), fuzzy approach has also the ability to support group decisions, to reflect collective opinions and conflicting judgments.
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
Overview, Multiple objectives, Multiple stakeholders, Decision-making, Flood management
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Akter, Taslima and Simonovic, Slobodan P., "A General Overview of Multi-objective Multiple-participant Decision Making for Flood Management" (2002). Water Resources Research Report. Book 4.

The formation of counties was one of the first matters attended to by the Lords Proprietors  after they received their charter in 1663 from King Charles II for the vast tract of land in America he called the province of Carolina. In 1664 the Proprietors formed "all that parte of the province which lyeth on the north east side or starboard side entering of the river Chowan now named by us Albemarle River together with the Islands and Isletts within tenn leagues thereof" into a county that they named Albemarle County  for George Monck, the duke of Albemarle, himself one of the Proprietors. This was the site of the first permanent settlement in Carolina. They then divided the new county into four precincts: Currituck , Perquimans , Pasquotank , and Chowan . Albemarle County was subsequently enlarged, and in 1696 the area south of Albemarle Sound was removed from Albemarle and made into a new county, named Bath, which in turn was divided into the precincts of Beaufort , Hyde , Craven  and Carteret .
The primary reason for establishing counties (or precincts) was to provide local seats of government where citizens could record documents, such as deeds or wills, and participate in court proceedings. At the same time, the sheriff was provided with a home base from which to fulfill his basic responsibilities of collecting taxes and maintaining law and order.
By 1738 Albemarle and Bath Counties had been dissolved and the 14 precincts then in existence became counties, a designation that has remained since the seventeenth century. Throughout the remainder of the colonial period, as settlement spread westward and population increased, older counties were divided and new ones formed. With statehood came an even greater rate of growth, and by 1800 the number had risen to 59 counties covering all of the state. In many cases, the dividing of counties caused heated political controversy, as eastern counties were often divided to maintain that region's majority in the state legislature against expanding representation from the piedmont and mountain regions. Shifts in population continued throughout the nineteenth century and into the twentieth century, resulting in even more counties. Larger counties were divided, and those in turn were sometimes divided yet again, until the seemingly magical figure of 100 was reached in 1911. (For a time, the number of counties was actually greater than 100, but some of these were ceded to Tennessee in 1789 and others were absorbed into other counties or never fully developed.) The number remained at 100, although in 1933 the General Assembly authorized the consolidation of existing counties subject to approval of the electorate. This could have resulted for the first time in a decrease from the 100 county figure, but as of the early 2000s there had been no such consolidations.
Initially, county government and judicial matters were in the hands of justices of the peace , who formed a body known as the Court of Pleas and Quarter Sessions . The justices were appointed by the governor, with strong input from the members of the colonial Assembly from the affected county, leaving the average citizen with no say as to who would run the government of the county in which he lived. At first the Court of Pleas and Quarter Sessions met wherever it was convenient to assemble a quorum, usually in a private home. A 1722 act of the Assembly instructed the justices to pick a site for a permanent seat of government for each precinct, where they were to buy an acre of land and build a courthouse. Whether in the early precinct days, or after the name of the local government entity was changed from precinct to county, the justices had the support of a sheriff for law enforcement, as well as a clerk of court and a register of deeds. Of the three, both the clerk of court and the register of deeds needed to remain in their offices in the courthouse, which left only the sheriff free to travel about the county. Accordingly, he was also designated tax collector, a position sheriffs continued to hold until the latter part of the twentieth century.
The general system of county government of the early colonial period, with the appointed members of the Court of Pleas and Quarter Sessions running things, was carried over into statehood, and little changed until the adoption of the North Carolina Constitution of 1868 . The system called for by the new constitution, known as the Township and County Commissioner Plan, gave control of county government to five commissioners, to be elected at large by the county's voters. In addition, each county was divided into townships whose residents elected two justices to serve as the township's governing body, as well as a three-member school committee and a constable. The new system significantly reduced the General Assembly's control of county government, since the legislators no longer appointed the justices of the peace who made up the county court.
The Township and County Commissioner Plan, patterned after one previously adopted in Pennsylvania, did not prove universally popular in North Carolina and lasted less than a decade. At a constitutional convention in 1875, the General Assembly was authorized to change the system, and in the session of 1877 townships were reduced to little more than geographic and administrative subdivisions of the counties. This seriously reduced the authority of county commissioners.
The modern system of county government, in which an elected board of commissioners is responsible for managing a county's affairs, including setting the rate and collecting taxes and determining where funds should be expended, dates to the early twentieth century. Periodically after that, the General Assembly  conferred additional authority and responsibility on the county commissioners, until at the end of the century they had been provided with such a wide range of "home-rule" statutes that many counties found it impossible to run their greatly expanded business without professional help. This led to the adoption by many counties of the County Manager Plan. Under this plan, commissioners employ a county manager to serve as a sort of chief executive of the county business-in some instances, the largest business in the county-with the manager having certain independent authority, including that of hiring and firing employees.
As with other matters, the state determines what sources the counties may tap for income. Traditionally, the real estate  tax has been the primary revenue source for North Carolina counties. However, especially in the last half of the twentieth century, counties were able to prevail on the General Assembly to let them collect from a variety of other sources, among those favored being local sales taxes, land transfer taxes, meals taxes, and occupancy taxes.
A. Fleming Bell, ed., County Government in North Carolina (3rd ed., 1989).
David LeRoy Corbitt, The Formation of the North Carolina Counties, 1663-1943 (1969).
1 January 2006 | Stick, David

European Painting before 1900, Johnson Collection
Triptych showing scenes from the Martyrdom of Saint Barbara and scenes from the Life of Christ
Master of the Laufen High Altarpiece, Austrian (active Salzburg), dated work 1467
Oil and gold on panels
EW1993-127-2a--cPurchased with the W. P. Wilstach Fund, the George W. Elkins Fund, and Museum funds, 1993
As described in The Golden Legend, written in about 1267 by Jacopo da Voragine, Saint Barbara converted to Christianity against the wishes of her pagan father. Locked in a tower by him, she ordered workmen to construct a third window inthe building to symbolize the Christian trinity. Enraged, her father turned her over to the Roman authorities for torture, and when her execution was ordered,he himself beheaded her. The left and right panels on the front of this triptychillustrate episodes from Barbara’s gruesome martyrdom.
These graphic depictions are intended to help the viewer equate Barbara’s physical torments with those of Christ, whose crucifixion is depicted in the top center composition. The figures at the top left and right, probably the apostles John and Luke, hold sayings taken from the last words of Christ on the cross, which here apply also to Barbara’s death. The bottom center panel shows Barbara enthroned in heaven, wearing a crown and holding a palm frond as symbols of victory over death. A tower and chalice, her identifying attributes, appear nearby.
Barbara’s martyrdom is paralleled on the reverse by the resurrected Christ standing in the tomb. The left and right panels of the back, which are movable and can be folded shut to appear on the front, show the angel Gabriel announcing the incarnation of Christ to the Virgin Mary.
Social Tags [?]austrian [x] gabriel [x] gold [x] martyr [x] three [x] trinity [x] triptych [x] [Add Your Own Tags]
* Works in the collection are moved off view for many different reasons. Although gallery locations on the website are updated regularly, there is no guarantee that this object will be on display on the day of your visit.

Vocalisation has been recognised as one of the important modes of animal communication. In one anabantoid fish, the croaking gourami Trichopsis vittata, both sexes produce loud, croaking sounds during agonistic encounters and courtship. It is known that sound emission of this fish is mostly involved with the ritualised portion of the contest, which is likely to convey information between the opponents about their respective strength and status. The sound is produced by a complex mechanism that involves two modified tendons, located behind each pectoral fin. Due to the external position of these soft structures, parasites, sickness, or injury from fights can easily damage the tendons, leading to muteness. Reduction or even loss of the croaking ability may result in a substantial decreasing of the overall fitness. Experiments were designed to test whether or not croaking gouramis can repair damaged tendons and regain fully functional sound producing organs, as well as to evaluate the effect of muting and recovery on the outcomes of agonistic interactions. Fishes were muted by surgically cutting one or both the tendons that connect the "sonic'' muscle with the fin rays. The occurrence and timing of recovery was evaluated for 30 specimens of T. vittata after surgical muting. Croaking sounds produced by the fish were recorded during staged contests after recovery. Sound from each specimen was previously recorded before and after muting as well, for comparison. The elapsed time of reconnection of each tendon to the relative fin ray was also recorded. Some fishes were found to recover completely within less than 30 days, while others needed up to three months. However, evidence for the beginning of the recovery process was noticed as early as 4 days after operation. Behavioural performance after recovery was normal. Details of sounds produced and changes of behavioural repertoires are discussed (supported by National Organization for Hearing Research, NIMH-58198, Institute of Museum and Library Service-LL90187).
Nicola Novarini, Tomonari Akamatsu & Hong Y. Yan (2002). Effects of muting and recovery on sound production in the croaking gourami Trichopsis vittata (Pisces: Anabantoidei) [abstract]. Bioacoustics 13(2): 202-203

These are poly-aromatic compounds, insoluble in n-heptane, with a number of carbon atoms greater than 50. The asphalthene content of a crude may be the cause of deposits in inter-changers and/or lines. In fact, the mix of a crude having a high asphalthene content with a paraffinic crude can displace the balance of the asphalthenes, precipitating them. A high asphalthene content ensures that the vacuum pitch will be suitable for producing asphalt.
ASTM D86 distillation is a test that measures the volatility of gasoline, kerosene and diesel.
Basic Sediment and Water (BSW)
The BSW relates to the content of free water (not dissolved) and sediments (mud, sand) in the crude. It is important that its reading is low in order to avoid dirtiness and difficulties during the crude processing, in which the steam produced by the free water can damage the oven. It is reported as a percentage in volume over the crude.
This is the weight of the residue remaining after the combustion of a fuel sample. It represents the facility of a heavy fuel to produce particles during combustion.
This is the measurement of the mass of a volume. It is expressed in kilograms per liter, or grams per cubic centimeter. Density depends on the temperature as this affects the volume of the substances.
Temperature at which a liquid stops flowing when cooled, through the precipitation of crystals of solid paraffin.
The draining temperature is very important as, in the unloading of paraffinic crudes using sea terminals with underwater pipelines of a certain length, the temperature of the crude can fall below the draining point, creating deposits of wax or solid paraffin in the pipelines, thus obstructing the flow.
This is the minimum temperature at which the vapors of a product flash or detonate momentarily when a flame is applied in controlled conditions. It represents the maximum temperature at which a product can be stored or transported in safe conditions.
This is the temperature at which the crystals formed during the cooling of a product sample disappear completely when the temperature rises in a controlled way
The metals content of a crude, vanadium and nickel, gives us an indication of their content in the heaviest products obtained in the refining. This is important because, for example, the metals in gas oil in vacuum are poison for the catalytic and hydro-cracking catalysts. A high vanadium content or metals in the combustible oil may cause oven and boiler tube breakage problems because they form corrosive products during combustion.
Number of cetane
This measures the ease with which the spontaneous ignition occurs of diesel oil using a standardized engine and a reference fuel.
The cetane rating is determined by making a comparison of the ignition time of a mix of cetane (C16)) and hepta-methyl-nonane (C 15), which has the same delay time in ignition as the fuel being examined. The cetane rating measured is the percentage of the cetane compound in the cetane/hepta-methyl-nonane mix.
The C16 has a cetane rating equal to 100 (it is an easily-ignited paraffin) and C15 has a cetane rating equal to 0 (as being a slow-combustion aromatic).
A high cetane rating represents a high ignition quality or a short delay time between the fuel injection and the start of combustion.
The diesel engine uses a high compression ratio to produce the spontaneous ignition of the diesel, instead of a spark as in the case of the internal combustion engine. The compressed air temperature in the diesel engine is sufficiently high to fire the diesel.
The lineal paraffins have a high cetane rating and therefore burn well; on the other hand, the aromatics are of a low cetane rating and burn badly, producing deposits of carbon and the production of black smoke. For that reason, high-quality diesel should have an aromatic content compatible with the specified cetane rating.
The cetane rating can be calculated based on the volatility (corresponding to the temperature of 50% distilled) and the density of the diesel and is called Calculated Cetane Rating. The reason for using the formula is the high cost of the cetane engine.
Octane number (NOR)
The RVP and NOR are the most important parameters of gasoline quality. The NOR measures the resistance of the gasoline to self-ignition or premature detonation in an engine's functioning conditions.
Self-ignition is noted for the hammering or noise produced when the gasoline self-ignites, detonating before the cylinder compresses all the gasoline and air mixture, losing power. The detonation produces sound waves that are detected using special microphones.
The octane rating is measured by comparing the noise of the detonation made by a reference fuel mixture in a standardized engine with that for which the fuel examined is made. The reference fuels are iso-octane (2, 2, 4 trimethyl pentane), with an octane rating equal to 100 (high resistance to hammering) and the n-heptane which has an octane rating of zero (very low resistance). The octane rating determined is the percentage in volume of iso-octane in the iso-octane/heptane mixture.
Fuels with a high octane rating have greater resistance to premature detonation than those of a lower octane rating. In addition, fuels with a high octane rating can be used in engines with a high compression ratio, which are more efficient.
There are two types of engine for the determination of the octane rating of gasoline. One uses the Research method and the other the Motor method.
The Research method represents the behavior of an engine in cities at low and moderate speeds. The Motor method represents situations with fast acceleration, like climbing gradients or overtaking.
There is another way of expressing the octane rating of a gasoline which is called Highway Octane. The Highway Octane rating is expressed as the sum of the Research octane and the Motor octane ratings divided by 2. The Highway Octane rating is used in the United States while the Research method is used in Chile.
Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP)
The Reid vapor pressure is an empirical test that measures the pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) exercised by the vapors or light components of the crude or of an oil product, in a closed container at a temperature of 100 °F (38 °C).
A high vapor pressure of the crude tells us that light products are present in it and that they will burn in the torch in the processing if there is no suitable recovery system. In the case of an internal combustion engine, excessive vapor pressure will cause a blockage which will impede the flow of gasoline.
Crude oil contains salt (NaCI) which comes from the oil fields or the sea water used as ballast by oil tankers. It is necessary to extract the salt with desalination equipment before the crude oil can enter the atmospheric distillation oven in order to avoid corrosion that is produced in the upper part of the atmospheric tower. The salt decomposes and produces chlorhydric acid. It is expressed in grams of salt per cubic meter of crude.
The temperature at which some products inflame spontaneously in contact with the air (without flame), probably due to the heat the show oxidation produces, which accumulates, raising the temperature to the inflammation point. Fortunately, the oil distillers have very high self-ignition temperatures and are therefore difficult to achieve; this is 450ºC in gasoline. Oily rags, on the other hand, self-ignite easily and cause fires and so should be suitably destroyed.
The ratio of the weight of a substance and the weight of an equal volume of water at the same temperature. In oil, the API specific gravity is used which is measured with hydrometers that float in the liquid. The API grades are read directly on the scale that stands above the liquid at the flotation line point. The API scale arose from the facility of graduating the hydrometer rod uniformly.
°API =141.5/(specific gravity) -131.5
The °API determines whether the crude or product is light or heavy and enables us to calculate the tons of this unloaded. A light crude has an API of 40-50 while a heavy one has 10-24.
Sulfur and the API are the properties with the greatest influence on the price of crude.
This is the resistance to degradation through heat or oxidation of an oil product. Products containing olefinic material are unstable and susceptible to degradation.
The sulfur content permits the foreseeing of difficulties in meeting product and atmospheric emission specifications, as treatment units are needed to meet these; it is also poison for some catalysts. It also enables us to see whether the plant metallurgy is the most suitable for processing it. It is expressed as a percentage in weight of sulfur.
Sulfuric acid (H2S)
A prior knowledge of the sulfuric acid content of the crude permits preventive actions and avoids accidents to people. The sulfhydric acid is very dangerous because it anesthetizes the olfactory nerve which prevents people from being aware of the situation and is mortal in small quantities. Personnel working in contact with the crude have therefore to wear protection equipment and personal sulfhydric acid sensors.
This is the degree of resistance of a liquid to flow. The greater the viscosity, the greater the resistance to flow. Viscosity is affected by the temperature, reducing it when the latter rises. It is measured by using special viscosimeters and is expressed in USS (Universal Saybolt Seconds), FSS (Furol Saybolt Seconds) and in centi-stokes.
Viscosity is important for fuel injection in engines and burners. It is also critical in the pumping of crude oil and products by pipeline. A higher viscosity than that designed for will reduce the desired flow and make a greater pump motor capacity necessary. The viscosity also affects measuring instrument factors, altering the readings.
The measurement of the facility with which a product vaporizes. Volatile products have high steam pressure and a low boiling point. It is measured through the ASTM D86 test and is expressed as the temperature at which certain volumes are distilled.

Peter PanLiterary Hero
Best known as:
Fanciful boy hero of Peter Pan
Peter Pan is the mischievous hero of J.M. Barrie's 1904 play Peter Pan. Peter is "the boy who never grew up," a fantastical figure who visits the bedroom of the Darling children (Wendy, John and Michael) and flies them away to Neverland. There the children meet Peter's loyal troupe of lost boys, and have adventures and battles with the nefarious Captain Hook. The character of Peter went through several versions, from a 1902 book The Little White Bird to Barrie's hugely successful 1904 play. Barrie published the story as prose in 1911, under the title of Peter and Wendy. In 1953, Walt Disney made a hit animated movie out of a cleaned up version the story, and a 1954 Broadway musical version of the play earned a Tony award for Mary Martin, who played Peter. In films Peter has been played by Jeremy Sumpter (Peter Pan, 2003) and Robin Williams (Hook, 1991) among many others. Peter Pan is also the star of a series of adventure stories for children by Dave Barry and Ridley Pearson, starting with Peter and the Starcatcher (2004).
Peter Pan is assisted by a tiny fairie named Tinkerbell, who carries a lighted wand; she has become one of the signature figures of the Walt Disney empire... Late singer Michael Jackson called his extravagant California ranch "Neverland"... In Barrie's story, Peter tells Wendy he lives "Second to the right, then straight on till morning." In some productions this has been changed to "Second star to the right, then straight on till morning"... Peter is usually played onstage by women, a tradition started with the original 1904 production; gymnast Cathy Rigby and actress Sandy Duncan played the role often later in the 20th century... In 1929, Barrie donated the rights to Peter Pan to London's Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children.
Copyright © 1998-2013 by Who2?, LLC. All rights reserved.
More on Peter Pan from Infoplease:
Information Please® Database, © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Ecological and Economic Foundations
Human well-being relies critically on ecosystem services provided by nature. Examples include water and air quality regulation, nutrient cycling and decomposition, plant pollination and flood control, all of which are dependent on biodiversity. They are predominantly public goods with limited or no markets and do not command any price in the conventional economic system, so their loss is often not detected and continues unaddressed and unabated. This in turn not only impacts human well-being, but also seriously undermines the sustainability of the economic system.
It is against this background that TEEB: The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity project was set up in 2007 and led by the United Nations Environment Programme to provide a comprehensive global assessment of economic aspects of these issues. The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, written by a team of international experts, represents the scientific state of the art, providing a comprehensive assessment of the fundamental ecological and economic principles of measuring and valuing ecosystem services and biodiversity, and showing how these can be mainstreamed into public policies. The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity and subsequent TEEB outputs will provide the authoritative knowledge and guidance to drive forward the biodiversity conservation agenda for the next decade.
1. Integrating the Ecological and Economic Dimensions in Biodiversity and Ecosystem Service Valuation
2. Biodiversity, Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services
3. Measuring Biophysical Quantities and the Use of Indicators
4. The Socio-cultural Context of Ecosystem and Biodiversity Valuation
5. The Economics of Valuing Ecosystem Services and Biodiversity
6. Discounting, Ethics, and Options for Maintaining Biodiversity and Ecosystem Integrity
7. Lessons Learned and Linkages with National Policies
Appendix 1: How the TEEB Framework Can be Applied: The Amazon Case
Appendix 2: Matrix Tables for Wetland and Forest Ecosystems
Appendix 3: Estimates of Monetary Values of Ecosystem Services
"A landmark study on one of the most pressing problems facing society, balancing economic growth and ecological protection to achieve a sustainable future."
- Simon Levin, Moffett Professor of Biology, Department of Ecology and Evolution Behaviour, Princeton University, USA
"TEEB brings a rigorous economic focus to bear on the problems of ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss, and on their impacts on human welfare. TEEB is a very timely and useful study not only of the economic and social dimensions of the problem, but also of a set of practical solutions which deserve the attention of policy-makers around the world."
- Nicholas Stern, I.G. Patel Professor of Economics and Government at the London School of Economics and Chairman of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment
"The [TEEB] project should show us all how expensive the global destruction of the natural world has become and – it is hoped – persuade us to slow down.' The Guardian 'Biodiversity is the living fabric of this planet – the quantum and the variability of all its ecosystems, species, and genes. And yet, modern economies remain largely blind to the huge value of the abundance and diversity of this web of life, and the crucial and valuable roles it plays in human health, nutrition, habitation and indeed in the health and functioning of our economies. Humanity has instead fabricated the illusion that somehow we can get by without biodiversity, or that it is somehow peripheral to our contemporary world. The truth is we need it more than ever on a planet of six billion heading to over nine billion people by 2050. This volume of 'TEEB' explores the challenges involved in addressing the economic invisibility of biodiversity, and organises the science and economics in a way decision makers would find it hard to ignore."
- Achim Steiner, Executive Director, United Nations Environment Programme
This volume is an output of TEEB: The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity study and has been edited by Pushpam Kumar, Reader in Environmental Economics, University of Liverpool, UK. TEEB is hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UENP) and supported by the European Commission, the German Federal Ministry for the Environment (BMU) and the UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), recently joined by Norway's Ministry for Foreign Affairs, The Netherlands' Ministry of Housing (VROM), the UK Department for International Development (DFID) and also the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). The study leader is Pavan Sukhdev, who is also Special Adviser – Green Economy Initiative, UNEP.
View other products from the same publisher

Scaevola taccada is a dense, spreading shrub that generally grows up to 3 meter in height. The light green leaves are somewhat succulent with a waxy covering and are alternately arranged along the stem.
The blades are elongated and rounded at the tips, 5 to 20 cm long and 5 to 7 cm wide and the edges are often curled downward. The flowers are white or cream colored, often with purple streaks, 8 - 12 mm long, and have a pleasant fragrance. They have an irregular shape with all five petals on one side of the flower making it appear to have been torn in half. The flowers grow in small clusters from the leaf axils near the ends of the stems. The fruits of Scaevola taccada are fleshy berries. They are white, oblong, and about 1 cm long. The seeds are beige, corky and ridged. The inside of the fruit is spongy or corky and the fruits are buoyant. They can float for months in the ocean and still germinate after having been in salt water for up to a year. One study showed that the seeds germinated best after 250 days in salt water.
(National Tropical Botanical Garden (NTBG). 1994. Naupaka. In Native Hawaiian plant information sheets. Lawai, Kauai: Hawaii Plant Conservation Center. National Tropical Botanical Garden. Unpublished internal papers.)
(Rauch, Fred D., Heidi L. Bornhorst, and David L. Hensley. 1997. Beach Naupaka, Ornamentals and Flowers.)
(Wagner, Warren L., Darrel R. Herbst, and S. H. Sohmer. 1990. Manual of the flowering plants of Hawai'i.)
(Bornhorst, Heidi L. 1996. Growing native Hawaiian plants: a how-to guide for the gardener.)

The common name for sedums is Stonecrop. There is a Stonecrop Nursery in eastern New York which was the first garden created by Frank Cabot. Frank created the Garden Conservancy, an organization which strives to preserve some of our exceptional gardens for posterity. Each year it also runs its Open Days Program which opens gardens to the public throughout the country. Frank Cabot went on to create Les Quatre Vents, an outstanding garden at his family home in Quebec.
There are two sedums which most gardeners grow; Sedum acre, a tiny low-growing
groundcover plant with bright yellow flowers. This is being used effectively in the Peace Garden in the plaza between the library and city hall.
The other is Autumn Joy which is in bloom now and will continue to provide color for
months to come. Some references say it requires full sun. Not so! I have it in three locations in my garden. I have several plants growing out of a south-facing wall. But there are tall oaks and maples to the south so that the only time it gets direct sun is in spring before the oaks leaf out. The rest of the year it is dappled light. Another plant is in the east-facing bed on top of my long stone wall where it gets only morning sun. The third plant is in my shrub-perennial border where it gets a bit of sun mid-day. Mine is the ordinary run-of-the-mill Autumn Joy, but there are several cultivars offered in nurseries. Among these are: Crimson, Iceberg, which has white flowers, Autumn Fire and Chocolate Drop, growing only eight inches tall with brown leaves and pink flowers.
There are two native sedums: Roseroot, Sedum rosa and Wild Stonecrop, Sedum ternatum. A third Wild Live-forever, Sedum teliphiodes, grows on cliffs and rocks in Pennsylvania and southward.

Recent acts of violence alongside pending legislation and international pressure have brought to light the pressing need for lawmaking in support of LGBT rights in Chile. Together with protests for reforms in the education system, the public seems to be increasingly impatient about what the government is doing to protect LGBT rights. These demands are important beyond the scope of gay rights, because they have brought attention to the need for Chile to recognize, accept and protect the human rights of an evolving, heterogeneous culture as a fundamental prerequisite for continued prosperity.
The passage of an antidiscrimination law, which remained unresolved for over seven years, by a close 58-56 vote in the Chamber of Deputies this month was a basic necessity for the country. The Chilean Movement for Sexual Minorities (MOVILH) notes that in 2011 gay, lesbian and transgender Chileans were increasingly outspoken in reporting abuse and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. However, this recently passed antidiscrimination law does not deal with hate crimes per se, but rather defines illegal discrimination. Furthermore, certain passages have yet to be finalized in a mixed commission of Senators and Deputies on May 2. The recent death of gay youth Daniel Zamudio points to precisely why legislating solely on discrimination does not suffice in this case, serving as an exceptionally violent example as to why hate crimes require specific punishment under the law.
Zamudio received not only the public’s sympathy, but also worldwide attention including a briefing note from the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights’ spokesman, Rupert Colville, urging Chile to enact hate crime legislation. In this regard, the MOVILH also argues that Chilean society is not opposed to legislating on issues of gay rights and antidiscrimination in its entirety, but there is a lack of bravery and willingness within Congress to approach these pending issues. The recent Inter-American Court of Human Rights’ overturning of a Chilean court ruling against lesbian Judge Karen Atala, who lost custody of her children because of her same-sex relationship, is further international pressure for Chile to meet requirements stipulated by international agreements it has signed onto.
Chile’s gay rights deficit is worrying as the country continues to be viewed as an example for continued economic growth despite global market volatility. President Sebastian Piñera’s administration is cautious about giving into all public demands, as Chile’s Minister of Finance Felipe Larraín recently said: “If we surrender to the temptation of appeasing demands by giving in to all of them, we will never get to our final goal [development].” However, most gay rights issues rely merely on political willingness rather than investment for social welfare. Furthermore, acting on gay rights is not the investment equivalent of reforming a public education system.
On the contrary, the lack of legislative initiative to protect gay Chileans is hindering the business community’s business opportunities. Private initiatives have been taken to reach out to gay customers, like for example the granting of access to mortgages and family insurance plans to Banco de Chile customers in same-sex relationships, proving how it is not only the public that is restless, but also the private sector that recognizes the positive effects of social inclusion in business. What could potentially prove threatening to Chile’s continued economic success might just be the lack of recognition given to the longstanding need for social inclusion of minorities in the country’s legal framework. In contrast, Chile’s neighbor Argentina has clearly reaped the benefits of gay tourism and investment since legislating on gay marriage, while Chile continues to turn a blind eye to opportunity.
This is not to say that Piñera’s administration has not taken basic steps to promote the rights of gay couples, like for example Piñera’s public presentation of a civil unions bill in August 2011. However, this legislative project was not only perceived as a political tool in the midst of cabinet discussions with student protest leaders, but is also minimal when considering the prominent use of gay couples in campaign ads for Sebastian Piñera during his presidential campaign. For this reason, the inclusion of a question in the 2012 census that allows gay couples to state whether they live with a same-sex partner may become an important, confidential and unbiased figure that current and future administrations could use to advocate for legislation on gay unions.
This paradox persists despite the heightened quality of life of Chileans. Economic growth is creating an increasingly obvious deficit in basic human rights the country has yet to attain. In spite of continued development and well-regarded fiscal policy through the recession and into today’s administration, Chile continues to be in debt to not only its citizens and the country’s business community, but also to international human rights agreements on sexual orientation and gender identity. These international standards continue to be well above those demonstrated by the current state of gay rights legislation in Chile.
Eduardo Ayala is a guest blogger to AQ Online. He is Chilean-American and works at the Council of the Americas in New York. He graduated from The George Washington University, during which time he also completed coursework at The University of Chile and The Pontifical Catholic University of Chile in Santiago.

Language Instruction for Immigrant and Non-English Speaking Children
Title III of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 provides Federal financial support to state and local educational agencies to supplement English language instruction in order to ensure that all English Language Learners, including immigrant children and youth, attain English proficiency, develop high levels of academic language proficiency in English, and meet the same challenging State academic achievement standards as all Maryland students are expected to meet.
To comply with these requirements, the Title III office of the Maryland State Department of Education works with local school districts to ensure that quality, research based ESL programs are offered to language minority students.
Title III, Secs. 3101, 3102 Part A

Don't feel like exercise? Scientists find compound that may help you work out harderJune 12th, 2012 in Medical research /
As science rushes to develop safe weight loss drugs, a new research report approaches this problem from an entirely new angle: What if there were a pill that would make you want to exercise harder? It may sound strange, but a new research report appearing online in The FASEB Journal suggests that it might be possible.
That's because a team of Swiss researchers found that when a hormone in the brain, erythropoietin (Epo), was elevated in mice, they were more motivated to exercise. In addition, the form of erythropoietin used in these experiments did not elevate red blood cell counts. Such a treatment has obvious benefits for a wide range of health problems ranging from Alzheimer's to obesity, including mental health disorders for which increased physical activity is known to improve symptoms.
"Here we show that Epo increases the motivation to exercise," said Max Gassmann, D.V.M., a researcher involved in the work from the Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Vetsuisse-Faculty and Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology at the University of Zurich in Switzerland. "Most probably, Epo has a general effect on a person's mood and might be used in patients suffering from depression and related diseases."
To make this discovery, Gassmann and colleagues used three types of mice: those that received no treatment, those that were injected with human Epo, and those that were genetically modified to produce human Epo in the brain. Compared to the mice that did not have any increase in Epo, both mouse groups harboring human Epo in the brain showed significantly higher running performance without increases in red blood cells.
"If you can't put exercise in a pill, then maybe you can put the motivation to exercise in a pill instead," said Gerald Weissmann, M.D., Editor-in-Chief of The FASEB Journal. "As more and more people become overweight and obese, we must attack the problem from all angles. Maybe the day will come when gyms are as easily found as fast food restaurants."
More information: Beat Schuler, Johannes Vogel, Beat Grenacher, Robert A. Jacobs, Margarete Arras, and Max Gassmann. Acute and chronic elevation of erythropoietin in the brain improves exercise performance in mice without inducing erythropoiesis. FASEB J. doi:10.1096/fj.11-191197
Provided by Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
"Don't feel like exercise? Scientists find compound that may help you work out harder." June 12th, 2012. http://medicalxpress.com/news/2012-06-dont-scientists-compound-harder.html

I do a lesson with tints and shades that requires no drawing skills.
The kids make a large triangular banner using their first or last
initial-usually 24x18 or 24x36 if you have that sized paper.
They make the letter on a piece of 9x12 size paper. They can embellish a
simple block or puffy letter with a few swirls or whatever, but keep it
simple enough to paint in the shape with whatever their color choice is.
Then transfer the letter onto the triangle, near the center of the upper
part of the wide end. I have them tape the letter in place behind the
triangle and trace through on the light box or at the window.
This is a monochromatic painting the way I do it with my 3rd graders. the
choose one color and use it straight from the bottle to paint the letter
shape. This is the only shape with unmixed colors.
Then they divide the background behind the letter into large shapes using
straight or curved lines (nothing too nervous, if you know what I mean. Just
simple lines). I usually limit the number of extra shapes to about 10-12 and
remind the kids that the letter is the star of this show, not the background
Then they start with tints (color plus white) and paint in half the shapes.
Do the same with shades (color plus black) to finish the background area.
when dry, we outline with a wide sharpie marker to neaten up the painted
edges between shapes and around the letter. Sometimes we edge the whole
thing with colored construction paper strips to make the banner a bit more
Concepts used are always mixing from light to dark to avoid needing gallons
of white paint to lighten up a dark blue, for example. Start with the
lightest tint and paint a shape, progressing darker by adding into that bowl
more of the prime color. Same with shades, starting with a drop of black
into the prime color, painting a shape, and progressing with more black til
all the shapes are done. Saves a lot of paint that way!
The kids usually pick a color that will match their bedroom at home . My
third graders love this project and look forward to it each year. If you
need a photo, I can take one and send it tomorrow. I am off Mondays.

A nocturnal bird of prey.
(AM2: dp. 1,009 (f.); l. 18710; 1 b. 356; dr. 104; s. 14 k.; cpl. 78; a. 2 3; cl. Lapwing)
The first Owl (AM2) was laid down 25 October 1917 by the Todd Shipbuilding Corp., Brooklyn, N.Y.; launched 4 March 1918; sponsored by Miss Ruth R. Dodd; and commissioned 11 July 1918, Lt. (j.g.) Charles B. Babson in command.
Following a New York to Charleston towing assignment, Owl reported to the 5th Naval District at Norfolk, 22 August 1918. Employed as a minesweeper for the remaining months of World War I, she then served as a light ship in the inner approach to Chesapeake Bay until 10 July 1919. From that time until 1936, she was primarily engaged in providing towing services along the eastern seaboard and in the Caribbean. Between June 1936 and January 1941, she operated with units of the Aircraft Division, Base Force, providing planeguard, seaplane tender, and target and mooring buoy planting services from New England to the Caribbean. Then, temporarily attached to Train, Patrol Force at Culebra, P.R., she steamed to Bermuda in May for towing and servicing duties with MinDiv 14. Redesignated AT137, 1 June 1942, she was based at Bermuda until June 1943. During that time, towing and escort duties frequently took her to the east coast, while numerous salvage and rescue missions, including aid to the submarine R1 and torpedoed Argentine tanker Victoria, kept her busy at Bermuda and in nearby convoy lanes.
Detached from Bermudan duty in June, Owl spent the last six months of 1943 with DesRon 30 operating out of Guantanamo Bay. She then steamed back to Norfolk for overhaul, and sailed for Europe. She arrived at Falmouth, U.K., 14 March 1944 to join the Allied forces gathering for the invasion of France. Redesignated ATO137 on 15 May 1944, she arrived off the Normandy coast two days after D-Day. As ground forces pushed inland, she towed port and road construction materials to the French coast, thus aiding the all important flow of men and equipment to the front.
Availability at Falmouth early in the new year, 1945, preceded her return to the United States, 27 February, and midAtlantic coast towing assignments. Transferred to the Pacific Fleet, she sailed from Newport, 5 May, with YNG11 in tow, and arrived at San Diego 23 June, to join ServRon 2. In August she continued on to Pearl Harbor for four months of target towing duty, returning to the west coast 2 January 1946. Owl then provided towing services for the 19th (Reserve) Fleet until beginning inactivation in April. She decommissioned in the 13th Naval District 26 July 1946 and on 27 June 1947 was sold for scrapping to the Pacific Metal and Salvage Co. at Port of Nordland, Wash.
Owl received 1 battle star for World War II service.

When the National Wild Turkey Federation (NWTF) was first founded in 1973 there were only 1.5 million wild turkeys across the U.S., Canada and Mexico. Today, it is estimated there are more than 5.6 million wild turkeys.
In Utah, wild turkey restoration efforts continue to be the most aggressive in the nation. Over 2,800 wild turkeys have been relocated to suitable habitat areas in Utah since the winter of 1999. As a result, wild turkey permits have increased 20 percent for the spring 2002 season.
However, this program will not be complete until over 200,000 wild turkeys roam the cottonwood river bottoms, pinyon/juniper, and ponderosa pine forests of the state. Whether you pursue wild turkeys as a hunter, or simply enjoy watching these magnificent birds in their natural surroundings, the time to view wild turkeys in Utah has never been better.
At the forefront of this dramatic return in Utah, has been the Federation's volunteers, working side-by-side with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources.
Now, with most restoration efforts completed in the East, all eyes have shifted to the West, where the wild turkey continues to redefine it's own idea of suitable habitat. While the release of a wild turkey into western habitat remains one of the federation's most enduring symbols, it is just one brick in a foundation of good works that are impacting people's lives and the environment in many positive ways.
Since 1977, the NWTF has spent over 144 million dollars on over 16,000 projects nationwide. The federation helps fund transplants, research projects, habitat acquisition, education, and the equipment needed to successfully accomplish these tasks. Through the Federation's regional habitat programs, volunteers have helped improve hundreds of thousands of acres by planting trees, crops, winter food sources and grasses that provide food and shelter for not only the wild turkey, but many others species of wildlife as well. Also improved in many areas, particularly in the west, has been water quality. Projects occurring right here in southeastern Utah include a San Rafael Desert guzzler, Knolls Ranch habitat improvement, and numerous other projects on the La Sal Mountains, Blue Mountains and Book Cliffs areas.
This month the Price River chapter of the NWTF will be hosting it's annual Wild Turkey Banquet on January 26. For more information, please call (435) 259-9453.

Learn something new every day More Info... by email
Thermal epoxy is any adhesive epoxy that has one or more substances added to it to enhance thermal, or heat, transfer. These epoxies can be electrically conductive or not conductive, depending on the thermal additive used. Silver and other metal-based thermal additives are usually electrically conductive, and thermal epoxies that contain these additives must be applied very carefully so as not to cause electrical shorts. Ceramic-based additives are not electrically conductive but are also not as efficient at thermal conduction.
Manufacturers make thermal epoxies that are designed to work as high-performance engineering adhesives and structural adhesives in a wide range of applications and environments. These include aircraft, boats, marine equipment, cars, surfboards, snowboards, and bicycles, among others. There are thermal formulations for almost every application imaginable, including those that cure while under water, those that remain very flexible or get quite rigid when cured, those resistant to fire or high heat, and even those certified by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for low outgassing.
Heat can damage or destroy electrical components, and today’s high-speed computer components produce a large amount of heat that must be removed. Devices called heat sinks are used to pull heat away from an object and dissipate the heat to the air, sometimes with the help of a cooling fan. Heat sinks are made from metal alloys designed to have excellent thermal conduction properties, and they have specially designed fins to help conduct and remove the heat. They are almost always mounted to a surface using a special adhesive thermal epoxy.
When used in computer applications, a thermal epoxy can help fill microscopic voids that occur in the surfaces of heat sinks and other devices. These voids occur in the manufacturing process. When two objects are mounted together, for instance a chip and a heat sink, the voids fill with air. Air is a very poor thermal conductor, so a substance is introduced to fill the voids and help conduct the heat to the heat sink for removal. The substance used can be thermal grease, thermal tape, thermal pads or, if the device needs to be secured to the mounting surface, thermal epoxy.
When applying thermal epoxy it is very important to use the least possible amount required to fill any voids and make the bond. If a too-thick coat of epoxy is applied, the electrical conductivity of the epoxy will be degraded. Once the epoxy has cured, the bond between the two surfaces is permanent. Epoxies should only be used in well-ventilated areas, and the manufacturer’s instructions should always be followed for best results.

DENVER – Put on your poodle skirts and tune in Elvis on the transistor radio, because it’s starting to look a lot like the 1950s.
Unfortunately, this won’t be the nostalgic ’50s of big cars and pop music.
The 1950s that could be on the way to Colorado is the decade of drought.
So says Brian Bledsoe, a Colorado Springs meteorologist who studies the history of ocean currents and uses what he learns to make long-term weather forecasts.
“I think we’re reliving the ’50s, bottom line,” Bledsoe said Friday morning at the annual meeting of the Colorado Water Congress.
Bledsoe studies the famous El Niño and La Niña ocean currents. But he also looks at other, less well-known cycles, including long-term temperature cycles in the oceans.
In the 1950s, water in the Pacific Ocean was colder than normal, but it was warmer than usual in the Atlantic. That combination caused a drought in Colorado that was just as bad as the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.
The ocean currents slipped back into their 1950s pattern in the last five years, Bledsoe said. The cycles can last a decade or more, meaning bad news for farmers, ranchers, skiers and forest residents.
“Drought feeds on drought. The longer it goes, the harder it is to break,” Bledsoe said.
The outlook is worst for Eastern Colorado, where Bledsoe grew up and his parents still own a ranch. They recently had to sell half their herd when their pasture couldn’t provide enough feed.
“They’ve spent the last 15 years grooming that herd for organic beef stock,” he said.
Bledsoe looks for monsoon rains to return to the Four Corners and Western Slope in July. But there’s still a danger in the mountains in the summer.
“Initially, dry lightning could be a concern, so obviously, the fire season is looking not so great right now,” he said.
Weather data showed the last year’s conditions were extreme.
Nolan Doesken, Colorado’s state climatologist, said the summer of 2012 was the hottest on record in Colorado. And it was the fifth-driest winter since record-keeping began more than 100 years ago.
Despite recent storms in the San Juan Mountains, this winter hasn’t been much better.
“We’ve had a wimpy winter so far,” Doesken said. “The past week has been a good week for Colorado precipitation.”
However, the next week’s forecast shows dryness returning to much of the state.
Reservoir levels are higher than they were in 2002 – the driest year since Coloradans started keeping track of moisture – but the state is entering 2013 with reservoirs that were depleted last year.
“You don’t want to start a year at this level if you’re about to head into another drought,” Doesken said.
It was hard to find good news in Friday morning’s presentations, but Bledsoe is happy that technology helps forecasters understand the weather better than they did during past droughts. That allows people to plan for what’s on the way.
“I’m a glass-half-full kind of guy,” he said.

EPO is a nootropicWednesday, 10 September, 2008
Erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone that increases red blood cells and is used as a performance enhancer for athletic performance, has now been shown to enhance memory in normal, healthy mice. Mice that received EPO injections had enhanced memory for 3-4 weeks afterwards, which is longer than the elevation in red blood cell count lasts.
This effect isn’t actually novel, as other researchers had noticed that EPO improved brain function over 18 years ago (Grimm et al, 1990), and research into mental illness has also suggested that EPO has an effect on brain function (Ehrenreich et al, 2004). But it was always thought to be dependent on the change in red blood cells, but more recent evidence has suggested it works independently of effects on blood cells (Miskowiak et al, 2007). This mouse model confirms this.
Of course, the researchers have been focusing on this as a treatment, but anyone can see that this is a promising enhancement too. This mouse research showed that EPO enhanced memory and athletic function in healthy mice. It enhances both athletic and mental performance – how good is that?
Then again, if EPO becomes a common cognitive enhancer, it will mean that few of us normal people would ever be able to compete in the Olympics. It was only in 2004 that caffeine was allowed in professional competition, but pretty soon college students will be doping themselves with EPO as a biochemical study aid. It will be interesting when almost all normal people would not be able to pass an Olympic-level drug test.
The possibility exists, however, that we may want the cognitive boost without increasing our red blood cells too much. And now that we know the cognitive effects of EPO are independent of red blood cell production, this may be possible too. Make a drug that stimulates the brain like EPO does, but doesn’t effect an increase in red blood cells. And this study has gone a long way to unraveling the relevant effects of EPO on neuronal plasticity that underly the enhancement to memory circuitry in the brain, which means that we may be able to find drugs that do so more effectively than EPO or act on other brain functions.

Celebrate Princeton Invention: Craig Arnold
Posted December 21, 2009; 01:08 p.m.
Able to adjust its focus more than 100,000 times faster than the human eye, the TAG Lens invented by mechanical and aerospace engineering professor Craig Arnold and his colleagues has applications in materials processing and imaging. (Photo: Brian Wilson)
Name: Craig Arnold, associate professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering
Invention: Tunable Acoustic Gradient Index of Refraction Lens (TAG Lens)
What it does: The TAG lens features a cylinder made of a special material that vibrates when electricity is passed through it, enclosed inside a fluid-filled chamber. Controlling the flow of electricity changes the vibrations that propagate through the fluid, changing the lens' focus more than 100,000 times faster than the human eye can refocus.
Inspiration: After developing a low-cost lens to shape laser beam output into different patterns, Arnold and his colleagues focused their attention on understanding how the device worked and its potential applications. Finding that the lens had the unique ability to focus rapidly at a wide range of focal lengths, they realized its potential went far beyond the original intended purpose, with numerous applications in materials processing and imaging.
Collaborators: Euan McLeod, a 2009 Ph.D. recipient, and Alexander Mermillod-Blondin, a former postdoctoral researcher in the Arnold lab
Back to main story

- 10 to 15 minutes
- Take turns introducing each other while pretending you are on a stage.
- Stand up, bow, and tell all the good things you can about the other person, his hobbies, good qualities, etc. Be sure to over-dramatize.
- Take turns introducing other family members, present or not.
- Challenge your child to introduce a best friend or a favorite teacher.
- Think of famous people and take turns introducing them.
Copyright © 2004 by Susan Kettmann. Excerpted from The 2,000 Best Games & Activities with permission of its publisher, Sourcebooks, Inc.
To order this book visit Amazon.com.

2012-2013 Service Learning Courses
Hispanic Literature in Translation—"Defiant Acts: Spanish and Latin American Theatre"
Isabel de Sena
This course will explore the full spectrum of theatre from the early modern period in Spain and colonial Spanish America to contemporary theatre on both sides of the Atlantic, including U.S. Latino playwrights. We will read across periods to identify preoccupations and generic characteristics as theatre evolves and moves between the street and the salon, the college yard and the court, enclosed theatres and theatre for the enclosed. In the process we will address a wide swath of ideas, on gender, class, freedom and totalitarianism, the boundaries of identity. Students will be introduced to some basic concepts and figures ranging from Lope de Vega’s brilliant articulation of “comedia” to Augusto Boal’s concept of an engaged theatre, and investigate the work of FOMMA (Fortaleza de la Mujer Maya) and similar contemporary collectives. And we will read plays as plays, as literature and as texts intended for performance on a stage. At the same time students will have the opportunity to explore creative practices, through engagement with different community organizations: schools, retirement homes, local theatre organizations, etc. Students are encouraged to apply concepts learned in class to their internships, and to bring their ideas and reflections on their weekly practices for discussion in class. Each other week one hour will be devoted to discussing their work in the community. NO Spanish required, but students who are sufficiently fluent in the language may opt to work in a community where Spanish is the primary language of communication. NO expertise in theatre required though theatre students are very welcome. Open to any interested student.
Fall & Spring
First Year Studies
Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu
[Isizulu: A person is only a person through other persons]
How do the contexts in which we live influence our development? And how do these contexts influence the questions we ask about development, and the ways in which we interpret our observations? How do local, national and international policies impact the contexts in which children live? Should we play a role in changing some of these contexts? What are the complications of doing this?
In this course, we will discuss these and other key questions about child and adolescent development in varying cultural contexts, with a specific focus on the United States and sub-Saharan Africa. As we do so, we will discuss factors contributing to both opportunities and inequalities within and between these contexts. In particular, we will discuss how physical and psychosocial environments differ for poor and non-poor children and their families in rural Upstate New York, urban Yonkers, and rural and urban Malawi, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Kenya and Tanzania. We will also discuss individual and environmental protective factors that buffer some children from the adverse effects of poverty, as well as the impacts of public policy on poor children and their families. Topics will include health and educational disparities; environmental inequalities linked to race, class, ethnicity, gender, language and nationality; environmental chaos; children’s play and access to green space; cumulative risk and its relationship to chronic stress; and the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the growing orphan problem in sub-Saharan Africa. Readings will be drawn from both classic and contemporary research in psychology, human development, anthropology, sociology, and public health; memoirs and other first-hand accounts; and classic and contemporary African literature and film.
This course will also serve as an introduction to the methodologies of community based and participatory action research within the context of a service-learning course. As a class, we will collaborate with local high school students in developing, implementing and evaluating effective community based work in partnership with organizations in urban Yonkers and rural Tanzania. As part of this work, all students will spend an afternoon a week working in a local after-school program. In addition, we will have monthly seminars with local high school students during our regular class time.
Environment, Race and the Psychology of Place
This service learning course will focus on the experience of humans living within physical, social and psychological spaces. We will use a constructivist, multidisciplinary, multilevel lens to examine the interrelationship between humans and the natural and built environment, to explore the impact of racial/ethnic group membership on person/environment interactions, and to provide for a critical analysis of social dynamics in the environmental movement. The community partnership/ service learning component is an important part of this class - we will work with local agencies to promote adaptive person-environment interactions within our community.
Children’s Health in a Multicultural Context
This course offers, within a cultural context, an overview of theoretical and research issues in the psychological study of health and illness in children. We will examine theoretical perspectives in the psychology of health, health cognition, illness prevention, stress, and coping with illness and highlight research, methods, and applied issues. This class is appropriate for those interested in a variety of health careers. Conference work can range from empirical research to bibliographic research in this area. Community partnership/service learning work is encouraged in this class. A background in social sciences or education is recommended.

BEMIDJI -The Governor's Task Force Prevention of School Bullying met with Bemidji students, parents and educators Wednesday evening kicking off a series of sessions to help redefine the state's anti-bullying statute.
"The Governor has organized a task force of citizens from around the state to make recommendations to the Governor and to the Legislature in regards that might be put forth that would direct all the school districts in the state as to how they should address bullying," said Nancy Riestenberg, School Climate Specialist at the Department of Education.
Riestenberg joined members of the task force to speak with students from Bemidji High School and students from Schoolcraft to discuss their concerns about bullying and ways in which they think it could be prevented.
Students like Thomas Caddy and Tia Siddens, 9th graders at Bemidji High School, bullying is present at the school and it is seen both physically and verbally.
"Words hurt more than fists in a lot of situations because if the physical wound isn't there it could still leave a mark on the mind," Siddens said.
The students said the most common targets of bullying in school are people of different race, sexual orientation or people with a mental disability.
"People who don't have a lot of friends are targeted more because if you don't always have those friends there to help speak up," Schoolcraft student Katie Fgevje said. "With less friends you are more vulnerable in my eyes because you don't have that person to kind of help you get through it."
When asked what the students would recommend the task force do to help the bullying problem in schools, a lot of students said there needs to be an effort to teach students from a young age why bullying is wrong, but also to teach the staff how to resolve and prevent bully situations.
"We have some programs that address bullying and I am happy we have them but I don't think they are exactly effective because if the person is doing it they are not going to be listening to the reasons why they are not supposed to be doing it," Thomas Caddy said.
Riestenberg said this was the first of many student sessions she and the task force will conduct but she said she was impressed by how engaging the students were.
"They confirmed for me what I teach in my job as the school climate specialist at the Department of Education and gave insight to the task force about what students face and what they need," Riestenberg said.
Following the parent session, the task force went to the middle school to meet with parents and educators to see what their concerns and recommendations were.
The common concern among the parents was the issue of cyber bullying in addition to racial and sexual orientation bullying. The parents agreed that the school and the parents need to make sure students know their resources on who they can talk to when being bullied.
"We need to be held accountable for our own actions and we not only need to listen to our kids but we need to show them that we are trying to do something," Marty Cobenais, a parent in attendance said. "If we don't make an effort to do something our kids are not going to come talk to us when they have a problem."
Bemidji School Superintendent James Hess said the bullying issue is one that does need to be addressed not only at the school level but also the community level.
"I think about bullying and I think about the school's role in bullying and I don't think the school is the place to lay all of the blame," Hess said. "I know that if you walk into any classroom in the district you won't find any teachers teaching bullying. I think we need to be a part of the search for a solution to bullying but I don't think we are the stopping place, we are the starting place. We need to look at the greater community to find solutions that are going to be the lasting solutions."
The task force will be meeting with schools across the state and will pass along recommendations to the Legislature by August.

A Soyuz rocket launched two Galileo satellites into orbit on Friday, marking a crucial step for Europe’s planned navigation system, operator Arianespace announced.
The launch took place at the Kourou space base in French Guiana, at 3:15pm (6:15pm GMT).
Three and three-quarter hours later, the 700kg satellites were placed into orbit.
The new satellites add to the first two in the Galileo navigation system, which were launched on Oct. 21, last year.
Together they create a “mini-constellation.” Four is the minimum number of satellites needed to gain a navigational fix on the ground, using signals from the satellite to get a position for latitude, longitude, altitude and a time reference.
Galileo will ultimately consist of 30 satellites, six more than the US Global Positioning System.
By 2015, 18 satellites should be in place, which is sufficient for launching services to the public, followed by the rest in 2020, according to the European Space Agency.
It is claimed that the system will be accurate to within one meter. The US Global Positioning System, which became operational in 1995 and is currently being upgraded, is currently accurate to between three and eight meters.
In May, the European Commission said the cost by 2015 would be 5 billion euros (US$6.45 billion).
As a medium-sized launcher, Soyuz complements Europe’s heavyweight Ariane 5 and lightweight Vega rockets.

Did You Know
Did you know that there is a town in Germany by the name of Reher??
That there is also one by the name of Stoltenberg??
Do you know where our Reher and Stoltenberg ancestors came from in Germany??
Johann Reher came from the town of Bebensee.
His father Casper came from Dreggers which was 6 miles east of there. Bad Segeberg is also associated with the family. It is about 7 miles north and the closest large town.
Since the town of Reher is 40 miles west of Bebensee and Dreggers I'm not sure if there is any connection to our name and family. Forty miles in the mid 1800's was quite a distance to travel.
Claus Stoltenberg came from Brodersdorf which is 46 miles north of Bebensee and about 10 miles northeast of Kiel, a major city on the Baltic Sea. Brodersdorf is two to three miles south of the Baltic Sea. Other towns associated with the Stoltenberg side of the family are all located in close proximity. They are LaBoe, Stein, Fahren, Probsteierhagen and Wentdorf.
The town of Stoltenberg is only seven miles to the southeast of Brodersdorf.
The above map of northern Germany will show you where the towns Reher, Stoltenberg, Bebensee, Dreggers, and Brodersdorf are located. I've marked these towns with a dark asterisk * to make them easier to find.
Click on the map to make it bigger and easier to see the towns marked with an asterisk. After the larger map comes up, click on that again to zoom in.
It is about 60 miles from Kiel at the top of the map to Hamburg which is towards the bottom of this map. From Reher to Bebensee it is 40 miles, to Brodersdorf it is 46 miles which is also the distance from Bebensee to Brodersdorf and Stoltenberg... almost a perfect equilateral triangle. See the map below... Reher is in the bottom left corner or the triangle, Bebensee in the bottom right and Brodersdorf in the top.
Hamburg is the port that our Johann & Sophia Reher sailed out of with their two small children, Emma and Ernest when they came to America in 1872.
The map above shows a closer view of the area where Bebensee & Dreggers are located... where Johann Reher and his father were born.
Once again, click on the map to make it larger.
The map above shows a closer view of the area where the Stoltenberg side of the family came from. You'll see all of the towns: Brodersdorf, LaBoe, Stein, Fahren, Probsteierhagen and Wentdorf. I've added the Stoltenberg name myself as the town didn't show up on this map.
So Now You Know

Thrombolytic drugs for heart attack
Small blood vessels called coronary arteries supply blood and oxygen to the heart.
- A heart attack can occur if a blood clot completely blocks one of these arteries.
- Unstable angina refers to chest pain and other warning signs that a heart attack may happen soon. It is most often caused by blood clots in the arteries.
Certain patients may be given drugs to break up the clot if the artery is completely blocked. These drugs are called thrombolytics, or clot busting drugs.
- These drugs should be given within 3 hours of when the patient first felt chest pain.
- The medicine is given through a vein (IV).
- Blood thinners taken by mouth may be prescribed later to prevent more clots from forming.
The main risk when receiving clot busting drugs is bleeding, especially bleeding in the brain.
Thrombolytic therapy is not safe for people who have:
- Bleeding inside the head or a stroke
- Brain abnormalities, such as tumors or poorly formed blood vessels
- Had a head injury within the past 3 months
- A history of using blood thinners or a bleeding disorder
- Had major surgery, a major injury, or internal bleeding within the past 3-4 weeks
- Peptic ulcer disease
- Severe high blood pressure
Other treatments that may be done instead of thrombolytic therapy are:
- Angioplasty is a procedure to open narrowed or blocked arteries that supply blood to the heart. It is often the first choice treatment.
- Heart bypass surgery to open narrowed or blocked arteries that supply blood to the heart may also be done. This procedure is also called "open heart surgery."
Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM, Bridges CR, Califf RM, Casey DE Jr, et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the management of patients with unstable angina/non-ST-Elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Unstable Angina/Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction) developed in collaboration with the American College of Emergency Physicians, the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons endorsed bythe American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation and the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50(7):e1-e157.
Antman EM, Hand M, Armstrong PW, Bates ER, Green LA, Halasyamani LK, et al. 2007 Focused Update of the ACC/AHA 2004 Guidelines for the Management of Patients with ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines: developed in collaboration with the Canadian Cardiovascular Society endorsed by the American Academy of Family Physicians: 2007 Writing Group to Review New Evidence and Update the ACC/AHA 2004 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, writing on behalf of the 2004 Writing Committee. Circulation. 2008;117(20:296-329.
Reviewed By: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, Washington. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.

The “presidi” translates as “garrisons” (from the French word, “to equip”), as protectors of traditional food production practices
Monday, March 23, 2009
The “presidi” translates as “garrisons” (from the French word, “to equip”), as protectors of traditional food production practices
This past year, I have had rewarding opportunities to observe traditional food cultures in varied regions of the world. These are:
Athabascan Indian in the interior of Alaska (the traditional Tanana Chiefs Conference tribal lands) in July, 2008 (for more, read below);
Swahili coastal tribes in the area of Munje village (population about 300), near Msambweni, close to the Tanzania border in December, 2008-January, 2009 (for more, read below); and,Laikipia region of Kenya (January, 2009), a German canton of Switzerland (March, 2009), and the Piemonte-Toscana region of northern/central Italy (images only, February-March, 2009).
In Fort Yukon, Alaska, salmon is a mainstay of the diet. Yet, among the Athabascan Indians, threats to subsistence foods and stresses on household economics abound. In particular, high prices for external energy sources (as of July, 2008, almost $8 for a gallon of gasoline and $6.50 for a gallon of diesel, which is essential for home heating), as well as low Chinook salmon runs for information click here, and moose numbers.
Additional resource management issues pose threats to sustaining village life – for example, stream bank erosion along the Yukon River, as well as uneven management in the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge. People are worried about ever-rising prices for fuels and store-bought staples, and fewer and fewer sources of wage income. The result? Villagers are moving out from outlying areas into “hub” communities like Fort Yukon -- or another example, Bethel in Southwest Alaska – even when offered additional subsidies, such as for home heating. But, in reality, “hubs” often offer neither much employment nor relief from high prices.
In Munje village in Kenya, the Digo, a Bantu-speaking, mostly Islamic tribe in the southern coastal area of Kenya, enjoy the possibilities of a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, and fish/oils.
Breakfast in the village typically consists of mandazi (a fried bread similar to a doughnut), and tea with sugar. Lunch and dinner is typically ugali and samaki (fish), maybe with some dried cassava or chickpeas.
On individual shambas (small farms), tomatoes, cassava, maize, cowpeas, bananas, mangos, and coconut are typically grown. Ugali is consumed every day, as are cassava, beans, oil, fish -- and rice, coconut, and chicken, depending on availability.
Even with their own crops, villagers today want very much to enter the market economy and will sell products from their shambas to buy staples and the flour needed to make mandazis, which they in turn sell. Sales of mandazis (and mango and coconut, to a lesser extent) bring in some cash for villagers.
A treasured food is, in fact, the coconut. This set of pictures show how coconut is used in the village. True, coconut oil now is reserved only for frying mandazi. But it also is used as a hair conditioner, and the coconut meat is eaten between meals. I noted also that dental hygiene and health were good in the village. Perhaps the coconut and fish oils influence this (as per the work of Dr. Weston A. Price).
Photos L-R: Using a traditional conical basket (kikatu), coconut milk is pressed from the grated meat; Straining coconut milk from the grated meat, which is then heated to make oil; Common breakfast food (and the main source of cash income), the mandazi, is still cooked in coconut oil
Note: All photos were taken by G. Berardi
Thursday, February 19, 2009
Despite maize in the fields, it is widely known that farmers are hoarding stocks in many districts. Farmers are refusing the NCPB/government price of Sh1,950 per 90-kg bag. They are waiting to be offered at least the same amount of money as that which was being assigned to imports (Bii, 2009b). “The country will continue to experience food shortages unless the Government addresses the high cost of farm inputs to motivate farmers to increase production,” said Mr. Jonathan Bii of Uasin Gish (Bartoo & Lucheli, 2009; Bii, 2009a, 2009b; Bungee, 2009).
Pride and politics, racism and corruption are to blame for food deficits (Kihara & Marete, 2009; KNA, 2009; Muluka, 2009; Siele, 2009). Clearly, what are needed in Kenya are food system planning, disaster management planning, and protection and development of agricultural and rural economies.
Click here for the full text.
Photos taken by G. Berardi
Cabbage, an imported food (originally), and susceptible to much pest damage.
Camps still remain for Kenya’s Internally Displaced Persons resulting from post-election violence forced migrations. Food security is poor.
Lack of sustained recent short rains have resulted in failed maize harvests.
Friday, January 16, 2009
Today I went to a lunch time discussion of sustainability. This concept promoted development with an equitable eye to the triple bottom line - financial, social, and ecological costs. We discussed the how it seemed relatively easier to discuss the connections between financial and ecological costs, than between social costs and other costs. Sustainable development often comes down to "green" designs that consider environmental impacts or critiques of the capitalist model of financing.
As I thought about sustainable development, or sustainable community management if you are a bit queasy with the feasibility of continuous expansion, I considered its corollaries in the field of disaster risk reduction. It struck me again that it is somewhat easier to focus on some components of the triple bottom line in relation to disasters.
The vulnerability approach to disasters has rightly brought into focus the fact that not all people are equally exposed to or impacted by disasters. Rather, it is often the poor or socially marginalized most at risk and least able to recover. This approach certainly brings into focus the social aspects of disasters.
The disaster trap theory, likewise, brings into focus the financial bottom line. This perspective is most often discussed in international development and disaster reduction circles. It argues that disasters destroy development gains and cause communities to de-develop unless both disaster reduction and development occur in tandem. Building a cheaper, non-earthquake resistant school in an earthquake zone, may make short-term financial sense. However,over the long term, this approach is likely to result in loss of physical infrastructure, human life, and learning opportunities when an earthquake does occur.
What seems least developed to me, though I would enjoy being rebutted, is the ecological bottom line of disasters. Perhaps it is an oxymoron to discuss the ecological costs of disasters, given that many disasters are triggered natural ecological processes like cyclones, forest fires, and floods. It might also be an oxymoron simply because a natural hazard disaster is really looking at an ecological event from an almost exclusively human perspective. Its not a disaster if it doesn't destroy human lives and human infrastructure. But, the lunch-time discussion made me wonder if there wasn't something of an ecological bottom line to disasters in there somewhere. Perhaps it is in the difference between an ecological process heavily or lightly impacted by human ecological modification. Is a forest fire in a heavily managed forest different from that in an unmanaged forest? Certainly logging can heighten the impacts of heavy rains by inducing landslides, resulting in a landscape heavily rather than lightly impacted by the rains. Similar processes might also be true in the case of heavily managed floodplains. Flooding is concentrated and increased in areas outside of levee systems. What does that mean for the ecology of these locations? Does a marsh manage just as well in low as high flooding? My guess would be no.
And of course, there is the big, looming disaster of climate change. This is a human-induced change that may prove quite disasterous to many an ecological system, everything from our pine forests here, to arctic wildlife, and tropical coral reefs.
Perhaps, we disaster researchers, need to also consider a triple bottom line when making arguments for the benefits of disaster risk reduction.
Tuesday, January 13, 2009
This past week the Northwest experienced a severe barrage of weather systems back to back. Everyone seemed to be affected. Folks were re-routed on detours, got soaked, slipped on ice, or had to spend money to stay a little warmer. In Whatcom and Skagit Counties, there are hundreds to thousands of people currently in the process of recovering and cleaning-up after the floods. These people live in the rural areas throughout the county, with fewer people knowing about their devastation and having greater vulnerability to flood hazards.
Luckily, there are local agencies and non-profits who are ready at a moment’s call to help anyone in need. The primary organization that came to the aid of the flood victims was the American Red Cross.
The last week I began interning and volunteering with one of these non-profits, the Mt. Baker American Red Cross (ARC) Chapter. While I am still in the process of getting screened and officially trained, I received first-hand experience and saw how important this organization is to the community.
With the flood waters rising throughout the week, people were flooded out of their homes and rescued from the overflowing rivers and creeks. As the needs for help increased, hundreds of ARC volunteers were called to service. Throughout the floods there have been several shelters opened to accommodate the needs of these flood victims. On Saturday I was asked to help staff one of these shelters overnight in Ferndale.
While I talked with parents and children, I became more aware of the stark reality of how these people have to recover from having all their possessions covered in sewage and mud and damaged by flood waters. In the meantime, these flood victims have all their privacy exposed to others in a public shelter, while they work to find stability in the middle of all the traumas of the events. As I sat talking and playing with the children, another thought struck me. Children are young and resilient, but it must be very difficult when they connect with a volunteer and then lose that connection soon after. Sharing a shelter with the folks over the weekend showed a higher degree of reality and humanity to the situation than the news coverage ever could.
I posted this bit about my volunteer experience because it made me realize something about my education and degree track in disaster reduction and emergency planning. We look at ways to create a more sustainable community, and we need to remember that community service is an important part of creating this ideal. Underlying sustainable development is the triple bottom line (social, economy, and environment). Volunteers and non-profits are a major part of this social line of sustainability. Organizations like the American Red Cross only exist because of volunteers. So embrace President-elect Obama’s call for a culture of civil service this coming week and make a commitment to the organization of your choice with your actions or even your pocketbook. Know that sustainable development cannot exist with out social responsibility.
Thursday, January 8, 2009
Its been two days now that schools have been closed in Whatcom County, not for snow, but for rain and flooding. This unusual event coincides with record flooding throughout Western Washington, just a year after record flooding closed I5 for three days and Lewis County businesses experienced what they then called an unprecedented 500 year flood. I guess not.
There are many strange things about flood risk notation, and this idea that a 500 year flood often trips people up. They often believe a flood of that size will happen only once in 500 years. On a probabilistic level, this is inaccurate. A 500 year flood simply has a .2% probability of happening each year. A more useful analogy might be to tell people they are rolling a 500 sided die every year and hoping that it doesn’t come up with a 1. Next year they’ll be forced to roll again.
But, this focus on misunderstandings of probability often hides an even larger societal misunderstanding . Flood risk changes when we change the environment in which it occurs. If a flood map tells you that you are not in the flood plain, better check the date of the map. Most maps are utterly out of date and many vastly underestimate present flood risk. There are several reasons this happens. Urban development, especially development with a lot of parking lots and buildings that don’t let water seep into the ground, will cause rainwater to move quickly into rivers rather than seep into the ground and slowly release. Developers might complain that they are required to create runoff catchment wetlands when they do build. They do, but these requirements may very well be based upon outdated data on flood risk. Thus, each new development never fully compensates for its runoff, a small problem for each site but a mammoth problem when compounded downstream.
Deforesting can have the same effect, with the added potential for house-crushing and river-clogging mudslides. Timber harvesting is certainly an important industry in our neck of the woods. Not only is commercial logging an important source of jobs for many rural and small towns, logging on state Department of Natural Resource land is the major source of funding for K-12 education. Yet, commercial logging, like other industries, suffers from a problem of cost externalization. When massive mudslides occurred during last year’s storm, Weyerhaeuser complained that it wasn’t it’s logging practices, but the fact that it was an unprecedented, out of the blue, 500 year storm that caused it. While it is doubtful the slides would have occurred uncut land, that isn’t the only fallacy. When the slide did occur, the costs of repairing roads, treatment plants, and bridges went to the county and often was passed on to the nation’s tax payers through state and federal recovery grants. Thus, what should have been paid by Weyerhaeuser, 500 year probability or not, was paid by someone else.
Finally, there is local government. Various folks within local governments set regulations for zoning, deciding what will be built and where. Here is the real crux of the problem. Local government also gets an increase in revenue in the form of property, sales, and business income taxes. Suppress the updating of flood plain maps, and you get a short term profit and often, a steady supply of happy voters. You might think these local governments will have to pay when the next big flood comes, but often that can be avoided. Certainly, they must comply with federal regulations on flood plain management to be part of the National Flood Insurance program, but that plan has significant leeway and little monitoring. Like the commercial logging, disaster-stricken local governments can often push the recovery costs off to individual homeowners through the FEMA homeowner’s assistance program, and off to state and federal agencies by receiving disaster recovery and community development grants and loans. Certainly, some communities are so regularly devastated, and are so few resources, that disasters simply knock them down before they can given stand up again. But others have found loopholes and can profit by continuing to use old food maps and failing to aggressively control flood plain development.
What is it going to take to really change this system and make it unprofitable to profit from bad land use management?
Here’s a good in-depth article on last year’s landslides in Lewis County. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2008048848_logging13m.html
An interesting article on the failure of best management practices in development catchment basins can be found here: Hur, J. et al (2008) Does current management of storm water runoff adequately protect water resources in developing catchments? Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 63 (2) pp. 77-90.
Monday, December 29, 2008
It’s difficult to imagine a more colorful book, celebrating locally-grown and –marketed foods, than David Westerlund’s Simone Goes to the Market: A Children’s Book of Colors Connecting Face and Food. This book is aimed at families and the foods they eat. Who doesn’t want to know where their food is coming from – the terroir, the kind of microclimate it’s produced in, as well as who’s selling it? Gretchen sells her pole beans (purple), Maria her Serrano peppers (green), Dana and Matt sell their freshly-roasted coffee (black), Katie her carrots (orange), a blue poem from Matthew, brown potatoes from Roslyn, yellow patty pan squash from Jed, red tomatoes (soft and ripe) from Diana, and golden honey from Bill (and his bees). This is a book perfect for children of any age who want to connect to and with the food systems that sustain community. Order from firstname.lastname@example.org.

The Brazilian Supreme Court's recognition of same-sex unions in early May marks the latest victory for gay rights in Latin America. The Court's ruling grants equal legal rights to same-sex civil unions as those enjoyed by married heterosexuals, including retirement benefits, joint tax declarations, inheritance rights, and child adoption.
An Unlikely Victory
As the world's largest Roman Catholic country, Brazil was an unlikely venue for such a promising gay rights victory. The Roman Catholic Church has actively fought proposals for same-sex unions in Brazil, arguing that the Brazilian Constitution defines a "family entity" as "a stable union between a man and a woman."2 The Catholic Church responded to the recent ruling with outrage. As Archbishop Anuar Battisti put it, the Supreme Court's decision marked a "frontal assault" on the sanctity of the family.3
The Catholic Church is losing its power in Brazil, which helped pave the way for the Supreme Court's recent decision in favor of homosexuals. Nevertheless, homophobia retains a tenacious grip on Brazilian society. Despite the fact that the nation boasts the world's largest gay pride parade, the LGBT movement has been unable to achieve fundamental progress and quell discrimination at a societal level. For instance, Marcelo Cerqueira, the head of the Gay Group of Bahia, claims the country is "number one when it comes to assassination, discrimination and violence against homosexuals."4 Additionally, in a disconcerting report, the Gay Group of Bahia found that 260 Brazilian gay people were murdered in 2010, exemplifying the level of hostility towards homosexuals.5 Because of this discriminating environment, gay rights activists traditionally have had little success in Brazil. Most notably, Congress disregarded proposals for gay rights legislation for nearly ten years.
The Supreme Court’s recent ruling was therefore a major turning point after a history of protracted, unsuccessful struggles. The judicial decision was made in response to two lawsuits, one of which was filed by Rio de Janeiro Governor Sérgio Cabral and the other by the Office of the Attorney General. While Congress repeatedly ignored requests for equal rights for gay Brazilian citizens, the Supreme Court argued that "Those who opt for a homosexual union cannot be treated less than equally as citizens."6 In this way, by appealing to the judicial system, the LGBT movement was able to achieve success despite deep-seated hostility throughout Brazilian society and in other branches of the government.
Latin America's Gay Rights Revolution
Professor Omar Encarnación of Bard College calls the recent string of gay rights legislation in Latin America a "gay rights revolution."7 Brazil's ruling came on the heels of several other noteworthy gay rights victories in Latin America, such as Uruguay’s legalization of same-sex civil unions in 2007. Shortly thereafter, in 2010, Argentina became the first Latin American nation and eighth nation worldwide to legalize gay marriage. Other landmark decisions in the past few years include Uruguay's decision to allow all men and women, regardless of sexual orientation, to serve in the military and Mexico City's legalization of same-sex civil unions.
The recent surge in gay rights victories throughout Latin America is altogether stunning, considering the region has generally been regarded as very homophobic. The Catholic Church has traditionally been a formidable enemy to gay rights movements in the region, but the secularization of much of Latin America has led to the impressive expansion of opportunities for gay rights movements.
Yet this success of gay rights movements throughout Latin America cannot be attributed solely to the declining importance of religion in the region. It is equally important, if not more so, to recognize the vital roles played by gay activist groups and the dynamic strategies these groups employ. For instance, gay rights groups in Brazil were able to reverse legislation banning gays from the workplace by forming partnerships with progressive businesses. In recent years, the use of social media has provided much of the gay movement's momentum by enhancing activist groups' ability to communicate and spread information. For instance, as Javier Corrales notes, by simply posting a video of a hate crime in San Juan or of a gay wedding in Argentina on YouTube, gay rights groups have been able to reach thousands of people and garner support.8 These innovative strategies have brought success despite a notably hostile environment towards homosexuals.
Through a comparison with the United States, we can see how remarkable the success of gay rights in Latin America has been. Latin America is marked by a much more homophobic environment than the US, according to a survey conducted by Mitchell Seligson and Daniel Moreno Morales.9 However, although the US has lower levels of societal discrimination towards gays, it is hard to imagine that the United States would completely legalize same-sex civil unions or gay marriage on a national scale. The fact that this legalization occurred in several Latin American nations, despite the formidable opposition there, makes these recent rulings even more significant.
Furthermore, the recent victories for gay rights exemplify the considerable progress toward the region's consolidation of democracy. The three Latin American countries that have now legalized same-sex unions—Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay—were each ruled by repressive military regimes just over two decades ago. Even Colombia, which is one of the region's worst human rights violators, granted same-sex unions equal rights regarding social security benefits and inheritance rights in 2007. The fact that gay liberation movements have been successful in these unlikely places is a testament to how far these countries have progressed in recent years.
 Marilia Brocchetto and Luciani Gomes. "Same-sex unions recognized by Brazil's high court." 5 May 2011.
Yana Marull. "Brazil top court recognizes same-sex civil unions." American Free Press. 5 May 2011.
 Omar Encarnación. "A Gay Rights Revolution in Latin America." Americas Quarterly. 17 May 2011.
 Javier Corrales. "Latin American Gays: The Post-Left Leftists." Americas Quarterly. 19 March 2010.
 Mitchell A. Seligson and Daniel E. Moreno Morales, "Gay in the Americas," Americas Quarterly, Winter 2010.

By Elliot Mamet
On June 23rd, 1972, President Nixon signed Title IX into law. Nearly 40 years later, the passage of Title IX is viewed as an unequivocal milestone in the struggle to protect, defend and expand civil liberties. As we celebrate Title IX’s 40th birthday, it is worth reflecting on its significance, as well as on the challenges that lie ahead.
Title IX mandates that federally funded institutions may not exclude or discriminate from an educational program or activity on the basis of sex. The law leverages federal funds in order to require equal opportunity for men and women. There are exceptions to Title IX (like sororities or the Boy Scouts), although in general, Title IX has applied quite broadly and unilaterally to different institutions. Through Title IX, the doors have opened a little wider for equal opportunity in the United States.
Title IX shattered the stereotype that women are too “fragile” or “weak” to play sports, but Title IX goes so much further than sports. By prohibiting discrimination based on non-conformity with gender stereotypes, Title IX has been used as an effective tool for defending the civil rights and civil liberties of LGBT students. Additionally, Title IX prohibits discrimination
and harassment based on students’ gender identity, change of sex, and/or transgender status.
Yet even with these successes, enforcing Title IX still has its challenges. One important concern for policymakers is applying Title IX in a way that is conscious of the diversity of gender expression. In a society where gender and sexual orientation mean different things to different people, self-identifying as the normative “male” or “female” can be difficult
. A sound approach to Title IX regulation would prioritize meeting the needs of participants in a particular sport or program. Federally funded institutions should allow students to participate in programs and sports based on the gender with which they identify, in a way that is conscious to individual needs. In this way, programs and activities could act as a safe space where program leaders are more sensitive to the diversity of gender expression.
Looking back at the past 40 years under Title IX, it is clear that Title IX has grown to reflect a fundamental mindset—that human institutions, whether the soccer team or a PhD program—shouldn’t shut out certain categories of people a priori
. If the Declaration of Independence and the Emancipation Proclamation mean anything at all to us today, surely they must be interpreted as another step on our quest to “make declarations of freedom real
,” as Martin Luther King Jr. said. And surely, in its own way, Title IX reflects that quest. It is today, nearly 40 years after Title IX was passed into law, that Title IX’s lessons must be heeded with the utmost resolve.
Elliot Mamet is the summer Colorado College Public Interest Fellow at the ACLU of Colorado. He is an incoming sophomore at Colorado College, a four-year, private liberal arts school, where he is studying political science.

Jonas Salk, with both eloquence and simplicity, once stated that there are two primary approaches to treating ill people. He said that there are therapeutic techniques that directly impact specific symptoms, and there are methods that stimulate the body's own immune and defense system.
Whereas conventional medical treatments today tend to focus on the former goal of treating or controlling symptoms, various natural therapeutics primarily attend to the latter goal of augmenting the person's own inherent defenses. Although the direct treatment of symptoms often has immediate effects, its benefits tend to be short-term. Because such therapeutic interventions do not usually strengthen the person's own defenses, the individual remains prone to recurrence of their problem.
In contrast, therapeutic methods that strengthen a person's immune and defense system has longer term benefit and can prevent recurrence, but the benefit is sometimes achieved more slowly.
These generalizations about therapeutic methods are, however, just that, generalizations. There are plenty of exceptions, but these generalizations create a useful framework from which to evaluate the benefits and limitations of various therapeutic approaches.
Homeopathy and Immune Response
Homeopathy obviously fits into the class of therapeutic methods that augment the body's own defenses. The basis of homeopathy, called the principle of similars, suggests that a microdose of a substance will heal whatever pattern of symptoms this substances causes in large dose. This principle is also observed in the use of vaccinations and allergy treatments, though homeopathic medicines are both considerably smaller and safer in dose and more individualized to the person they are being used to treat.
Although homeopathic medicines are thought to stimulate the body's own defenses, how they do so remains a mystery. One study published in the European Journal of Pharmacology1 showed that a homeopathic medicine, Silicea, stimulated macrophages (macrophages are a part of the body's immune system which engulf bacteria and foreign substances). How or why Silicea was able to have this action or why exceedingly small doses of it are so active is unknown. In the same way that physicians and pharmacologists do not understand how many drugs work, we do not understand how homeopathic medicine actually work.
Homeopathic medicine do not simply stimulate the body's immune system to treat ill people, for they can also calm it when this is necessary for the healing of the individual. An example of this latter effect was observed in a study of the homeopathic treatment of people with rheumatoid arthritis, a condition which is considered an autoimmune illness. People with auto-immune ailments suffer because their body's immune system is over-active and it attacks the person's own cells, not just bacteria, viruses, or foreign substances.
This study on 46 people with rheumatoid arthritis showed that those given an individualized choice of homeopathic medicine got considerably more relief than those given a placebo.2 A total of 82% of those people given a homeopathic medicine experienced relief of pain, while only 21% of those given a placebo got a similar degree of relief.
Homeopathy and Infectious Diseases
Toward the end of Louis Pasteur's life, he had come to realize that germs may not be the cause of disease afterall, but instead are probably the results of disease. In other words, various bacteria and other infective organisms may be present when there is some type of disease, but infection tends to establish itself primarily when a person's own defenses are compromised sufficiently to make him susceptible to the infection.

Racism can be a tough thing to study. In situations where all things appear even, they might not be even at all. For example, in situations where employers are refusing to hire minority candidates, the argument could sometimes be made (although maybe not successfully) that there are extenuating circumstances. A truly successful study of race should be made in a laboratory of sorts. The only difference between two people should be skin color.
Well, thanks to the internet, the great equalizer, we do have such a situation, eBay. Three Yale and Harvard researchers conducted a study called, “Race Effects on Ebay.” The results? Americans are racist.
Even when selling the exact same items, buyers responded more favorably to white people than to black. From Good Technology:
The researchers auctioned off moderately priced baseball cards, which were photographed held in either a dark black hand or a white hand. Though the cards themselves were the same, cards held in a black hand sold for about 20 percent less than cards held in a white hand. What’s more, “the race effect was more pronounced in sales of minority player cards.”
The eBay study mimics a similar one from 2010. While that experiment, from the Centre for Economic Policy Research, focused on iPods sold via general online classified ads, the results were sadly the same: Black sellers received fewer responses and fewer cash offers than white sellers, and the cash offers they did receive were significantly lower. Beyond that, buyers corresponding with black sellers “exhibited lower trust,” according to the researchers. In other words, they were far less likely to accept delivery by mail (44 percent) and far more likely to object to the idea of making a long-distance payment (56 percent).
The 2010 study also found that there were regional discrepancies. The Northeast part of the U.S. was the worst, where black people received 32% fewer offers. The Midwest had a 23% gap and the South, 15%. There was virtually no difference in the West.

Memory loss (amnesia) is unusual forgetfulness. You may not be able to remember new events, recall one or more memories of the past, or both.
Forgetfulness; Amnesia; Impaired memory; Loss of memory; Amnestic syndrome
Normal aging may cause some forgetfullness. It's normal to have some trouble learning new material, or needing more time to remember it.
However, normal aging does NOT lead to dramatic memory loss. Such memory loss is due to other diseases. Sometimes, memory loss may be seen with depression. It can be hard to tell the difference between memory loss and confusion due to depression.
Some types of memory loss may cause you to forget recent or new events, past or remote events, or both. You may forget memories from a single event, or all events.
Memory loss may cause you to have trouble learning new information or forming new memories.
The memory loss may be temporary (transient), or permanent.
Memory loss can be caused by many different things. To determine a cause, your doctor or nurse will ask if the problem came on suddenly or slowly.
Many areas of the brain help you create and retrieve memories. A problem in any of these areas can lead to memory loss.
Causes of memory loss include:
- Alcohol or use of illicit drugs
- Not enough oxygen to the brain (heart stopped, stopped breathing, complications from anesthesia)
- Brain growths (caused by tumors or infection)
- Brain infections such as Lyme disease, syphilis, or HIV/AIDS
- Brain surgery, such as surgery to treat seizure disorders
- Cancer treatments, such as brain radiation, bone marrow transplant, or after chemotherapy
- Certain medications
- Certain types of seizures
- Depression, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia when symptoms have not been well controlled
- Dissociative disorder (not being able to remember a major, traumatic event; the memory loss may be short-term or long-term)
- Drugs such as barbiturates or benzodiazepines
- Electroconvulsive therapy (especially if it is long-term)
- Encephalitis of any type (infection, autoimmune disease, chemical/drug induced)
- Epilepsy that is not well controlled with medications
- Head trauma or injury
- Heart bypass surgery
- Illness that results in the loss of, or damage to, nerve cells (neurodegenerative illness), such as Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, or multiple sclerosis
- Long-term alcohol abuse
- Migraine headache
- Mild head injury or concussion
- Nutritional problems (vitamin deficiencies such as low vitamin B12)
- Permanent damage or injuries to the brain
- Transient global amnesia
- Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
A person with memory loss needs a lot of support. It helps to show them familiar objects, music, or photos.
Write down when the person should take any medication or complete any other important tasks. It is important to write it down.
If a person needs help with everyday tasks, or safety or nutrition is a concern, you may want to consider extended care facilities, such as a nursing home.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The doctor or nurse will perform a physical exam and ask questions about the person's medical history and symptoms. This will almost always include asking questions of family members and friends. They should come to the appointment.
Medical history questions may include:
- Can the person remember recent events (is there impaired short-term memory)?
- Can the person remember events from further in the past (is there impaired long-term memory)?
- Is there a loss of memory about events that occurred before a specific experience (anterograde amnesia)?
- Is there a loss of memory about events that occurred soon after a specific experience (retrograde amnesia)?
- Is there only a minimal loss of memory?
- Does the person make up stories to cover gaps in memory (confabulation)?
- Is the person suffering from low moods that impair concentration?
- Time pattern
- Has the memory loss been getting worse over years?
- Has the memory loss been developing over weeks or months?
- Is the memory loss present all the time or are there distinct episodes of amnesia?
- If there are amnesia episodes, how long do they last?
- Aggravating or triggering factors
- Has there been a head injury in the recent past?
- Has the person experienced an event that was emotionally traumatic?
- Has there been a surgery or procedure requiring general anesthesia?
- Does the person use alcohol? How much?
- Does the person use illegal/illicit drugs? How much? What type?
- Other symptoms
- What other symptoms does the person have?
- Is the person confused or disoriented?
- Can they independently eat, dress, and perform similar self-care activities?
- Have they had seizures?
Tests that may be done include:
Cognitive therapy, usually through a speech/language therapist, may be helpful for mild to moderate memory loss.
See: Dementia - homecare for information about taking care of a loved one with dementia.
Kirshner HS. Approaches to intellectual and memory impairments. In: Gradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, eds. Neurology in Clinical Practice. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2008:chap 6.
Luc Jasmin, MD, PhD, Department of Neurosurgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, and Department of Anatomy at UCSF, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. © 1997-
A.D.A.M., Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.

CentOS uses both font systems and they use different folders: http://www.centos.org/docs/5/html/Deployment_Guide-en-US/s1-x-fonts.html
Red Hat Enterprise Linux uses two subsystems to manage and display fonts under X: Fontconfig and xfs.
The newer Fontconfig font subsystem simplifies font management and provides advanced display features, such as anti-aliasing. This system is used automatically for applications programmed using the Qt 3 or GTK+ 2 graphical toolkit.
For compatibility, Red Hat Enterprise Linux includes the original font subsystem, called the core X font subsystem. This system, which is over 15 years old, is based around the X Font Server (xfs).
On CentOS5/Redhat it seems that XFS gets its fonts from the X config file /etc/X11/fs/config which points to /usr/share/X11/fonts, and fontconfig gets its config from /etc/fonts/font.conf which points to /usr/share/fonts. By default neither font system sees the fonts from the other system.
Seems that RH wants to move to fontconfig but still has some things that use XFS. Why they didnt just put all the fonts in 1 folder and pointed everything there so that both font systems had all the same fonts is a mystery.

Ears, Nose, and Throat Surgery
One of the most critical areas on the human body is the Ear, Nose and Throat area, commonly called ENT. Many times, obstructions or complications in this area can affect basic health system functions such as breathing, eating and sleeping.
Various surgeries for the ear, nose, and throat are available to improve health and functionality. Airway reconstruction is an option for patients with breathing difficulties such as constriction and noisy breathing, while vocal cord surgery addresses similar problems with sound and articulation.
In many cases, surgeons operate on delicate structures such as minute blood vessels, which requires a level of precision and expertise that our medical staff are skilled at providing. Common procedures in the ENT area can include:
Head and Neck
To find a surgeon at Trinity visit our Physician Finder.

Mars is a cold desert world. It is half the diameter of Earth and has the same amount of dry land. Like Earth, Mars has seasons, polar ice caps, volcanoes, canyons and weather, but its atmosphere is too thin for liquid water to exist for long on the surface. There are signs of ancient floods on Mars, but evidence for water now exists mainly in icy soil and thin clouds.
Featured Mission: Mars Science Laboratory/Curiosity
Curiosity, a robotic rover about the size of a small SUV, is designed to find whether the Red Planet ever was -- or is still today -- an environment suitable for life. The rover landed on Mars in August 2012.
Read More About Mars

With the hope of encouraging Pennsylvanians to better understand their personal finances, Governor Tom Corbett has declared April to be “Financial Education Month” in the state.
The administration believes a basic financial education is essential to ensuring that Pennsylvanians of all ages are prepared to manage money, credit, investments, and debt.
Pennsylvania Department of Banking is looking to both celebrate and draw attention to public and private education efforts. “One of our goals is to empower people. In the run up to the economic downturn, we saw a lot of very hardworking people make poor decisions with credit cards, mortgage financing, and home purchases,” said Department of Banking spokesperson Ed Novak.
The governor believes in order for Pennsylvanians to fully recover from the economic slide, they need to be responsible for better educating themselves. “It’s clear to us that as a starting point for getting ourselves out of this economic downturn, Pennsylvanians need to increase their financial literacy to help them navigate what is becoming an increasingly complex financial marketplace,” said Novak.

Emacs Lisp uses two kinds of storage for user-created Lisp objects: normal storage and pure storage. Normal storage is where all the new data created during an Emacs session are kept (see Garbage Collection). Pure storage is used for certain data in the preloaded standard Lisp files—data that should never change during actual use of Emacs.
Pure storage is allocated only while temacs is loading the
standard preloaded Lisp libraries. In the file emacs, it is
marked as read-only (on operating systems that permit this), so that
the memory space can be shared by all the Emacs jobs running on the
machine at once. Pure storage is not expandable; a fixed amount is
allocated when Emacs is compiled, and if that is not sufficient for
the preloaded libraries, temacs allocates dynamic memory for
the part that didn't fit. The resulting image will work, but garbage
collection (see Garbage Collection) is disabled in this situation,
causing a memory leak. Such an overflow normally won't happen unless
you try to preload additional libraries or add features to the
standard ones. Emacs will display a warning about the overflow when
it starts. If this happens, you should increase the compilation
SYSTEM_PURESIZE_EXTRA in the file
src/puresize.h and rebuild Emacs.
This function makes a copy in pure storage of object, and returns it. It copies a string by simply making a new string with the same characters, but without text properties, in pure storage. It recursively copies the contents of vectors and cons cells. It does not make copies of other objects such as symbols, but just returns them unchanged. It signals an error if asked to copy markers.
This function is a no-op except while Emacs is being built and dumped; it is usually called only in preloaded Lisp files.
The value of this variable is the number of bytes of pure storage allocated so far. Typically, in a dumped Emacs, this number is very close to the total amount of pure storage available—if it were not, we would preallocate less.
This variable determines whether
defunshould make a copy of the function definition in pure storage. If it is non-
nil, then the function definition is copied into pure storage.
This flag is
twhile loading all of the basic functions for building Emacs initially (allowing those functions to be shareable and non-collectible). Dumping Emacs as an executable always writes
nilin this variable, regardless of the value it actually has before and after dumping.
You should not change this flag in a running Emacs.

35 - The Philosopher's Toolkit: Aristotle's Logical Works
Peter discusses Aristotle’s pioneering work in logic, and looks at related issues like the ten categories and the famous “sea battle” argument for determinism.
You are missing some Flash content that should appear here! Perhaps your browser cannot display it, or maybe it did not initialize correctly.
• J. Hintikka, Time and Necessity. Studies in Aristotle's Theory of Modality (Oxford:1973).
• W. Leszl, “Aristotle's Logical Works and His Conception of Logic,” Topoi 23 (2004), 71–100.
• R. Smith, "Logic," in J. Barnes (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle (Cambridge: 1995), 27-65.
• S. Waterlow, Passage and Possibility (Oxford: 1982).
On the "sea battle" problem:
• G.E.M. Anscombe, “Aristotle and the Sea Battle,” in J.M.E. Moravcsik (ed.), Aristotle: a Collection of Critical Essays, (1967), reprinted from Mind 65 (1956).
• D. Frede, “The Sea-Battle Reconsidered: a Defence of the Traditional Interpretation,” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 3 (1985).
• J. Hintikka, “The Once and Future Sea Fight: Aristotle’s Discussion of Future Contingents in de Interpretatione 9,” in his Time and Necessity (see above).

Find More Accuracy in the Treatment of Brain Tumor by Stereotactic Radiosurgery
Stereotactic radiotherapy (also called stereotaxy) is a type of minimally invasive surgical intervention. It uses radiation treatment to deliver a large and precise radiation dose to the tumor area in a single session. This type of surgery applies a three-dimensional coordinates system to locate small targets inside the body. With the help of gamma knife, radiation beams are focused at the tumor from various angles for a short period of time. Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) can be performed by several other machines such as X-Knife, CyberKnife and Clinac. It is used to treat brain tumors and other brain disorders that are difficult to be treated by regular surgery.
This type of surgery works under three main components. The first one is stereotactic planning system; it includes multimodality image matching tools. The stereotactic atlas is a series of cross sections of anatomical structure. In most atlases, the three dimensions are as latero-lateral (x), dorso-ventral (y) and rostro-caudal (z). Another one is a stereotactic device or apparatus which uses a set of three coordinates (x, y and z). And the last one is stereotactic localization and placement procedure. This therapy works in the same way as other forms of radiation treatment. Instead of removing the tumor, stereotactic radiotherapy damages the DNA of tumor cells. In this way malignant and metastatic tumors may shrink more rapidly.
Stereotactic radiosurgery can effectively treat different types of tumors including benign, malignant, primary, metastatic, single and multiple. A study in 2008 by The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center revealed that SRS and Whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT) for the treatment of metastatic brain tumors have more that twice the risk of developing leaning and memory problems than treated with SRS alone.

NOLAN, MATTHEW (1834–1864). Matthew Nolan, Mexican War veteran, Texas Ranger, Nueces County sheriff, and Confederate cavalry officer, was born in 1834 in Providence, Rhode Island. He was the son of Irish immigrants. Some sources claim he was born in New York. His parents died when he and his older sister Mary and younger brother Tom were children, leaving them on their own. Mary married a soldier and enlisted her brothers as buglers in Zachary Taylor's Second Dragoons. She became a laundress so that she could travel with her husband and brothers to Texas on the eve of the Mexican War. They settled in Corpus Christi until Taylor moved his army to the Rio Grande valley at the beginning of the war. By this time Mary was working as a hospital matron. Matthew and Tom Nolan were at the battles of Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma and traveled with the army until the end of the war in 1848 and then returned to Corpus Christi.
In 1850 Nolan joined John S. "Rip" Ford's Texas Ranger unit as a bugler where he distinguished himself in a May 26, 1850, skirmish with Comanche Indians near Fort Merrill. In Ford's memoirs he wrote that Nolan "rushed barefoot through prickly pear to get a shot at the retreating foe." Nolan stayed with Rip Ford and the Texas Rangers during the 1850s and fought minor territorial battles throughout Texas. In 1858 Nolan was elected sheriff of Nueces County, and he named his brother Tom a deputy sheriff.
At the outbreak of the Civil War, Nolan raised a company of volunteers from Corpus Christi and joined the Second Texas Cavalry. He fought along the Mexican border with his former commander Ford. He returned to Corpus Christi to marry Margaret J. McMahon on May 22, 1862. Nolan rejoined his regiment to take part in the January 1, 1863, recapture of Galveston Island. His actions in the battle of Galveston led to his promotion to major.
Later in 1863 Nolan was sent back to a volatile Corpus Christi to help keep the peace in South Texas and monitor the coast. Corpus Christi was equally divided between Northern and Southerner sympathizers. Ford employed Nolan to keep watch on Cecilio Balerio, Union sympathizer and rancher. With Ford's blessing, Nolan was reelected to county sheriff on August 1, 1864. His job was to arrest, "perfidious renegades." One of these "renegades," former sheriff H. W. Barry, was a Mexican War veteran who was providing cotton to Union ships in the Gulf of Mexico. Nolan reported to Ford that he had seen Barry in action. By December 1864 Corpus Christi was suffering the effects of war, and tensions ran high. On the night of December 22, 1864, Nolan and horse trader J. C. McDonald met outside of the Nolan home, and while they talked, two of Barry's stepsons, Frank and Charles Gravis, appeared and started an argument with Nolan. In the commotion that ensued, one of the Gravis brothers shot and fatally wounded Nolan. Other sources claim that Nolan was in the process of arresting McDonald, and the two brothers, intending to kill McDonald for seducing their sister, accidentally shot Nolan instead.
Matthew Nolan is buried next to his brother Tom in the Old Bayview Cemetery in Corpus Christi.
Murphy Givens, "Corpus Christi History: The Nolans arrive in Corpus Christi," Corpus Christi Caller–Times, August 23, 2000 (http://www.caller2.com/2000/august/23/today/murphy_g/2672.html), accessed March 23, 2011.
The following, adapted from the Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition, is the preferred citation for this article.Stephanie P. Niemeyer, "NOLAN, MATTHEW," Handbook of Texas Online (http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/fno33), accessed May 22, 2013. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

scintillation counterArticle Free Pass
scintillation counter, radiation detector that is triggered by a flash of light (or scintillation) produced when ionizing radiation traverses certain solid or liquid substances (phosphors), among which are thallium-activated sodium iodide, zinc sulfide, and organic compounds such as anthracene incorporated into solid plastics or liquid solvents. The light flashes are converted into electric pulses by a photoelectric alloy of cesium and antimony, amplified about a million times by a photomultiplier tube, and finally counted. Sensitive to X rays, gamma rays, and charged particles, scintillation counters permit high-speed counting of particles and measurement of the energy of incident radiation.
What made you want to look up "scintillation counter"? Please share what surprised you most...

Learning how to read coherently and write effectively teaches you to think critically, increases your vocabulary, and improves your language and research skills. No matter what field you enter, communication and writing skills are important and highly sought after by employers. Maranatha’s English major will expose you to enduring literary works and teach you to write more effectively, whether you write sermons, correspondence, books, magazine articles, or other forms of communication. Because of its emphasis on critical thinking and writing, English is also one of the best ways to prepare for graduate school.
Unlike secular English programs that promote relativistic theory about language, Maranatha’s English major teaches students to “approve things that are excellent” (Phil. 1:10) and to evaluate literature from a moral and biblical perspective. The English major will not only immerse you in the wide world of literature and awaken your cultural awareness but also equip you to discern objective truth and beauty according to God’s standard.
An English minor is also available for those majoring in another field who want to improve their ability to think, read, and write effectively through an acquaintance with excellent literary works.
This is the suggested class list for the English major. You may also look over the details for our English Education major.
|English Composition 1||3||English Composition 2||3|
|Computer Information System Elective||1||Computer Information System Elective||2|
|Christian Life 1||1||New Testament Survey||2|
|Old Testament Survey||2||Minor||3|
|Fundamentals of Public Speaking||2||Music Elective||2|
|The Modern World||3||Science Elective||3|
|British Literature Survey to 1789||3||British Literature Survey: 1789 to Present||3|
|Composition and Literature||3||American Masterpieces||3|
|Elementary Spanish 1||3||Elementary Spanish 2||3|
|Computer Information System Elective||1||Baptist Heritage||3|
|Christian Life 2||1||Bible Elective||2|
|Principles of Bible Study||2||Minor||3|
|Writing Elective||3||Literary Criticism||3|
|Period Literature Elective||3||Computer Information System Elective||1|
|Intermediate Spanish 1||3||Intermediate Spanish 2||3|
|Introduction to Philosophy||2||Bible Doctrine 1||3|
|Christian Life 3||1||Minor||3|
|Minor||3||American Studies Elective||3|
|Period Literature Elective||3||Period Literature Elective||3|
|Writing Elective||3||Writing or Period Literature Elective||3|
|Bible Doctrine 2||3||English Elective||3|
|Humanities Elective||3||Humanities Elective||3|
- Copy editor
- Creative writer
- English as a Second Language teacher
- Linguistic specialist
- Literacy tutor
- Literature specialist
Chelsie (Czichray) Messenger (’08) is enrolled in the Professional Communications program at Clemson University and hopes to someday work in business communications or public relations. She previously taught English at Easley Christian School in Easley, SC. “My academic advisor, Nathan Huffstutler, helped me sort out my future career goals and helped me develop my love of technical writing,” Messenger said.

Dry, flaky skin, also referred to as xerosis, not only looks unattractive, it can be uncomfortably tight and itchy. In severe cases, the skin is so dry that fissures and cracks develop which can become inflamed or infected. The symptoms worsen in the winter months when skin is exposed to dry air and heat, but some people deal with xerosis all year round.
Dry skin is caused by a lack of moisture in the outer layer of the skin. The outermost layer of the skin contains lipids. These lipids consist of ceramides, fatty acids and cholesterol that help to hold in water and prevent dryness. People with dry skin often have lower levels of ceramides. This affects the skin’s ability to retain moisture. When the outer layer of skin is too dry, skin cells aren’t shed properly and the cells build up on the surface of the skin causing it to look rough and flaky.
Some people are prone towards dry skin genetically, but lifestyle habits play a role too. Ceramides that keep skin moist and supple can be stripped away by using harsh cleansers and detergents, washing skin in hot water, exposing skin to chemicals, frequent bathing and exposure to dry air or extremes in temperature. Areas with the fewest oil glands such as the extremities and trunk are most susceptible.
It’s important to reduce your skin’s exposure to elements that damage the lipid layer and remove moisture from the skin. Some people live in homes with a low humidity. Adding a home humidifier to increase moisture in the air is a simple way to sooth dry, irritated skin. Staying covered up outdoors in the winter helps too.
Another problem that aggravates xerosis is excessive exposure to water, especially hot water. Dry skin was less common years ago when people didn’t have the convenience of taking a shower every day. Using harsh cleansers and bath products including soap also worsen the problem by stripping away the lipids and oils that keep skin moist. A better alternative is to use a soap-free cleanser which contains ingredients that remove dirt while helping to repair the protective lipid barrier. Keep baths short, and use warm, not hot, water. A brief shower is a better alternative.
After cleansing, it’s important to moisturize. Pat skin dry and immediately apply a layer of moisturizer while skin is still slightly damp. Choose one that contains ingredients known to be effective for dry skin such as hyaluronic acid, glycerin, alpha-hydroxy acids or urea. Alpha-hydroxy acids have the additional advantage of smoothing the skin surface and improving its texture so it reflects light better, making skin look more youthful. Stay away from lanolin and fragrance which can irritate the skin.
A lotion works well for xerosis on the body, but creams are better for treating facial dryness. Select a product which contains hyaluronic acid and glycerin along with other moisturizers such as shea butter and safflower seed oil to retain moisture. Using a combination of moisturizers also helps to smooth out the appearance of fine lines and makes skin feel supple and silky.
Dry skin is more than just a cosmetic problem. It can make skin feel itchy and uncomfortable. Fortunately, it can be treated by making a few lifestyle changes and using the right skin care products.

Gonorrhoea - the drugs don't work
Published: 23rd Dec 2011 08:41:37
The prospect of untreatable gonorrhoea has provoked alarm around the world, and there are no new classes of antibiotics in development.
In this week's Scrubbing Up column, Peter Greenhouse of the British Association for Sexual Health & HIV (BASHH) argues financial incentives will be needed to seek a new cure.
We're all familiar with stories about hospital-acquired superbugs - MRSA and the like - becoming more difficult to treat, and are fearful whenever an elderly relative needs in-patient care.
But now, with a report from Japan of multidrug-resistant gonorrhoea, and the festive season in full swing, the spectre of an untreatable sexually transmitted infection looms over us - and our teenagers - for the first time in a generation.
Since penicillin was first used to treat gonorrhoea in 1943, the organism has gradually developed novel means of evading control by each new antibiotic.
For treatment to be effective and practical, it must be simple to administer by mouth as a single dose, achieving a high enough concentration of the drug in the body to treat over 95% of infections.
If the efficacy drops below this figure, the treatment has to change.
But over-the-counter medication, widely available in Africa and Asia means people self-medicate often taking the wrong dose at the wrong time, perhaps with alcohol which further reduces the concentration of the drug.
Strains of gonorrhoea which need a higher concentration of a drug to kill them become the dominant ones. This keeps happening until the drug no longer works.
If gonorrhoea becomes untreatable in these countries, the effect on increasing HIV rates could be disastrous - because any sexually transmitted infection which causes inflammation and discharge increases the transmission efficiency of HIV.
On average, transmission is five times more likely to occur if gonorrhoea or chlamydia are present
In the UK, the situation is monitored annually by the Health Protection Agency, providing an essential early warning of drugs which are about to fail, allowing a switch of treatment regimes before they become ineffective.
There's a desperate world-wide demand for new antibiotics, yet the drug companies aren't interested”
Ciprofloxacin - a drug introduced in the mid-1980s after the failure of penicillin - lasted in the UK until 2002: This may have survived longer because of the world-wide drop in gonorrhoea rates following the arrival of HIV, when fear of the new virus meant people practised safe-sex and changed partners less.
But it had already failed in the Far East, some four years previously.
Resistance develops faster in homosexual men, not just because of high rates of partner change.
Most people don't realise that oral sex is an important route of transmission for gonorrhoea, which doesn't usually cause a sore throat.
Gonorrhoea mixes with organisms which live naturally in the rectum and throat, picking up new types of antibiotic resistance from these bugs.
The next drug, cefixime, was introduced around 2003, but lasted only six years in the UK before resistance rose suddenly, hitting 25% among homosexual men.
Now, their only treatment option is an injection (Ceftriaxone) which has recently failed in Japan.
But why isn't there a new drug in development?
Since the mid-1980s and the arrival of HIV, almost all drug company research has focused on antiviral medicines, with no new classes of antibiotics being produced since the 1970s, and none on the horizon.
There's a desperate world-wide demand for new antibiotics, yet the drug companies aren't interested, so how could we motivate them?
Financial reality dictates research policy: Why bother to develop a drug which works in one day or one week, when you could make one - such as an antidepressant, statin or antiviral - which must be taken for months, for years, or for life?
So either the new drug(s) would have to be seriously expensive, precluding their use where they would be most needed, or there would have to be a substantial reward offered, perhaps of a magnitude only affordable by a fund such as the Gates Foundation.
Yet even if novel drugs could be produced, the biology and transmission dynamics of gonorrhoea mean that each new regime would probably fail within five-to-ten years of its introduction, unless we use multi-dose, multi-drug regimes, which will be less practical and more expensive to administer.
Faced with this, what can we do to stay sexually healthy? Stay at home, or take your partner to the New Year party: If that's not possible, use condoms - meticulously, and visit your local clinic - frequently.
Harvard CitationBBC News, 2011. Gonorrhoea - the drugs don't work. [Online] (Updated 23 Dec 2011)
Available at: http://www.ukwirednews.com/news.php/212819-Gonorrhoea-the-drugs-dont-work [Accessed 14th May 2013]
At 07:53:07 in BusinessA group of international investors is interested in buying UK water supplier Severn Trent, the company has said....
At 07:49:21 in WalesMajor road safety works have started on a one-mile stretch of coast road at Flintshire which has been the scene of serious accidents....
At 07:48:53 in EnglandStuart Hazell is due to be sentenced later after admitting mid-trial to killing his partner's granddaughter....
At 07:47:03 in WalesAn independent TV company has issued redundancy notices to 10 members of staff due to a cut in work from Welsh language broadcaster S4C....
At 07:43:33 in WalesFurther forensic evidence is expected to be heard later in the trial of the man accused of murdering April Jones....
At 07:41:47 in WalesA Cardiff theatre was asked to explain by the Arts Council of Wales why there was no plan to tackle an £800,000 overspend, it has emerged....
At 07:40:22 in EntertainmentHollywood actress Angelina Jolie has undergone a double mastectomy to reduce her chances of getting breast cancer....
At 07:32:39 in HeadlinesA boat carrying Rohingya Muslims has capsized off western Burma, aid agencies say. ...
At 07:31:47 in BusinessIndia's top drugmaker Ranbaxy Laboratories is to pay a record fine in the US for lying to officials and selling badly made generic drug...
At 07:31:30 in Northern IrelandPolice have issued a description of a man they want to question about the rape of a teenage girl in west Belfast....
News In Other Categories
A group of international investors is interested in buying UK water supplier Severn Trent, the company has said....
Free wi-fi access is to be introduced at 25 of Scotland's busiest railway stations before the end of the year. ...
Major road safety works have started on a one-mile stretch of coast road at Flintshire which has been the scene of serious accidents....
What makes a great foreign minister? Some of those who have held the great office of state, including Lord Carrington, David Owen and David ...
It was a melodious spectacle....
With the doors to its brand new £1million training centre officially open, one of the UK's leading apprentice training providers, Bristol ba...

2011 State Poverty Data Underscore the Need to Protect Programs for Low-Income Women
New data from the Census was just released, and NWLC’s calculations show that many women and their families around the country are still struggling in the wake of the great recession. Though poverty stabilized between 2010 and 2011, protecting low income programs remains absolutely critical for women.
In 2011, more than one in five women was poor in Mississippi (22.3 percent) and Louisiana (20.6 percent). Only one state, New Hampshire, had a poverty rate of less than ten percent for women, at 8.9 percent. In the other 47 states and the District of Columbia, between 10 and 20 percent of women lived below the poverty line.
In 2011, more than half of female-headed families with children were poor in Kentucky (51.3 percent), Louisiana (50.3 percent), Mississippi (51.8 percent), and West Virginia (51.6 percent). In eight more states (AL, AR, ID, MI, NM, OH, SC, and TN), their poverty rates were 45 percent and above.
What about women of color? In eleven states, about a third or more of black women were poor (IA, IN, LA, ME, MI, MN, MS, SD, WI, WV, and, VT). Roughly a third of Hispanic women were poor in six states (IN, MS, NC, PA, RI, TN).
Yet again, these numbers underscore the importance of federal and state programs for low-income people. We’ve talked about this before, but with poverty rates at record highs, programs like Social Security, Medicare, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly food stamps), and the Earned Income Tax Credit, among others, are essential for keeping millions of women and families above the poverty line. We know that women disproportionately rely on these programs, making the message from the state poverty data clear: Programs for low-income families and individuals must be protected. We sincerely hope Congress is taking note.
Articles by Topic
Join the New Reproductive Health Campaign
Go to ThisIsPersonal.org to get the facts and tools you need to help protect women's reproductive health.

The Founding Fathers, as a group, were a band of very wise men. Perhaps the wisest was Benjamin Franklin, a rare combination of genius and solid common sense. He also had that attribute of truly wise people: the sense to hide his intellect to some extent behind a fog of good humor. How fortunate for America that throughout his life he placed his intellect at the service of his country, a country he understood at an early date embraced all of the colonies in British America.
At the end of his life his final great service to America was at the Constitutional Convention where his calming words helped bring disputing factions together to achieve the task of hammering a document together that has endured through the centuries. Many of the delegates noted the importance of Doctor Franklin in the process of bringing the Constitution to life. One of the delegates, Dr. James McHenry of Maryland, a surgeon who had served as an aide to General Washington during the Revolutionary War, recorded that as Franklin was leaving Constitution Hall “A lady asked Dr. (Benjamin) Franklin, “Well Doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?” “A republic,” replied the Doctor, “if you can keep it.”
I have always been struck by that answer, because Franklin indicated in it that it is the responsibility of each individual American to keep the nation a Republic, not the responsibility of someone else. Sound advice in 1787, sound advice in 2011.

While Americans and others may celebrate Easter only on a Sunday, that occasion is marked in Spain by an entire week of festivities known as Semana Santa, or Holy Week. The Holy Week festivals that take place all over the country are especially marked in Andalucia. Here, the emphasis is less on doleful repentance and more on celebration of the central figures of Christianity.
The central feature of all those activities are the notable processions that take place in every town in the region. The times, participants and style varies considerably from town to town. But almost all have some common themes.
Typically, traffic is closed off to allow for the floats and the hundreds or sometimes even thousands of people that precede or follow them. The festival is marked by religious figures dressed in Church finery carrying candles and directing the parade. Encircled by them is the main focus of the event: the floats.
Every float is a unique and creative construction that contains a figure of Jesus, Mary or an important saint.
A small statue of Saint Rocco, for example, may be held aloft on one platform, displaying his bare leg. He is regarded as a patron of the sick and the hopeful will often toss money onto the float, seeking relief or improvement.
Other floats will depict scenes from the Bible, early Christian stories, or any of a thousand different images that evoke memories of tales passed down through hundreds of generations. There is the Gitano del Polvorín, the Virgen de la Victoria and the Señor de Sevilla, among many more.
The processions, like the stories, are an ongoing tradition that has its origins in the early Middle Ages. As far back as 1,500 years ago the faithful annually walked with the platforms to celebrate the Annunciation, the Sermon on the Mount, the Rising from the Dead and other well-known scenes from the Bible.
For centuries – during the period Spain was ruled by Islamic Moors, Berbers, Arabs and others from North Africa – the festivals were forbidden. Not surprisingly, therefore, after the Reconquest by Christian kings and the re-establishment of Christianity in the country, the festivals started anew. They have been a regular event in Andalucia, with few interruptions, ever since.
But the natives are not the only participants. Church officials from Rome and elsewhere, along with people from around the world merely wanting to take part, celebrate the Holy Week festivals, too.
The celebrations ramp up a notch the final few days before Easter, making that an especially good time to visit in order to see or participate in Semana Santa. Musicians will play and sing as others carry banners, followed by Nazarenos dressed in tunics and masks.
Whether taking place in Cadiz or Cordoba, or any of the other dozens of cities large and small in Andalucia, the scene is similar. At the end of the procession, which often takes place from dusk to the following dawn, the float enters its individual sponsoring church and a hush comes over the crowd, signifying the culmination of Semana Santa.

Objective: To determine the prevalence of infant exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) among infants attending child health clinics in regional NSW; the association between such exposure and household smoking behaviours; and the factors associated with smoking restrictions in households with infants. Methods: Parents completed a computer-based questionnaire and infant urine samples were collected. Information was obtained regarding the smoking behaviours of household members and samples were analysed for cotinine. Results: Twenty seven per cent of infants had detectable levels of cotinine. Infant ETS exposure was significantly associated with the smoking status of household members, absence of complete smoking bans in smoking households and having more than one smoker in the home. Smoking households were significantly less likely to have a complete smoking ban in place. Conclusions: This study suggests that a significant proportion of the population group most vulnerable to ETS were exposed. Implications: Future efforts to reduce children's exposure to ETS need to target cessation by smoking parents, and smoking bans in households of infants where parents are smokers if desired reductions in childhood ETS-related illness are to be realised.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health Vol. 34, Issue 3, p. 269-273

Did You Know... The Facts About HPV?
The Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania
Last Modified: January 13, 2008
- HPV is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases in the world.
- By age 50, about 80% of women have been infected by some type of HPV.
- Most HPV infections do not cause any symptoms, therefore people are unaware that they are infected.
- 70-80% of HPV infections resolve spontaneously because our immune system fights them off.
- HPV is found in 99% of cervical cancers.
- There are 100 strains of HPV, 12 or more are classified as “high risk” and are linked to cancer.
- Most women with HPV do NOT develop cervical cancer.
- About 20% of women infected with HPV will develop chronic infection, and 2% of these will develop cervical cancer.
- Two strains of HPV are responsible for causing genital warts.
- Sexual intercourse is not necessary for transmission of HPV; skin to skin genital/genital, genital/anal and possibly genital/oral contact is sufficient for transmission.
- Use of condoms can reduce the risk of transmission, but it cannot prevent all transmission because some genital tissue remains uncovered.
- HPV is the cause of many high and moderate grade abnormal pap smears (CIN 2/3) and some low grade lesions (CIN 1).
- HPV is estimated to cause:
- 70% of anal cancers
- 50% of vaginal and vulvar cancers
- 50% of penile cancers
- 20% of head and neck cancers
- Researchers are looking at vaccinating men as well as women.

SAINT ALEXANDER NEVSKY
Alexander Nevsky (1220-1263) was proclaimed Saint of the Russian Orthodox Church by Metropolite Macarius in 1547
||| Back to the Royal Russia News Archive |||
||| Royal Russia Bulletin - Our Official Blog. Updated Daily With News Clips, Videos & Photographs |||
||| Royal Russia Video & Film Archive ||| Romanov & Imperial Russia Links |||
||| Our Bookshop: Books on the Romanovs & Imperial Russia ||| Gilbert's Books - Publisher of Books on the Romanovs |||
||| What's New @ Royal Russia - Updated Monthly |||
||| Return to Royal Russia - Directory ||| Return to Royal Russia - Main Page |||
Alexander Nevsky (1220-1263)
The life of a saint is always a mystery both for contemporaries and for descendants. Only our Lord and Savoir Jesus Christ can evaluate in full measure all the troubles and accomplishments of his hermit. The life of a saint, although it belongs to the church on our sinful earth, serves as an expression of the will of the Church in Heaven. We recall the saints in the most difficult minutes of our life, when it seemed there is no way out. And that is when God sends us his hermit. This happened to our Russian land more than once.
“In the year 1237,” runs the chronicle, “Batu Khan, cruel and godless, came to the Russian land and there were many Tartars with him. Batu Khan’s army was so big that one Russian had to fight against a thousand Tartars, and two – against a legion. There had never been a battle like that and there were no survivors.
Almost all Russia, except its Northern areas, languished under the Tartar-Mongol yoke for nearly 300 years.
Having conquered the Russian land, the Tartars went down the Volga River where they founded their kingdom – the “Golden Horde”. The town of Sarai was its capital.
Fortunately, the Tartars, though they imposed a heavy tax on Russia, left untouched the Russian Orthodox Church – the guarantee of the future liberation of Russia.
Alexander’s father, Grand Prince Yaroslav, undertook to take care of the devastated Russian land.
The Tartars and Mongols were not the only enemies Russia had to face at the time. Germans and Swedes threatened it from the West. Prince Alexander was 20 years old when he clashed with them for the first time.
Be that time Grand Prince Yaroslav, Alexander’s father, made him Prince of Novgorod. Taught martial arts since early childhood, Alexander was a skilled warrior. He was a man of military bearing and rare beauty. A contemporary wrote about him:
“I traveled about many countries and saw many celebrities, but never did I meet a prince or king equal to Prince Alexander.”
Prince Alexander was a wise and just ruler, and had good manners which made him very popular and highly respected. A contemporary of his wrote:
“He treated priests and monks with love and respect; he was considerate to the poor. And as for metropolitans and bishops, Prince Alexander honored them as he honored Jesus Christ.”
Prince Alexander’s subjects used to say: “Our Prince is sinless.”
In 1240 Prince Birger of Sweden sent his messengers to Prince Alexander with the following address.
“Hey, Prince Alexander! You may resist if you can. But remember that I am already here ready to conquer your land.”
For a long time Prince Alexander prayed in the St. Sofia Cathedral of Novgorod. He recalled the words of Jesus Christ: “No love is greater than the love of a man who gives life for his friends”. When he left the church, he addressed the army in these words:
“God is not force, God is truth.”
Prince Alexander entrusted his hopes to the Holy Trinity and made up his mind to fight.
The two armies met on the banks of the Neva River. One was the army of the proud invader, the other – of the Russian combatants. Our Lord helped his hermit — Prince Alexander. The legend has it that a soldier named Philip had a miraculous vision on the eve of the battle. He was on patrol on the Neva River. At dawn he saw a boat with martyr princes Boris and Gleb, ancestors of Prince Alexander, in full combat gear. Suddenly Philip heard a voice from the boat:
“Gleb, brother of mine! Hurry up, we must help our relative, Grand Prince Alexander.”
And the vision disappeared…
Encouraged by the miraculous vision, Alexander rushed his men to the scene and gave the battle on the banks of the Neva.
The battle was great, says the chronicle, and many people were killed, both Russians and Latins, and Prince Alexander left a scar on the face of their leader with a lance.
At this point I must explain that in medieval Russia all intruders from the West were called Latins.
After the glorious victory in the battle of the Neva Prince Alexander was awarded the honorary title Alexander Nevsky or Alexander of the Neva.
Birger and his warriors were defeated. But another threat to Russia already loomed in the West. The German crusaders (or Teutonic knights) conquered the ancient Russian fortress of Koporye. In 1241 Alexander Nevsky regained it, but in a year the Teutonic knights were back. They also seized the ancient Russian towns Pskov and Izborsk.
By the winter of 1242 Prince Alexander had gathered an army to defend Russia from the German crusaders. And on April 5th Russian warriors and Teutonic knights met in a merciless battle on the ice of Lake Chudskoye, also known as Lake Peipus.
Prince Alexander was praying: God and our Savior Jesus Christ! Help us defend our country, our mothers and fathers, our sons and daughters, as many years ago you helped Moses.
Here’s how one chronicler described the battle on Lake Chudskoye:
“Prince Alexander arranged his men in battle formation and moved towards the enemy. Alexander had many brave men, like King David in ancient times. It was a Saturday. The troops clashed when the sun rose. It was a fierce battle. The crackle of breaking spears and the clanging swords sounded as though the ice began to move. The ice couldn’t be seen for blood…
With God’s help the courageous Russian warriors defeated the Teutonic knights. Many knights drowned, others were taken prisoner, and only few of them escaped.
The contemporaries rejoiced over the victory in what would later be called “The Battle on the Ice”.
Entrance of Alexander Nevsky at Pskov after the Battle on the Ice. Artist: Valentin Serov
Having preserved Russian land in the West, the Grand Prince Alexander clearly realized he ought to maintain peace with the Tartars, the “Golden Horde”. Weak and devastated, Russia was in no position to fight again.
The Tartar yoke was a heavy burden on the Russian people. Before he could become a real ruler of his domain any Russian prince had to go to the “Golden Horde” where, after a long and humiliating procedure he might (or might not) get the so called “Yarlyk” – a license to rule. For many Russian princes, landlords and warriors the way to the “Golden Horde” was the last.
Alexander Nevsky too, went to see Batu Khan, the king of the Tartars. Batu Khan was amazed to see him; he told his nobles: “It’s true what they said, that there’s no one like him.” He paid the prince all due honors and let him go safely.
Alexander Nevsky had to go to Sarai, the capital of the “Golden Horde” on three occasions. And every time he was not sure he would return. But he never lost heart, for he was sure that God would not leave him.
In the “Golden Horde” Prince Alexander always remembered he was not only a prince but also a Christian. He told pagans and Muslims about the Christian faith, about our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and about the Holy Trinity. That was the beginning of Christianization of oriental peoples. Thousands of them turned their souls to Jesus Christ. Owing to the efforts of Alexander Nevsky the Russian Orthodox episcopate was established in Sarai in 1261.
In 1252 Alexander Nevsky became the absolute ruler of the Russian land. His responsibilities were enormous. He managed to protect southern, eastern and western boundaries of Russia firmly enough. His wise rule breathed a new life into Russia after the Tartar invasion. Churches, monasteries and towns were built all over the country.
Unfortunately, Prince Alexander’s farsighted policy was sometimes disapproved of by his fellow countrymen. In 1261 many Russian towns rose in revolt. The Tartar envoys who had come to collect tribute were killed. People waited for revenge with horror. Prince Alexander had to go to the Tartar capital again in order to ward off devastating raids against Russia. An excellent diplomat, the prince saved Russia and coped with his duty to God and the country.
However years of wars and the affairs of the state undermined Alexander Nevsky’s health. Upon his return from Sarai the Grand Prince fell ill and died in a small monastery of St. Feodor in the town of Gorodets, not far from the ancient city of Vladimir, on November 14, 1263. Just before his death Alexander, in keeping with the ancient Russian tradition, took monastic vows and was named Alexi.
The death of Alexander Nevsky in 1263. Artist: M. V. Nesterov
“Brethren! The sun has set over Russian land! Our Grand Prince Alexander has passes away. No one like him will be found in Russian land.”
And there was so much weeping and groaning as had never been heard before; the land trembled.
Nine days people carried Grand Prince Alexander’s body to the city of Vladimir where the burial service took place in the St. Vladimir Cathedral on November 23. During that service a miracle happened. When a priest about to pull a scroll with the last prayer in the late prince’s hand approached the body, the dead prince stretched out his hand, took the prayer and crossed his hands on his chest again. This episode caused awe and terror in the crowd present…
In 120 years, shortly before a great battle with the Tartars, a monk at the church where the Grand Prince Alexander’s body was buried saw a vision during the night praying.
The candles in front of Prince Alexander’s tomb suddenly lit up and two elders came up to the tomb and said: “Arise, our prince! Hurry to help your relative, Prince Dmitry!” And the saint prince arose and became invisible. After that vision the saint’s tomb was opened and the relics found undecayed. Many sick people who came close to them are said to have been healed.
The Russian Orthodox Church canonized Grand Prince Alexander.
1724 was the time of sweeping and rapid reforms of the Russian emperor Peter the Great. Those were the times of great changes in all spheres of life: spiritual, political, economic. The Emperor and the Holy Synod began to play the leading role in the Russian Church, whereas before the Patriarch was the most important figure. The Emperor and the Holy Synod decided that the relics of Alexander Nevsky be transferred to St. Petersburg, to the monastery built in his honor. On August 30 the capital of the Russian Empire welcomed the boat carrying the holy relics. Peter the Great piloted the boat himself; senior officials assisted him as sailors. A festive religious service for the Grand Prince took place at the monastery of his name. The commemoration of St. Alexander took place shortly after Russia’s victory in the Northern war of 1700-1721 against Sweden.
Almost for 200 years the relics of St. Alexander were kept in the Alexander Nevsky Monastery. After the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 the relics were taken away and put on display at a museum of atheism. As for the Alexander Nevsky Monastery, it was closed down. Alexander Nevsky remained a saint most revered by the Russian people. People named in his honor are too numerous to count.
In 1990 the relics of Saint Alexander Nevsky were returned to the Russian Orthodox Church to take their place in the Alexander Nevsky Lavra in St. Petersburg to the joy of all Russian believers. And we know that owing to St. Alexander’s prayers, our Russian land will be revived and stand firm forever…
Watercolour of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra in St. Petersburg
7 December, 2012

Definition of Amylo-
Amylo-: (Amyl- before a vowel.) A prefix pertaining to starch. From the Greek amylon, meaning starch.
Last Editorial Review: 6/14/2012
Back to MedTerms online medical dictionary A-Z List
Need help identifying pills and medications?
Get the latest health and medical information delivered direct to your inbox FREE!

Many conditions during pregnancy or labor can make a C-section necessary, including:
Prolonged or ineffective labor
Placenta issues if the placenta is positioned abnormally low in the cervix (placenta previa), it can block the birth canal.
The placenta can also suddenly separate from the uterus (placenta abruptia), causing the mother to hemorrhage and the baby to have an abnormal heart rate.
Disproportion or multiple births: if the baby’s head is too large for the birth canal, or if there is more than one baby to deliver, a C-section may be safer than a vaginal delivery.
Abnormal presentation: if the baby’s position in the womb is abnormal, it may be safer to deliver via a C-section.
Prolapsed cord: if the umbilical cord cord comes before the baby through the vagina, it can strangle the baby during a vaginal delivery.
Fetal distress or medical problems: if the mother has diabetes, genital herpes, hypertension, cardiac disease, toxemia, or ovarian or uterine cysts, vaginal delivery may be hazardous for both mother and child.
If a C-section may be necessary for you, it is important to plan ahead and know what risks may be involved. Learn more about potential C-section risks .

Some of school going kids uses Electricity and Magnetism related science projects Experiments in there school’s science fair. children’s always trying to know that what is a magnet or something about electricity.
Someone can make electricity and Magnetism Science Fair Projects Using Batteries, Balloons etc. these Electricity and Magnetism Physics Projects are so interesting and Hair Raising.
Electricity and magnetism, electromagnetic waves and Magnetism are most used in these Physics Projects of school. here we have video to know more about Electricity and Magnetism Physics Projects Experiments.

About this site
The main goal of Across Cultures is to celebrate Canadian cultural diversity by highlighting the extraordinary contributions that different communities have made to Canada, as well as the many challenges they have had to face, while acknowledging the less praiseworthy moments in Canadian history regarding cultural diversity. The site is also intended as a tribute to filmmakers from various cultural and ethnic communities who have made it their work to show the Canadian population the great richness of their cultures. Lastly, the site is designed to help teachers present the issues around Canadian multiculturalism in a dynamic and inviting way that also matches the goals of their academic programs.
Films and film clips
The site features 120 films from the NFB collection (60 in English; 60 in French in the French part). Of those, 48 (24 in English; 24 in French in the French part) include an audio description for the blind and visually impaired; and 49 films (27 in English; 22 in French in the French part) are available with closed-captioning. Users will also find 164 film clips (80 in English; 84 in French in the French part).
These 120 films are only a fraction of NFB productions on Canada’s ethnic and cultural communities; however, they are representative of communities from all over the country, and altogether more than 60 years of film production are covered. The selection does not include films on Aboriginal peoples, since another site – Aboriginal Perspectives – is devoted entirely to them.
Some people may be surprised at the omission of well known works from our list. They are absent because we were unable to obtain online broadcast rights for all the films we might have wanted to include and because the project, which is supported by the Canadian Memory Fund, had to leave aside some newer works to give pride of place to those of high heritage value.
How the site is organized
The Across Cultures Web site is divided into five sections: Themes to Explore; Cinema and Representation; Points of View; See Everything, Hear Everything; and For Teachers. The Themes section covers 6 themes formulated as questions. Each theme includes film clips with accompanying questions, original articles and interviews with experts, public opinion polls, archival materials and classroom activities. Cinema and Representation considers the ways in which ethnic and cultural communities have been represented in NFB documentaries. In it, you will find film clips, archival materials, original articles by NFB experts, interviews with filmmakers and a classroom activity. The third section, Points of View, addresses issues of racism, identity and social integration in Canada. It comprises original articles by Canadian experts in the field, film clips and discussions. The See Everything, Hear Everything section gives users access to all the complete films, film clips, archival artefacts and other types of audiovisual content available on the site. Finally, For Teachers offers lesson plans, web links and bibliographic resources. It contains a Glossary of Terms (also available on the Tools menu) to familiarize users with the language of cultural diversity.
Our main focus is on the complete films, but we also include film clips as an easy introduction to each section. The clips allow teachers, students and other users to quickly pinpoint specific content – the issues raised in each theme, expert viewpoints, or aspects of ethnic and cultural representation, for example. Of course, the complete films are always available and easily accessed for viewing.
Clearly, we cannot claim to cover every aspect of diversity, describe every issue, raise every question, or mention the challenges and achievements of every ethnic and cultural community in the country. Across Cultures does, however, provide an excellent introduction to the area for anyone interested in multiculturalism and the issue of cultural diversity in Canada.
We encourage users to visit two other sites our team has built with support from the Canadian Memory Fund, which also deal with issues of cultural diversity: Documentary Lens and Aboriginal Perspectives.

Aleja wakes up very early in the morning, as she does every Saturday, to go to the market and buy the groceries for the week. She takes with her the same amount of money she usually does, but to her surprise she can’t even buy half of the things she needs.
At home, Aleja has five small children waiting for her to bring them something to eat. She is a single parent, mother of two sponsored children from Betel Student Center in the city of Oruro. She was abandoned by her husband and left with her children.
The family lives in a very small and dark room where they have three beds, a small table, some chairs and a small, wrecked shelf. Outside of the room, they use a small space covered with old pieces of calamines as their kitchen.
Aleja works washing clothes. She earns around $21 per week, and that is how she supports her family. She uses the money to pay the rent, the water, the electricity, the gas and buy the food and some things her children need for school.
Bolivia is experiencing a food crisis as a consequence of many things. Besides the inflation, there are other variables that are affecting the country.
When we have the “typical” unrests, immediately some food is “hidden,” so people speculate, and as a consequence the prices rise. This general rise of prices in basic food has affected everybody, especially those who need it the most.
“It affects my family because I can’t feed my children properly, I can’t provide them everything they need,” says Aleja.
Families have had to reduce the number of meals they have every day, because what they earn and what they have is simply not enough.
When people go to buy what they need for the week, they go back home with half, or less, of the things they were supposed to buy. It seems like money doesn’t have the same value anymore. It seems like money flies out of their hands. It seems like money falls out from holes in their pockets.
Sonia, the Betel Student Center director says,
“Many rather not eat bread anymore. They eat quinua (grain) or other things they bring from their crops. They eat chuño (dried potato) soup. They bring food from the country, like potatoes, chuño, grains, and that way they don’t have to buy things here.
For example, they don’t eat oat, lentils or milk. Things that are good for them, they can’t have because they are too expensive.”
The development centers have also been affected by this situation. Suddenly, the budget they had wasn’t enough, so they had to take some measures that also affected the children. They had to reduce the daily provision they gave the children in order to make the money last for the whole month. Sonia explains,
“We were very sad, because we started to give the children only one plate of food. One day they received soup; the other a dry plate. We also suspended special activities for the children, like field trips. Also in the material for the classes, we stopped buying some things.”
However, not everything is discouraging. Thanks to special funding through the Complementary Intervention Program (CIV), many children who have malnutrition will be helped by receiving extra nourishment at the student center.
This intervention will benefit 80 child development centers in Bolivia. They will work with all of the undernourished registered children, up to 18 years old.
Sonia says that parents are very thankful for this extra support they receive. They were already thankful for the meals, but this extra food can be considered an extra blessing for them.
They are very thankful; they come here and say that here they can have meals and a soft drink. Those are the only three days they can eat. At their home they don’t.
Children don’t miss a day at the center, even though many of them live far away and have to walk around one hour or more to get here.”
The children are very thankful, too. They might not express it with words, but their faces of happiness, when they receive their meals, say it all.

Digital Audio Networking Demystified
The OSI model helps bring order to the chaos of various digital audio network options.
Credit: Randall Fung/Corbis
Networking has been a source of frustration and confusion for pro AV professionals for decades. Fortunately, the International Organization of Standardization, more commonly referred to as ISO, created a framework in the early 1980s called the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model, a seven-layer framework that defines network functions, to help simplify matters.
Providing a common understanding of how to communicate to each layer, the OSI model (Fig. 1) is basically the foundation of what makes data networking work. Although it's not important for AV professionals to know the intricate details of each layer, it is vital to at least have a grasp of the purpose of each layer as well as general knowledge of the common protocols in each one. Let's take a look at the some key points.
The Seven Layers
Starting from the bottom up, the seven layers of the OSI Reference Model are Physical, Data Link, Network, Transport, Session, Presentation, and Application. The Physical layer is just that — the hardware's physical connection that describes its electrical characteristics. The Data Link layer is the logic connection, defining the type of network. For example, the Data Link layer defines whether or not it is an Ethernet or Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) network. There is also more than one data network transport protocol. The Data Link layer is divided into two sub-layers: the Media Access Control (MAC) and the Logical Link Control (above the MAC as you move up the OSI Reference Model).
The seven layers of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model for network functions.
Here is one concrete example of how the OSI model helps us understand networking technologies. Some people assume that any device with a CAT-5 cable connected to it is an Ethernet device. But it is Ethernet's Physical layer that defines an electrical specification and physical connection — CAT-5 terminated with an RJ-45 connector just happens to be one of them. For a technology to fully qualify as an Ethernet standard, it requires full implementation of both the Physical and Data Link layers.
The Network layer — the layer at which network routers operate — “packetizes” the data and provides routing information. The common protocol for this layer is the Internet Protocol (IP).
Layer four is the Transport layer. Keep in mind that this layer has a different meaning in the OSI Reference Model compared to how we use the term “transport” for moving audio around. The Transport layer provides protocols to determine the delivery method. The most popular layer four protocol is Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). Many discuss TCP/IP as one protocol, but actually they are two separate protocols on two different layers. TCP/IP is usually used as the data transport for file transfers or audio control applications.
Comparison of four digital audio technologies using the OSI model as a framework.
TCP provides a scheme where it sends an acknowledge message for each packet received by a sending device. If it senses that it is missing a packet of information, it will send a message back to the sender to resend. This feature is great for applications that are not time-dependent, but is not useful in real-time applications like audio and video.
Streaming media technologies most common on the Web use another method called User Datagram Protocol (UDP), which simply streams the packets. The sender never knows if it actually arrives or not. Professional audio applications have not used UDP because they are typically Physical layer or Data Link layer technologies — not Transport layer. However, a newcomer to professional audio networking, Australia-based Audinate, has recently become the first professional audio networking technology to use UDP/IP technology over Ethernet with its product called Dante.
The Session and Presentation layers are not commonly used in professional audio networks; therefore, they will not be covered in this article. Because these layers can be important to some integration projects, you may want to research the OSI model further to complete your understanding of this useful tool.
The purpose of the Application layer is to provide the interface tools that make networking useful. It is not used to move audio around the network. It controls, manages, and monitors audio devices on a network. Popular protocols are File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Telnet, Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Domain Name System (DNS), and Virtual Private Network (VPN), to name just a few.
Now that you have a basic familiarity with the seven layers that make up the OSI model, let's dig a little deeper into the inner workings of a digital audio network.
Breaking Down Audio Networks
Audio networking can be broken into in two main concepts: control and transport. Configuring, monitoring, and actual device control all fall into the control category and use several standard communication protocols. Intuitively, getting digital audio from here to there is the role of transport.
Control applications can be found in standard protocols of the Application layer. Application layer protocols that are found in audio are Telnet, HTTP, and Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). Telnet is short for TELetype NETwork and was one of the first Internet protocols. Telnet provides command-line style communication to a machine. One example of Telnet usage in audio is the Peavey MediaMatrix, which uses this technology, known as RATC, as a way to control MediaMatrix devices remotely.
SNMP is a protocol for monitoring devices on a network. There are several professional audio and video manufacturers that support this protocol, which provides a method for managing the status or health of devices on a network. SNMP is a key technology in Network Operation Center (NOC) monitoring. It is an Application layer protocol that communicates to devices on the network through UDP/IP protocols, which can be communicated over a variety of data transport technologies.
Control systems can be manufacturer-specific, such as Harman Pro's HiQnet, QSC Audio's QSControl, or third party such as Crestron's CresNet, where the control software communicates to audio devices through TCP/IP. In many cases, TCP/IP-based control can run on the same network as the audio signal transport, and some technologies (such as CobraNet and Dante) are designed to allow data traffic to coexist with audio traffic.
The organizing and managing of audio bits is the job of the audio Transport. This is usually done by the audio protocol. Aviom, CobraNet, and EtherSound are protocols that organize bits for transport on the network. The transport can be divided into two categories: logical and physical.
Purely physical layer technologies, such as Aviom, use hardware to organize and move digital bits. More often than not, a proprietary chip is used to organize and manage them. Ethernet-based technologies packetize the audio and send it to the Data Link and Physical layers to be transported on Ethernet devices. Ethernet is both a logical and physical technology that packetizes or “frames” the audio in the Data Link layer and sends it to the Physical layer to be moved to another device on the network. Ethernet's Physical layer also has a Physical layer chip, referred to as the PHY chip, which can be purchased from several manufacturers.
Comparing Digital Audio Systems
The more familiar you are with the OSI model, the easier it will be to understand the similarities and differences of the various digital audio systems. For many people, there is a tendency to gloss over the OSI model and just talk about networking-branded protocols. However, understanding the OSI model will bring clarity to your understanding of digital audio networking (Fig. 2).
Due to the integration of pro AV systems, true networking schemes are vitally important. A distinction must be made between audio networking and digital audio transports. Audio networks are defined as those meeting the commonly used standard protocols, where at least the Physical and Data Link layer technologies and standard network appliances (such as hubs and switches) can be used. There are several technologies that meet this requirement using IEEE 1394 (Firewire), Ethernet, and ATM technologies, to name a few. However, because Ethernet is widely deployed in applications ranging from large enterprises to the home, this will be the technology of focus. All other technologies that do not meet this definition will be considered digital audio transport systems, and not a digital audio network.
There are at least 15 schemes for digital audio transport systems and audio networking. Three of the four technologies presented here have been selected because of their wide acceptance in the industry based on the number of manufacturers that support it.
Let's compare four CAT-5/Ethernet technologies: Aviom, EtherSound, CobraNet, and Dante. This is not to be considered a “shoot-out” between technologies but rather a discussion to gain understanding of some of the many digital system options available to the AV professional.
As previously noted, Aviom is a Physical layer–only technology based on the classifications outlined above. It does use an Ethernet PHY chip, but doesn't meet the electrical characteristics of Ethernet. Therefore, it cannot be connected to standard Ethernet hubs or switches. Aviom uses a proprietary chip to organize multiple channels of audio bits to be transported throughout a system, and it falls in the classification of a digital audio transport system.
EtherSound and CobraNet are both 802.3 Ethernet– compliant technologies that can be used on standard data Ethernet switches. There is some debate as to whether EtherSound technology can be considered a true Ethernet technology because it requires a dedicated network. EtherSound uses a proprietary scheme for network control, and CobraNet uses standard data networking methods. The key difference for both the AV and data professional is that EtherSound uses a dedicated network, and CobraNet does not. There are other differences that may be considered before choosing between CobraNet and EtherSound, but both are considered to be layer two (Data Link) technologies.
Dante uses Ethernet, but it is considered a layer four technology (Transport). It uses UDP for audio transport and IP for audio routing on an Ethernet transport, commonly referred to as UDP/IP over Ethernet.
At this point you may be asking yourself why does the audio industry have so many technologies? Why can't there be one standard like there is in the data industry?
The answer to the first question relates to time. Audio requires synchronous delivery of bits. Early Ethernet networks weren't much concerned with time. Ethernet is asynchronous, meaning there isn't a concern when and how data arrives as long as it gets there. Therefore, to put digital audio on a data network requires a way to add a timing mechanism. Time is an issue in another sense, in that your options depend on technology or market knowledge available at the time when you develop your solution. When and how you develop your solution leads to the question of a single industry standard.
Many people don't realize that the data industry does in fact have more than one standard: Ethernet, ATM, FiberChannel, and SONET. Each layer of the OSI model has numerous protocols for different purposes. The key is that developers follow the OSI model as a framework for network functions and rules for communicating between them. If the developer wants to use Ethernet, he or she is required to have this technology follow the rules for communicating to the Data Link layer, as required by the Ethernet standard.
Because one of the key issues for audio involves time, it's important to use it wisely.
There are two types of time that we need to be concerned with in networking: clock time and latency. Clock time in this context is a timing mechanism that is broken down into measurable units, such as milliseconds. In digital audio systems, latency is the time duration between when audio or a bit of audio goes into a system until the bit comes out the other side. Latency has many causes, but arguably the root cause in audio networks is the design of its timing mechanism. In addition, there is a tradeoff between the timing method and bandwidth. A general rule of thumb is that as the resolution of the timing mechanism increases, the more bandwidth that's required from the network.
Ethernet, being an asynchronous technology, requires a timing method to be added to support the synchronous nature of audio. The concepts and methodology of clocking networks for audio are key differences among the various technologies.
CobraNet uses a time mechanism called a beat packet. This packet is sent out in 1.33 millisecond intervals and communicates with CobraNet devices. Therefore, the latency of a CobraNet audio network can't be less than 1.33 milliseconds. CobraNet was introduced in 1995 when large-scale DSP-based digital systems started replacing analog designs in the market. Because the “sound system in a box” was new, there was great scrutiny of these systems. A delay or latency in some time-critical applications was noticed, considered to be a challenge of using digital systems. However, many believe that latency is an overly exaggerated issue in most applications where digital audio systems are deployed. In fact, this topic could be an article unto itself.
A little history of digital systems and networking will provide some insight on the reason why there are several networking technologies available today. In the late '90s, there were two “critical” concerns in the digital audio industry: Year of 2000 compliance (Y2K) and latency. To many audio pros, using audio networks like CobraNet seemed impossible because of the delay —at that time, approximately 5 milliseconds, or in video terms, less time than a frame of video.
Enter EtherSound, introduced in 2001, which addressed the issue of latency by providing an Ethernet networking scheme with low latency and better bit-depth and higher sampling rate than CobraNet. The market timing and concern over latency gave EtherSound an excellent entry point. But since reducing latency down to 124 microseconds limits available bandwidth for data traffic, a dedicated network is required for a 100-MB EtherSound network. Later, to meet the market demands of lower latency requirements, CobraNet introduced variable latency, with 1.33 milliseconds being the minimum. With the Ethernet technologies discussion thus far, there is a relationship between the bit-depth and sample rate to the clocking system.
Audio is not the only industry with a need for real-time clocking schemes. Communications, military, and industrial applications also require multiple devices to be connected together on a network and function in real-time. A group was formed from these markets, and they took on the issue of real-time clocking while leveraging the widely deployed Ethernet technology. The outcome was the IEEE 1588 standard for a real-time clocking system for Ethernet networks in 2002.
As a late entry to the networking party, Audinate's Dante comes to the market with the advantage of using new technologies like IEEE 1588 to solve many of the current challenges in networking audio. Using this clocking technology in Ethernet allows Dante to provide sample accurate timing and synchronization while achieving latency as low as 34 microseconds. Coming to the market later also has the benefit of Gigabit networking being widely supported, which provides the increased bandwidth requirement of ultra-low latency. It should be noted here that EtherSound does have a Gigabit version, and CobraNet does work on Gigabit infrastructure with added benefits but it is currently a Fast Ethernet technology.
Dante provides a flexible solution to many of the current tradeoffs that require one system on another due to design requirements of latency verses bandwidth, because Dante can support different latency, bit depth, and sample rates in the same system. For example, this allows a user to provide a low-latency, higher bandwidth assignment to in-ear monitoring while at the same time use a higher latency assignment in areas where latency is less of a concern (such as front of house), thereby reducing the overall network bandwidth requirement.
The developers of CobraNet and Dante are both working toward advancing software so that AV professionals and end-users can configure, route audio, and manage audio devices on a network. The goal is to make audio networks “plug-and-play” for those that don't want to know anything about networking technologies. One of the advances to note is called “device discovery,” where the software finds all of the audio devices on the network so you don't have to configure them in advance. The software also has advance features for those who want to dive into the details of their audio system.
Advances in digital audio systems and networking technologies will continue to change to meet market applications and their specific requirements. Aviom's initial focus was to create a personal monitoring system, and it developed a digital audio transport to better serve this application. Aviom's low-latency transport provided a solution to the market that made it the perfect transport for many live applications. CobraNet provides the AV professional with a solution to integrate audio, video, and data systems on an enterprise switched network. EtherSound came to the market by providing a low-latency audio transport using standard Ethernet 802.3 technology. Dante comes to the market after significant change and growth and Gigabit networking and new technologies like IEEE 1588 to solve many of challenges of using Ethernet in real-time systems.
Networking audio and video can seem chaotic, but gaining an understanding of the OSI model helps bring order to the chaos. It not only provides an understanding of the various types of technology, but it also provides a common language to communicate for both AV and data professionals. Keeping it simple by using the OSI model as the foundation and breaking audio networking down into two functional parts (control and transport) will help you determine which networking technology will best suit your particular application.
Brent Harshbarger is the founder of m3tools located in Atlanta. He can be reached at email@example.com.

Definitions for acanthosis nigricans
acanthosis nigricans, keratosis nigricans(noun)
a skin disease characterized by dark wartlike patches in the body folds; can be benign or malignant
U.S. National Library of Medicine
A circumscribed melanosis consisting of a brown-pigmented, velvety verrucosity or fine papillomatosis appearing in the axillae and other body folds. It occurs in association with endocrine disorders, underlying malignancy, administration of certain drugs, or as in inherited disorder.
Use the citation below to add this definition to your bibliography:
"acanthosis nigricans." Definitions.net. STANDS4 LLC, 2013. Web. 23 May 2013. <http://www.definitions.net/definition/acanthosis nigricans>.

Eye tracking is a process that identifies a specific point in both space and time that is being looked at by the observer. This information can also be used in real-time to control applications using the eyes. Recent innovations in the video game industry include alternative input modalities to provide an enhanced, more immersive user experience. In particular, eye gaze control has recently been explored as an input modality in video games. This book is an introduction for those interested in using eye tracking to control or analyze video games and virtual environments. Key concepts are illustrated through three case studies in which gaze control and voice recognition have been used in combination to control virtual characters and applications. The lessons learned in the case studies are presented and issues relating to incorporating eye tracking in interactive applications are discussed. The reader will be given an introduction to human visual attention, eye movements and eye tracking technologies. Previous work in the field of studying fixation behavior in games and using eye tracking for video game interaction will also be presented.
Collect Fly Buys when you purchase this title
The final chapter discusses ideas for how this field can be developed further to create richer interaction for characters and crowds in virtual environments. Alternative means of interaction in video games are especially important for disabled users for whom traditional techniques, such as mouse and keyboard, may be far from ideal. This book is also relevant for those wishing to use gaze control in applications other than games. Table of Contents: Introduction / The Human Visual System / Eye Tracking / Eye Tracking in Video Games / Gaze and Voice Controlled Video Games: Case Study I and II / Gaze and Voice Controlled Drawing: Case Study III / Conclusion

MONTFERMEIL, France (AP) -- The streets in one of the Paris region's toughest housing projects, burgeoning with immigrants, bear names like Cezanne, Picasso and Utrillo, as if to stamp the French heritage onto the psyches of its residents.
But neither the names of the great masters nor the idyllic images conjured up by the name of the project, Les Bosquets, or The Groves, capture the daily realities of the French-style ghetto, an enclosed world where many residents don't speak French.
Delinquency soars and the unemployment rate is estimated at some 40 percent, nearly four times the national rate. Montfermeil's town hall could not provide an official figure.
Just 17 kilometers (10.5 miles) from Paris, Les Bosquets is light years from the world of Parisians.
Les Bosquets, like other projects that surround the big cities of France, belies this nation's special brand of integration whereby newcomers from afar assimilate into the French culture, becoming one with it whatever their origins. Despite quiet debate, French authorities, whatever their political colors, have stood by a French model that's colorblind to differences, in total contrast to the U.S. notion of a vibrant melting pot.
The story of France is often viewed as the antithesis to the U.S., one in which race and ethnicity are not counted in the government census and minority rights need not exist, due to residents who share a common identity of "French." Many French shudder at the word "multiculturalism."
But housing projects such as Les Bosquets, often cut off by poor public transport from the cities, raise questions about how much assimilation is really happening in France and whether the French model of integration, long the nation's pride, is wearing thin.
Even Muslim immigrants from France's former North African colonies, many in their third generation, and making up a large portion of residents of Les Bosquets, are far from melding with the mainstream.
For Patrick Simon, a leading demographer, the French model has a basic flaw that is becoming increasingly evident as time goes by.
"It's a model founded on the invisibility of differences," Simon said. The problem is that minorities are increasingly visible, many of them with origins in France's former colonies in Muslim North Africa, and because "we see them, we can't ignore their existence."
Even second- and third-generation citizens of foreign origin are perceived as different and treated thus.
Statisticians are not allowed to count people by their origins, complicating research.
But the postcard vision of France with church steeples perched over a contented populace that's wearing berets and carrying baguettes has been upended in the Seine-Saint-Denis region northeast of Paris.
French kings are buried in the great cathedral of Saint-Denis, the main town, but traditional minorities have become the majority in the region.
A study by Simon puts immigrants and their descendants through the second generation at 75 percent of the city's population. It includes people from French overseas departments (8 percent), who are French but of color. The jobless rate was 16.5 percent in 2009, according to Insee, the national statistics agency. But the economic leaders are in the white minority, Simon said, putting new stress on the notion that immigrants and their children are being successfully assimilated.
In Les Bosquets, the most widespread complaint remains poor public transport and the isolation that keeps Les Bosquets at a distance from mainstream France. It takes nearly 90 minutes to get to Paris.
"They've done everything to keep us closed among ourselves," said a 34-year-old born in France of Algerian parents. "It is they who don't want us to integrate." Like most residents of the projects, the man, who works with a private fire department, refused to identify himself by name.
Discrimination is a fact of life in France for minorities, and a poll by the Ipsos firm published this year in the daily Le Monde showed no sign that that might lessen. A full 70 percent of those questioned felt there were "too many foreigners in France." The finger was pointed, above all, at those of the Muslim faith.

TV is one of the most popular forms of media. As much as there are many people who might want to dispute this, a majority of people still find themselves drawn to the entertainment box. Radio which was more popular in the previous generation is slowly losing its glory. This is mostly because there are numerous gadgets that can be used to listen to music.
Podcasts for example can be used in place of the radio. This is one of the things that is increasingly gaining popularity in social media. Some of the basics that involve the podcasts include:
This is a combination of the words “broadcast” and “iPod”; podcasts are a kind of digital media that is episodic. Users can download to this media via web syndication when they have subscribed. They take the form of the audio although there are video podcasts where slideshows are used.
In the past, they were only used by the techie demographic but the general public son caught up. Content used in the podcasts usually ranges from culture, sports, music and magic among many others.
Social Media and Podcasts
Podcasts were introduced almost at the same time as social media. Most people understand social media as fancy web 2.0 terminologies that are related to Facebook and Twitter which are a means of opening up communication as well as interactions between organizations and their followers, fans and audience, brands and persons.
The podcasts allow for a wider interaction with people mostly because of the syndication feeds. Feeds permit the users to download the podcasts once they have been released and listen to them using a variety of mediums. This is different from the radio where you have to tune in at a specific time or date.
Most of the time, the people who have produced the podcasts will become the producers and vice versa thus they end up holding conversations with each other. Podcasting calling usually calls for active participation and listening.
Content and Freedom
Podcasts empower both the consumer and the producer. Listeners can choose the time they want to listen to the content.
Anyone with a computer and microphone can participate as it does not have too many restrictions. They have become one of the most unique ways of sharing information/content. Podcasts have broad audience, do not have any restrictions, can be used easily as it does not have difficult applications and is one of the major forms of media which gives people voice to be heard. More on podcast transcription

One of the great bits of repartee in The King’s Speech comes as the maverick Australian speech therapist, Lionel Logue, is just getting to know His Royal Highness Prince Albert, the stammering Duke of York:
Logue: “Surely a prince’s brain knows what his mouth’s doing?” Bertie: “You’re obviously not well acquainted with many royal princes.”
No one could have imagined any such dialogue involving Archduke Otto von Habsburg, who died on July 4—not because the archduke was a fearsome personality, but because he was a pre-eminently intelligent and decent man.
The full name he was given at his baptism in 1912—Franz Josef Otto Robert Maria Anton Karl Max Heinrich Sixtus Xavier Felix Renatus Ludwig Gaetan Pius Ignatius—speaks volumes about the history of his family, whose rule over central Europe extended back some seven centuries. Otto might have been thought an anachronism after his father, Emperor Karl, was driven from the throne of the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary in the waning days of World War I. Yet the son declined to disappear from the scene and played roles both dramatic and useful over the eight decades of his maturity.
He worried Hitler, who saw him as a potential threat to the Anschluss uniting Austria with Germany. So the Nazi Führer twice tried to meet the young Austrian nobleman when Archduke Otto was studying in Berlin in 1931-32. Otto von Habsburg not only rebuffed Hitler on both occasions, thus putting himself firmly on the Gestapo’s list of enemies; in 1938, as the Nazi vice was closing on an independent Austria, the archduke, at obvious risk to his life, volunteered to return to Austria as the head of government, to provide a national rallying point against Nazi paganism.
In June 1940, the Luftwaffe bombed the Belgian castle in which Otto von Habsburg and his family were living, just hours after the family had fled south ahead of the Wehrmacht’s drive west. Hounded by the Gestapo in neutral Lisbon, Archduke Otto and his family came to the United States at the invitation of President Franklin Roosevelt and spent the Second World War years in America. Otto von Habsburg returned to Europe after the Nazi defeat, married Princess Regina of Sachsen-Meiningen, who was working as a nurse at a Munich refuge camp the archduke visited (and whose father, Duke George III, had died in the Soviet Gulag); the couple had seven children, and lived a model Christian family life.
Elected to the European parliament in 1979, Otto von Habsburg spent 20 years as perhaps that body’s most respected member: an adroit debater in seven languages, he kept alive the vision of a post-Cold War Europe reunited as a single civilizational enterprise, built on the sturdy foundations of biblical religion, faith in reason, and commitment to the rule of law. In that sense, Otto von Habsburg was arguably the first modern “European.”
He may also have been the last. For the European Union, as it has evolved in the early 21st century, has been built around a naked public square in which biblical religion plays no role; faith in reason is faltering under the assault of post-modernism and political correctness; and the rule of law is jeopardized by what another great son of Mitteleuropa, Joseph Ratzinger, has called the “dictatorship of relativism.” In 2006, I spent a memorable evening discussing this unhappy situation with the Archduke Otto, at an Acton Institute dinner in Rome at which we were seated across the table from one another. He was not bitter, for he was a man of deep Catholic faith, and thus a man of hope. But he was concerned about Europe’s future, and his concerns have turned out to be entirely prescient.
Otto von Habsburg’s father, Emperor Karl, was beatified by John Paul II in 2004. The late pope once greeted Archduke Otto’s mother, Empress Zita, by saying that he was “happy to receive the widow of my father’s last sovereign.” It is entirely safe to say that we shall not see their likes again. May they rest in peace.
George Weigel is Distinguished Senior Fellow of the Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington, D.C.
Become a fan of First Things on Facebook, subscribe to First Things via RSS, and follow First Things on Twitter.

Bipolar Disorder: Hypomanic Episodes
Hypomanic episodes can occur in people who have mood disorders. Hypomanic episodes are less severe than manic episodes, although a hypomanic episode can still interfere with your ability to function properly.
Hypomania may be diagnosed if:
- A distinct period of elevated or irritable mood occurs in which the mood is clearly different from a regular nondepressed mood.
- Three or more of the following symptoms last for a
significant period of time:
- Inflated self-esteem or unrealistic feelings of importance
- Decreased need for sleep (feels rested after only a few hours of sleep)
- Racing thoughts or flight of ideas
- Being easily distracted
- An increase in goal-directed activity (work or personal)
- Irresponsible behaviors that may have serious consequences, such as going on shopping sprees, engaging in increased sexual activity, or making foolish business investments
- The mood or behavior change is noticeable to others.
- The episode is not severe enough to cause impairment in social or job functioning and does not require hospitalization.
- The symptoms are not caused by Reference substance abuse Opens New Window.
If you feel that you or someone you care about may be experiencing a hypomanic episode, contact your doctor to discuss the possible causes and the treatment options.
|By:||Reference Healthwise Staff||Last Revised: Reference March 1, 2012|
|Medical Review:||Reference Patrice Burgess, MD - Family Medicine
Reference Lisa S. Weinstock, MD - Psychiatry

An accessor method is an instance method that gets or sets the value of a property of an object. In Cocoa’s terminology, a method that retrieves the value of an object’s property is referred to as a getter method, or “getter;” a method that changes the value of an object’s property is referred to as a setter method, or “setter.” These methods are often found in pairs, providing API for getting and setting the property values of an object.
You should use accessor methods rather than directly accessing state data because they provide an abstraction layer. Here are just two of the benefits that accessor methods provide:
You don’t need to rewrite your code if the manner in which a property is represented or stored changes.
Accessor methods often implement important behavior that occurs whenever a value is retrieved or set. For example, setter methods frequently implement memory management code and notify other objects when a value is changed.
Because of the importance of this pattern, Cocoa defines some conventions for naming accessor methods. Given a property of type
type and called
name, you should typically implement accessor methods with the following form:
The one exception is a property that is a Boolean value. Here the getter method name may be
isName. For example:
This naming convention is important because much other functionality in Cocoa relies upon it, in particular key-value coding. Cocoa does not use
getName because methods that start with “get” in Cocoa indicate that the method will return values by reference.

Identifying time lags in the restoration of grassland butterfly communities: a multi-site assessment
Woodcock, B.A.; Bullock, J.M.; Mortimer, S.R.; Brereton, T.; Redhead, J.W.; Thomas, J.A.; Pywell, R.F.. 2012 Identifying time lags in the restoration of grassland butterfly communities: a multi-site assessment. Biological Conservation, 155. 50-58. 10.1016/j.biocon.2012.05.013Full text not available from this repository.
Although grasslands are crucial habitats for European butterflies, large-scale declines in quality and area have devastated many species. Grasslandrestoration can contribute to the recovery of butterfly populations, although there is a paucity of information on the long-term effects of management. Using eight UK data sets (9–21 years), we investigate changes in restoration success for (1) arable reversion sites, were grassland was established on bare ground using seed mixtures, and (2) grassland enhancement sites, where degraded grasslands are restored by scrub removal followed by the re-instigation of cutting/grazing. We also assessed the importance of individual butterfly traits and ecological characteristics in determining colonisation times. Consistent increases in restoration success over time were seen for arable reversion sites, with the most rapid rates of increase in restoration success seen over the first 10 years. For grasslands enhancement there were no consistent increases in restoration success over time. Butterfly colonisation times were fastest for species with widespread host plants or where host plants established well during restoration. Low mobility butterfly species took longer to colonise. We show that arable reversion is an effective tool for the management of butterflycommunities. We suggest that as restoration takes time to achieve, its use as a mitigation tool against future environmental change (i.e. by decreasing isolation in fragmented landscapes) needs to take into account such time lags.
|Programmes:||CEH Topics & Objectives 2009 onwards > Biodiversity|
|CEH Sections:||CEH fellows
|Additional Keywords:||arable reversion, calcareous, grassland enhancement, mesotrophic, functional traits, recreation|
|NORA Subject Terms:||Ecology and Environment|
|Date made live:||12 Sep 2012 15:38|
Actions (login required)

You are browsing the web and suddenly come across a page that displays numbers
instead of letters? You see four numbers inside a little box instead of letters? Well then you might just be missing a Unicode font. Here is a simple fix.
Those four numbers inside the little box are the hexadecimal code for the letter. If you have not got the font that translates those four numbers into a character or glyph you will only be able to see the number.
Here you can find a list of all Unicode fonts as well as a comparison of those Unicode fonts.
Having a look at the list, "GNU Unifont" clearly stands out with 63,446 characters 63,449 glyphs. As the name already suggests GNU Unifont is free to use and to download. You can get the GNU Unifont for Mac and Windows from here. Download the WinZip archive for Mac or Windows, it is 3MB in file size.
Once downloaded simply unzip the file and copy it to your systems fonts folder.
If you have trouble with that have a look here for Windows 7 users and here for Windows XP users. Basically in Windows the fonts are located at c:\windows\fonts.
Mac users can check this out to install the font.
Additionally here is a link to the Unicode 6.0 Character Code Charts.

A diplomatic crisis is engulfing part of Borneo, after Filipino rebels seized control of a remote section of Malaysia’s Sabah state as part of an unresolved territorial dispute that stretches back centuries. Malaysian security forces have surrounded 100 to 200 members of the Royal Army of Sulu, who have holed up in the village of Lahad Datu for the past two weeks in order to press their historic claim to the land. The Philippine and Malaysian governments are now engaged in tense negotiations in order to resolve the dispute without the use of force. The rebels, who hail from the autonomous island province of Sulu in the southwestern Philippines, had been given until midnight on Tuesday to voluntarily leave the area, but Manila has been desperately trying to negotiate an extension to this deadline to avoid bloodshed and a tense standoff currently hangs in place.
The leader of the rebel unit is the brother of Jamalul Kiram III, one of the two main claimants to the title of Sultan of Sulu. Back in the 17th century, before the Philippines existed in its present form, the two principle sultanates in the region were Sulu and Brunei. In 1658, the Sultan of Brunei for some reason gave Sabah to the Sultanate of Sulu, which today is considered part of the Philippines. However, the picture is further complicated by an 1878 deal between the Sultanate of Sulu and the British North Borneo Company, in which Sabah was leased to the Europeans on a rolling contract. To this day, the Malaysian government pays a token sum, equivalent to around $1,500, to the Philippines every year in recognition of this continuing arrangement. The Royal Army of Sulu interprets this deal as a lease that can be canceled, while Malaysia believes that it represents the permanent transfer of the territory.
It does not appear that the Malaysian authorities are willing to give up the land, which boasts valuable petroleum reserves, palm-oil plantations and also serves as an agricultural and manufacturing hub. Regional commentators have accused the Sulu rebels of trying to exploit past claims as a gateway toward ensuring future prosperity. “The governments of Malaysia and the Philippines are trying to manage this incident carefully,” Jonah Blank, senior political scientist specializing in Southeast Asia for RAND Corp., a global policy think-tank, tells TIME. ”We’ve seen many Muslim rebel groups arise or take refuge in the southern part of the Philippines, and Malaysia has brokered a fragile cease-fire: neither Kuala Lumpur nor Manila is eager to see that fall apart.”
Philippine President Benigno Aquino III on Tuesday appealed to Kiram to instruct his brother to end the occupation. “If you are truly the leader of your people, you should be one with us in ordering your followers to return home peacefully,” he said during a statement aired on national TV. On Sunday, Manila sent the Philippine navy ship BRP Tagbanua to Borneo carrying Filipino-Muslim leaders, social workers and medical personnel for a “humanitarian mission” to bring their compatriots home. However, Royal Army of Sulu sources indicate that the rebels are not willing to entertain such a retreat.
Some observers believe that the timing of the occupation is designed to disrupt the Malaysian national elections that are due before the end of June, and the issue has now become a political hot potato domestically. The Center for Media Freedom and Responsibility, a Philippine NGO, on Tuesday released a joint statement condemning the arbitrary detention of three al-Jazeera journalists who were in Sabah to report on the standoff. The group was eventually released after being held and interrogated for at least six hours. Liew Chin Tong, a Democratic Action Party MP and shadow Defense Minister for the Pakatan Rakyat opposition coalition of Malaysia, tells TIME that the country is now suffering the consequences of decades of poorly enforced border controls. “Sabah is a key state which was previously seen as a safe zone for the government but now keenly contested by the opposition,” he says.

Stop by the library to fill out an application to get a library card. To get a card, the hopeful patron must present a photo identification and at least one proof of residence (a utility bill, an envelope mailed to yourself). Minors must be accompanied by a parent or guardian. This spring, everyone will be recieving a brand new card to celebrate the activation of the One Card Network, a project of the sister libraries belonging to the Washington County Library System. The updated cards are free and each will automatically link to our Overdrive electronic book database.
GREAT SCHOOLS offers ten easy tips for inspiring children to make reading a part of everyday life. Great Schools Website
YOUTH COMPUTER STATION - Visit a quiet corner of our sunny children's room to play (and learn) on our children's computer. The computer provides a myriad of games to encourage many skills and some games just for fun. Parents may also choose to use this work station themselves while their children read books, play with our puppet theatre or learning games, explore our interactive science display, or simply sit at a table to draw in a sunny room.
STOP HUNGER AND LEARN - Every correct answer you give while playing this online brain-building game earns ten grains of rice for the United Nations World Food program. Visit Free Rice.
ONE BOOK, LOTS OF FAMILY FUN - Copies of Suzanne Bloom's picture book The Bus for Us are available at all Pennsylvania pubic libraries. Reading aloud is one of the best activities you can do to prepare your child for school. Make time to read aloud every day, using lots of expression while taking time to enjoy the pictures and asking thought-provoking questions. Before reading the book: Look at the cover, point out the title and author. Ask your child to tell you everything he or she knows about riding a bus and going to school. While reading the book: Occasionally run your finger under the words as you read them. Use facial expressions and vary your voice. Ask questions about the story (Is this the bus, or it is another type of truck? What do you think the children have in their bags?) Have your child help you read the repeated question, "Is this the bus for us, Gus?" After reading the book: Talk about the emotions the children in the story felt. Point out their expressions in the drawings. Talk about the different vehicles shown in the story. Read books about trains, boats, airplanes, dirigibles,trucks or cars. Stop by your California Information Station to pick up an activity book outlining additional ideas, including games to play, activities to develop STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Math) Skills, and tips on safety and preparing for school. For information about the book and its creator, visit www.paonebook.org.

General Information / Education / Medical / Cultural / Entertainment
The History ... Cumberland Gap has been used as a crossing point in the Appalachian Mountains. Animals have used it as a path to the green pastures of Kentucky. Native Americans used the Gap as the Warrior's Path that led from the Potomac River down the south side of the Appalachians through the Gap and north to "The Dark and Bloody Ground" known as Kentucky and on to Ohio.
In 1750 Dr. Thomas Walker found the Gap and mapped its location, but the French and Indian Wars closed the new frontiers.
Daniel Boone and many other long-hunters used the Gap to the Kentucky hunting grounds. In 1775, after the Treaty of Sycamore Shoals ended most Indian troubles, Boone and thirty men marked out the Wilderness Trail from what is now Kingsport Tennessee through the Cumberland Gap to Kentucky. Part of the Wilderness Road can be walked in Cumberland Gap, Tennessee by the Iron Furnace.
Before the Revolutionary War over 12,000 people crossed into the new frontier territory. By the time of Kentucky's admission to the Union, over 100,000 people had passed through the Gap. By 1800 the Gap was being used for transportation and commerce, both east and west. In the 1830's, other routes west caused the Gap to decline in importance.
During the Civil War the Gap was called the Keystone of the Confederacy and the Gibraltar of America. Both armies felt the invasion of the North or South would come through the Gap. Both armies held and fortified the Gap against the invasion that never came.
The Gap exchanged hands four times to be finally abandoned in 1866 by the Federal Army.
Today the Cumberland Gap is the main local route North and South, via Cumberland Gap Parkway (Hwy. 25E). By the mid 1990's a four lane tunnel under the Gap will open a new North-South, East-West route and the Cumberland Gap will be restored like the first pioneer saw it.
Claiborne County located on the Tennessee-Kentucky-Virginia borders in East Tennessee, one of the state's three "Grand Divisions." It was formed in 1801 from parts of Hawkins and Grainger Counties. The county seat is Tazewell.
The communities of Tazewell and New Tazewell are in Claiborne County, Tennessee. We are located in the beautiful mountains of the Cumberland Gap area. Cumberland Gap is located where Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia meet.
Claiborne County is a rural county with a population of 28,828. The county covers 2400 square miles. Tazewell, the county seat, is located about 40 miles north of Knoxville, Tennessee. Along with our beautiful mountains we have beautiful Norris Lake with 850 miles of shoreline. Norris Lake was the first T.V.A. lake built in the late 1930's. The lake is fed by two large rivers, the Clinch and the Powell. The lake is enjoyed by fisherman and water lovers of all ages.
Some of the larger communities in the county are Tazewell, New Tazewell, Harrogate, Speedwell, Forge Ridge, Midway, Springdale, Cumberland Gap, Cedar Grove, Dogwood Heights, and Lone Mountain.
Population in Claiborne County 28,828
Communi Comm Services
Claiborne County Utility District
United Cities Propane Gas
The Claiborne County area is home to 11 schools. The Claiborne County Board of Education consists of 7 members.
For additional information contact our superintendent of schools is Dr. Roy K. Norris. You can contact the central office at Box 179, Tazewell, Tennessee 37879. The phone number is (423)626-5225.
Welcome to Lincoln Memorial University (LMU). For more than 100 years, LMU has helped serve the higher education needs of our tri-state area and beyond. We are excited by that heritage, and we invite you to share it! The University offers a talented, dedicated faculty and staff, a strong and varied curriculum, a well-rounded student life, a beautiful campus, and excellent facilities.
In keeping with its Lincoln legacy, LMU prides itself in providing well developed and relevant academic programs for today's students destined to compete in tomorrow's competitive workplace. Some of our nation's most competent lawyers, doctors, nurses, artists, veterinarians, business persons, and writers have their academic roots at Lincoln Memorial University
Claiborne County Hospital and Nursing Home 1850 Old Knoxville Road P.O. Box 219 Tazewell, TN 37879 (865) 626-4211
The Abraham Lincoln Library and Museum houses one of the most diverse Lincoln and Civil War collections in the country. Located on the beautiful campus of Lincoln Memorial University in Harrogate, Tennessee.
Exhibited are many rare items - the silver-topped cane Lincoln carried the night of his assassination, a lock of his hair clipped as he lay on his death bed, two life masks made of Lincoln, the tea set he and Mary Todd owned in their home in Springfield, and numerous other belongings. Over 20,000 books, manuscripts, pamphlets, photographs, paintings, and sculptures tell the story of President Lincoln and the Civil War period in America.
The Cumberland Gap National Historical Park in Cumberland Gap is a natural opening in the mountains made famous by Daniel Boone. The Indians used this path long before Boone arrived. Today, you can visit the Cumberland Gap National Historical Park and enjoy the history and beauty of our area.
If your interested in fishing, boating, or any water activity, then Norris Lake offers all that and more. There are several marinas and boat docks throughout the county.
Toll Free 800-747-0713

NetWellness is a global, community service providing quality, unbiased health information from our partner university faculty. NetWellness is commercial-free and does not accept advertising.
Saturday, May 18, 2013
Cold and Flu
Catching Colds and Flu
I wasn`t sure which catergory this would come under, but it involves catching a cold or the flu. I know that germs are the cause of getting these conditions and being outside in the cold whether without a jacket doesn`t cause someone to get them. But someone told me that if you are exposed to a cold environment and then warm one, back and forth, it can make someone sick with the cold or the flu, and does involve germs somehow. If that is true, can you please explain how that happens? Thanks
A cold or flu is caused by a viral infection, and viruses tend to be very contagious. They are spread primarily by droplets, or in other words, by saliva and mucus either sprayed into the air or by direct human contact. Going repeatedly from a cold to a warm environment and back should not increase one's chances to become infected. However, when the weather turns colder, people tend to begin spending more time indoors. This creates closer human contact and thereby increases the likelihood of infection. This is in large part why cold and flu season is during the colder months.
Allen M Seiden, MD
Professor of Otolaryngology, Director of Division of Rhinology and Sinus Disorders, Director of University Taste and Smell Center, Director of University Sinus and Allergy
College of Medicine
University of Cincinnati

Buried inside Robert Bryce’s relatively new book entitled Power Hungry is a call to “aggressively pursue taxes or caps on the emissions of neurotoxins, particularly those that come from burning coal” to generate electricity such as mercury and lead. This is notable not because Bryce agrees with many environmental and human health experts, but also because the book credibly debunks the move to tax or cap carbon dioxide emissions both from technical and political perspectives.
The word “neurotoxic” literally translates as “nerve poison”. Broadly described, a neurotoxicant is any chemical substance which adversely acts on the structure or function of the human nervous system.
As its subtitle signals, Power Hungry also declares policies subsidizing renewable sources of electricity, biofuels and electric vehicles as too costly and impractical to make a significant difference in making the U.S. power and transportation systems more sustainable.
So why take aim at mercury and lead, which is certain to drive up the cost of coal-fired electricity just as a carbon cap or tax would? Because, Bryce asserts, “arguing against heavy metal contaminants with known neurotoxicity will be far easier than arguing against carbon dioxide emissions. Cutting the output of mercury and the other heavy metals may, in the long run, turn out to have far greater benefits for the environmental and human health.” Bryce draws a parallel to the U.S. government ordering oil refiners to remove lead from gasoline starting in the 1970s.
In the book, which has has received predominantly good reviews on Amazon.com, Bryce makes some valid points about the carbon density of our energy sources. Among his overarching messages is that the carbon density of the world’s major economies is actually declining (see graph below). Not to be missed: his attack on carbon sequestration, pp. 160-165. His case about the threat of neurotoxins begins on p. 167.
There’s a lot more to this challenge of reducing America’s reliance on coal-fired power plants than this. But considering the failure by the U.S. Congress to agree on a carbon tax or cap, his idea has serious merit and deserves a broad discussion, especially as Congress reassess its budget priorities. This includes billions of dollars of tax breaks and incentives for oil and other fossil fuels.

Deaths in Moscow have doubled to an average of 700 people a day as the Russian capital is engulfed by poisonous smog from wildfires and a sweltering heat wave, a top health official said today, according to the Associated Press.
The Russian newspaper Pravda reported: “Moscow is suffocating. Thick toxic smog has been covering the sky above the city for days. The sun in Moscow looks like the moon during the day: it’s not that bright and yellow, but pale and orange with misty outlines against the smoky sky. Muscovites have to experience both the smog and sweltering heat at once.”
“Russia has recently seen the longest unprecedented heat wave for at least one thousand years, the head of the Russian Meteorological Center,” the news site Ria Novosti reported.
Various news sites report that foreign embassies have reduced activities or shut down, with many staff leaving Moscow to escape the toxic atmosphere.
Russian heatwave: This NASA map released today shows areas of Russia experiencing above-average temperatures this summer (orange and red). The map was released on NASA’s Earth Obervatory website.
NASA Earth Observatory image by Jesse Allen, based on MODIS land surface temperature data available through the NASA Earth Observations (NEO) Website. Caption by Michon Scott.
According to NASA:
In the summer of 2010, the Russian Federation had to contend with multiple natural hazards: drought in the southern part of the country, and raging fires in western Russia and eastern Siberia. The events all occurred against the backdrop of unusual warmth. Bloomberg reported that temperatures in parts of the country soared to 42 degrees Celsius (108 degrees Fahrenheit), and the Wall Street Journal reported that fire- and drought-inducing heat was expected to continue until at least August 12.
This map shows temperature anomalies for the Russian Federation from July 20-27, 2010, compared to temperatures for the same dates from 2000 to 2008. The anomalies are based on land surface temperatures observed by the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA’s Terra satellite. Areas with above-average temperatures appear in red and orange, and areas with below-average temperatures appear in shades of blue. Oceans and lakes appear in gray.
Not all parts of the Russian Federation experienced unusual warmth on July 20-27, 2010. A large expanse of northern central Russia, for instance, exhibits below-average temperatures. Areas of atypical warmth, however, predominate in the east and west. Orange- and red-tinged areas extend from eastern Siberia toward the southwest, but the most obvious area of unusual warmth occurs north and northwest of the Caspian Sea. These warm areas in eastern and western Russia continue a pattern noticeable earlier in July, and correspond to areas of intense drought and wildfire activity.
Bloomberg reported that 558 active fires covering 179,596 hectares (693 square miles) were burning across the Russian Federation as of August 6, 2010. Voice of America reported that smoke from forest fires around the Russian capital forced flight restrictions at Moscow airports on August 6, just as health officials warned Moscow residents to take precautions against the smoke inhalation.
Posted by David Braun
Earlier related post: Russia burns in hottest summer on record (July 28, 2010)
Talk about tough: These guys throw themselves out of 50-year-old aircraft into burning Siberian forests. (National Geographic Magazine feature, February 2008)
Photo by Mark Thiessen
Join Nat Geo News Watch community
Readers are encouraged to comment on this and other posts–and to share similar stories, photos and links–on the Nat Geo News Watch Facebook page. You must sign up to be a member of Facebook and a fan of the blog page to do this.
Leave a comment on this page
You may also email David Braun (email@example.com) if you have a comment that you would like to be considered for adding to this page. You are welcome to comment anonymously under a pseudonym.

New to Typophile? Accounts are free, and easy to set up.
In current practice, usage of the term case most likely refers to the use of uppercase (capital) or lowercase letters. See some examples below. In letterpress practice, case refers to the physical box (case), usually wooden, that a given set of letters is stored. Capital letters were stored in the upper (top) case and lowercase letters were stored in the lower (bottom) case.
ALL CAPS -- All letters are capitalized.
Title Case -- The first letter of each word is capitalized.
Sentence case -- where the first character is capital and the remaining words are lowercase.
Camel Case -- Also called internal caps where one or more characters in a given word (or string) has a capitalized letter. This is often used in programming languages and increasingly seen for naming or branding companies or products.
Greek OpenType Features

|born on||11 March 1611 at 12:00 (= 12:00 noon )|
|Place||Southwick, England, 50n50, 0w13|
|Timezone||LMT m0w13 (is local mean time)|
|Astrology data||20°32' 15°14 Asc. 17°30'|
British scientist, a brilliant linguist and mathematician. He was the son of a non-conformist clergyman who died when the boy was five and left the legacy of a good library. Pell was a bright and multi-lingual student and very handsome. Famed in philosophy and math, he established a school in Sussex.
Married in 1632, he had eight kids. Also unpractical and improvident, he struggled with his financial position and died in poverty 12/12/1685.
- Relationship : Marriage 1632 (Lasting)
- Death, Cause unspecified 12 December 1685 (Age 74)
chart Placidus Equal_H.
- Death of Father 1617 (When he was five)
Martin Harvey in Nativitas I, "His youngest uncle guessed 'about noon.'"
- Notable : Famous : Top 5% of Profession
- Notable : Extraordinary Talents : For Languages
- Vocation : Science : Mathematics/ Statistics (Mathematician)
- Family : Parenting : Kids more than 3 (Eight)
- Family : Relationship : Number of Marriages (One)
- Family : Childhood : Family traumatic event (Age five when dad died)
- Lifestyle : Financial : On the edge (Impractical; died in poverty)

What fun it is to build a snowman each year! This Shared Reading book is similar to the familar "Buckle My Shoe" but with original text. It shows each step necessary to make a snowman. It is a perfect way to develop the concept of sequencing with your students. ?This full colored printable comes with matching pictures and word cards for your Pocket Chart & a student extension worksheet to use in a poetry journal or as a Take-Home page.?Enjoy our poem! Jackie and Kylene
Jackie and Kylene primary grade teachers who specialize in Singable Text for grades Kindergarten & 1st. Our songs, poems, and songs are always set to familiar tunes and great for developing literacy skills in both English only and English Language Learners. We LOVE creating both our singables and other resources that support teachers like skill-based games, writing extensions, emergent readers.
Visit our website at www.jkcurriculumconnection.com for additional FREE downloads and teaching tips and resources.

Variation is a term used in genetic science, and concerns the emergence of different varieties, or species. This genetic phenomenon causes individuals or groups within a given species to possess different features from others. For example, all human beings on Earth possess essentially the same genetic information. But thanks to the variation potential permitted by that genetic information, some people have round eyes, or red hair, or a long nose, or are short and stocky in stature.
Darwinists, however, seek to portray variation within a species as evidence for evolution. The fact is, however, that variations constitute no such thing, because variation consists of the emergence of different combinations of genetic information that already exists, and cannot endow individuals with any new genetic information or characteristics.
Variation is always restricted by existing genetic information. These boundaries are known as the gene pool in genetic science. (See The Gene Pool.) Darwin, however, thought that variation had no limits when he proposed his theory267, and he depicted various examples of variation as the most important evidence for evolution in his book The Origin of Species.
All human beings on Earth share basically the same genetic information, but thanks to the variation potential permitted by this genetic information, they often look very different from one another.
According to Darwin, for example, farmers mating different variations of cow in order to obtain breeds with better yields of milk would eventually turn cows into another species altogether. Darwin’s idea of limitless change stemmed from the primitive level of science in his day. As a result of similar experiments on living things in the 20th century, however, science revealed a principle known as genetic homeostasis. This principle revealed that all attempts to change a living species by means of interbreeding (forming different variations) were in vain, and that between species, there were unbreachable walls. In other words, it was absolutely impossible for cattle to evolve into another species as the result of farmers mating different breeds to produce different variations, as Darwin had claimed would happen.
Luther Burbank, one of the world’s foremost authorities on the subject of genetic hybrids, expresses a similar truth: “there are limits to the development possible, and these limits follow a law.” 268 Thousands of years of collective experience have shown that the amount of biological change obtained using cross-breeding is always limited, and that there is a limit to the variations that any one species can undergo.
Indeed, in the introduction to their book Natural Limits to Biological Change Professor of Biology Lane P. Lester and the molecular biologist Raymond G. Bohlin wrote:
That populations of living organisms may change in their anatomy, physiology, genetic structure, etc., over a period of time is beyond question. What remains elusive is the answer to the question, How much change is possible, and by what genetic mechanism will these changes take place? Plant and animal breeders can marshal an impressive array of examples to demonstrate the extent to which living systems can be altered. But when a breeder begins with a dog, he ends up with a dog—a rather strange looking one, perhaps, but a dog nonetheless. A fruit fly remains a fruit fly; a rose, a rose, and so on.269
Variations and their various changes are restricted inside the bounds of a species’ genetic information, and they can never add new genetic information to species. For that reason, no variation can be regarded as an example of evolution.
The Danish scientist W. L. Johannsen summarizes the situation:
The variations upon which Darwin and Wallace placed their emphasis cannot be selectively pushed beyond a certain point, that such variability does not contain the secret of “indefinite departure.” 270
The fact that there are different human races in the world or the differences between parents and children can be explained in terms of variation. Yet there is no question of any new component being added to their gene pool. For example, no matter how much you seek to enrich their species, cats will always remain cats, and will never evolve into any other mammal. It is impossible for the sophisticated sonar system in a marine mammal to emerge through recombination. (See Recombination.) Variation may account for the differences between human races, but it can never provide any basis for the claim that apes developed into human beings.
Vestigial Organs Thesis
One claim that long occupied a place in the literature of evolution but was quietly abandoned once it was realized to be false is the concept of vestigial organs. Some evolutionists, however, still imagine that such organs represent major evidence for evolution and seek to portray them as such.
A century or so ago, the claim was put forward that some living things had organs that were inherited from their ancestors, but which had gradually become smaller and even functionless from lack of use.
The tonsils, which evolutionists long sought to define as vestigial organs, have been found to play an important role in protecting against throat in fections, particularly up until adulthood.
Those organs were in fact ones whose functions had not yet been identified. And so, the long list of organs believed by evolutionists to be vestigial grew ever shorter. The list of originally proposed by the German anatomist R. Wiedersheim in 1895 contain approximately 100 organs, including the human appendix and the coccyx. But the appendix was eventually realized to be a part of the lymph system that combats microbes entering the body, as was stated in one medical reference source in 1997:
Other bodily organs and tissues—-the thymus, liver, spleen, appendix, bone marrow, and small collections of lymphatic tissue such as the tonsils in the throat and Peyer’s patch in the small intestine—are also part of the lymphatic system. They too help the body fight infection. 271
The tonsils, which also appeared on that same list of vestigial organs, were likewise discovered to play an important role against infections, especially up until adulthood. (Like the appendix, tonsils sometimes become infected by the very bacteria they seek to combat, and so must be surgically removed.) The coccyx, the end of the backbone, was seen to provide support for the bones around the pelvic bone and to be a point of fixation for certain small muscles.
In the years that followed, other organs regarded as vestigial were shown to serve specific purposes: The thymus gland activates the body’s defense system by setting the T cells into action. The pineal gland is responsible for the production of important hormones. The thyroid establishes balanced growth in babies and children. The pituitary ensures that various hormone glands are functioning correctly.
Today, many evolutionists accept that the myth of vestigial organs stemmed from sheer ignorance. The evolutionist biologist S.R. Scadding expresses this in an article published in the magazine Evolutionary Theory:
Since it is not possible to unambiguously identify useless structures, and since the structure of the argument used is not scientifically valid, I conclude that ‘vestigial organs’ provide no special evidence for the theory of evolution.272
Evolutionists also make a significant logical error in their claim that vestigial organs in living things are a legacy from their ancestors: Some organs referred to as “vestigial” are not present in the species claimed to be the forerunners of man.
For example, some apes have no appendix. The zoologist Professor Hannington Enoch, an opponent of the vestigial organ thesis, sets out this error of logic:
Apes possess an appendix, whereas their less immediate relatives, the lower apes, do not; but it appears again among the still lower mammals such as the opossum. How can the evolutionists account for this? 273
The scenario of vestigial organs put forward by evolutionists contains its own internal inconsistencies, besides being scientifically erroneous. We humans have no vestigial organs inherited from our supposed ancestors, because humans did not evolve randomly from other living things, but were fully and perfectly created in the form we have today.
It has now been realized that the appendix (below), which evolutionist biologists imagined to be vestigial, plays an important role in the body's immune system. The lowest bone in the spinal column, known as the coccyx, is al so not vestigial, but a point for muscles to at tach to.

The dangers of feeding lorikeets
Lorikeet feeding habits
Lorikeets are brightly coloured parrots of the family Psittacidae and sub-family Loriinae (lories and lorikeets). Six species are found in Australia, although further species occur in New Guinea, Indonesia and many South Pacific islands.
The tip of a lorikeet's tongue holds a brush-like appendage, enabling the bird to feed on pollen, nectar and fruits. Because lorikeets are mainly seen feeding on blossoms, it was long thought that nectar was their staple diet. However, studies have now shown that pollen is probably their major food. They also eat insects and insect larvae, together with other invertebrates found in foliage and blossom.
Lorikeets travel in small, swift flocks which attract attention with their piercing calls. The birds locate blossoms by sight and by the calls of other birds already feeding. When food is abundant, large numbers gather in the blossoms and foliage, clamouring noisily.
Lorikeets have a very simple digestive system. Proteins and fats are obtained from pollen and insects, and carbohydrates come from the sugars found in nectar. They spend a large amount of time foraging for food, which indicates that carbohydrates are extremely important to them. Their diet is high in energy, and low in protein.
The dangers of feeding lorikeets
Many people have taken to encouraging lorikeets into their gardens by giving them a variety of alluring foods. These foods are usually based on sugar, honey or jam, which will ensure regular visits to the garden by these wonderfully happy, colourful birds. However, it is this very act of 'kindness' that can cause the death of lorikeets at an unnaturally early age.
OEH officers became concerned at outbreaks of lorikeets dying in large numbers for no apparent reason, and decided to investigate. Autopsies were carried out by NSW Agriculture. With other investigations, these autopsies established that the lorikeets were dying from a disease called necrotizing enteritis. A bacteria called clostridia was isolated as the organism responsible.
Necrotizing enteritis is associated with poor hygiene and an inadequate diet, and it was found that the disease is not normally associated with lorikeets living a natural way of life. The scientists could directly relate the lorikeets' deaths to inadequate artificial diets, and to the unsanitary conditions of trays and other containers from which they were being fed.
Another disease is also having a serious impact on lorikeets. Called psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD) or psittacine circovirus disease, it is considered the most important viral disease affecting cockatoos, parrots, lories, lorikeets and macaws around the world. Affecting the immune system of the birds, it often results in an AIDS-like condition. The keratin in the birds' bodies breaks down, causing deformed beaks and feathers, and feather loss. The disease is usually fatal, but infected birds may not display symptoms for many months or even years.
Infected birds can drop faeces, which contain the potentially infectious circovirus particles, into the environment to infect other birds. Unfortunately, there is a great potential for the virus to spread at places like feed stations. Clustering in large numbers, many birds may come into contact with contaminated perches and food dishes.
Preventing lorikeet deaths
Obviously the best solution to these problems is to stop feeding the birds altogether. The only feeding method recommended by OEH is to plant a variety of flowering native shrubs, such as grevilleas, callistemon (bottlebrushes) and banksias, around your garden. These plants not only look good; they also provide safe, healthy food for blossom-feeding birds such as lorikeets and honeyeaters.
Page last updated: 15 April 2011

Doing u-substitution twice (second time with w) Example where we do substitution twice to get the integral into a reasonable form
Doing u-substitution twice (second time with w)
⇐ Use this menu to view and help create subtitles for this video in many different languages. You'll probably want to hide YouTube's captions if using these subtitles.
- Let's see if we can take the integral of cosine of 5x over e to the sine of 5x dx.
- And there's a crow squawking outside of my window so I'll try to stay focused.
- So let's think about whether u-substitution might be appropriate. Your first temptation might to said,
- "Hey, maybe we let u equal sine of 5x, and if u is equal to sine of 5x,
- we have something that is pretty close to du up here." Let's verify that.
- So du could be equal to -- so du/dx (derivative of u with respect to x),
- well we just use the chain rule. Derivative of 5x is 5,
- times the derivative of sine of 5x with respect to 5x, that's just going to be cosine of 5x.
- If we want to write this in differential form, which is useful when we do our u-substitution,
- we could say that du is equal to 5 cosine 5x.
- Now when you look over here, we don't have quite du there. We have just cosine of 5x dx--
- sorry, I need cosine of 5x dx, just like that. So when you look over here,
- you have a cosine of 5x dx, but we don't have a 5 cosine of 5x dx,
- but we know how to solve that. We can multiply by 5 and divide by 5.
- 1/5 times 5 is just going to be 1. So we haven't changed the value of the expression.
- But when we do it this way, we see pretty clearly, we have our u and we have our du.
- Our du is 5 -- let me circle that and let me do that in that blue color --
- is 5 cosine of 5x dx. So we can rewrite this entire expression as --
- I'll do that 1/5 in purple -- this is going to be equal to 1/5 --
- I hope you don't hear that crow outside; he's getting quite obnoxious --
- 1/5 times the integral of, well all this stuff in blue is my du,
- and then that is over e to the u. So how do we take the anti-derivative of this?
- Well, you might be tempted to -- well, what would you do here?
- Well, we're still not quite ready to simply take the anti-derivative here.
- If I were to rewrite this, I could rewrite this as (this is equal to)
- 1/5 times the integral of e to the negative u du.
- And so, what might jump out of you is maybe we do another substitution,
- and we already use the letter u, so maybe we might use w. We'll do some "w-substitution."
- And you might be able to do this in your head, but we'll do w-substitution just to make it a little bit clearer.
- So let's -- this would've been really useful if this was just e to the u,
- because we know the anti-derivative of e to the u. It's just e to the u.
- So let's just try to get it in terms of the form of e to the negative something.
- So let's set -- and I'm running out of colors here -- w equal to negative u.
- And in that case, then dw (derivative of w with respect to u) is negative 1,
- or if we were to write that statement in differential form,
- dw is equal to du times negative 1 is negative du.
- So this right over here would be our w, and do we have a dw here?
- Well we just have du; we don't have a negative du there.
- But we can create a negative du by multiplying this inside by negative 1,
- but then also multiplying the outside by negative 1.
- Negative 1 times negative 1 is positive 1; we haven't changed the value.
- We have to do both of these in order for it to make sense.
- Or I could do it like this. So negative 1 over here, and a negative 1 right over there.
- And if we do it in that form, then this negative 1 times du --
- that's the same thing as negative du -- this is this right over here.
- And so we can rewrite our integral -- it's going to be equal to --
- now it's going to be negative 1/5 -- trying to use the colors as best as I can --
- times the indefinite integral of e to the -- well instead of negative u, we could right w.
- E to the w. And instead of du times negative 1 or negative du, we can write "dw."
- Now this simplifies things a good bit. We know what the anti-derivative of this in terms of w.
- This is going to be equal to negative 1/5 e to the w, and then we might have some constant there,
- so I just do a plus C. And now we just have to all of our un-substituting.
- So we know that w is equal to negative u, so we could write that --
- so this is equal to negative 1/5 -- I want to stay true to my colors -- e to the negative u,
- that's what w is equal to, plus C. But we're still not done un-substituting.
- We know that u is equal to sine of 5x. So we can write this as being equal to
- negative 1/5 times e to the negative u, which is negative u is sine of 5x,
- and then finally, we have our plus C. Now, there was a simpler way that we could've done this
- by just doing one substitution. But then you kind of have to look ahead a little bit
- and realize that it was not trivial to take -- not to bad to take your anti-derivative of e to the negative u.
- The inside that you might of have although you shouldn't really hold yourself
- when you feel too bad when you didn't see that inside.
- We could've rewritten that original integral -- let me rewrite it --
- it's cosine of 5x over e to the sine of 5x dx. We could've written this entire integral as being equal to
- cosine of 5x times e to the negative sine of 5x dx. And in this situation, we could've said
- u to be equal to negative of 5x, and say well, if u is equal to --
- or negative sine of 5x, then du is going to be equal to negative 5 cosine of 5x,
- and we don't have a negative 5 -- oh, dx, we don't have a negative 5 here,
- but we can construct one by putting negative 5 there, then multiplying by negative 1/5,
- and then that would've immediately simplified this integral right over here to be equal to
- negative 1/5 times the integral of -- well, we have our du -- let me do this in a different color --
- that's the negative 5 -- let me do it this way -- negative 5 cosine of 5x dx.
- So that is our du -- I'm just changing the order of multiplication -- times e to the u.
- This whole thing now is u this second time around. So if we did it this way, with just one substitution,
- we could've immediately gotten to the result that we wanted. You take the anti-derivative of this --
- I'll do it in one color now, just 'cause I think you get the idea -- this is equal to
- negative 1/5 e to the u plus C. u is equal to negative sine of 5x,
- so this is equal to negative 1/5 e to the negative sine of 5x plus C. And we're done.
- So this one is faster; it's simpler, and over time, you might even start being able to do this in your head.
- This top one, you still didn't mess up by just setting u equal to sine of 5x;
- we just have to do an extra substitution in order to work it through all the way.
- And I was able to do this video despite the crowing crow outside -- or squawking crow.
Be specific, and indicate a time in the video:
At 5:31, how is the moon large enough to block the sun? Isn't the sun way larger?
Have something that's not a question about this content?
This discussion area is not meant for answering homework questions.
Share a tip
When naming a variable, it is okay to use most letters, but some are reserved, like 'e', which represents the value 2.7831...
Have something that's not a tip or feedback about this content?
This discussion area is not meant for answering homework questions.
Discuss the site
For general discussions about Khan Academy, visit our Reddit discussion page.
Flag inappropriate posts
Here are posts to avoid making. If you do encounter them, flag them for attention from our Guardians.
- disrespectful or offensive
- an advertisement
- low quality
- not about the video topic
- soliciting votes or seeking badges
- a homework question
- a duplicate answer
- repeatedly making the same post
- a tip or feedback in Questions
- a question in Tips & Feedback
- an answer that should be its own question
about the site

Definitions of bullying
Bullying is when a person or a group repeatedly and intentionally uses or abuse their power to intimidate, hurt, oppress or damage someone else. It can be covert or cyber-based (happening online through social networks or even through mobile phones). Bullying can be physical or emotional.
According to the National Centre Against Bullying, there are five different kinds of bullying behaviour. They are:
1. Physical bullying: when physical actions such as hitting, poking, tripping or pushing, are used to hurt and intimidate. Repeatedly and intentionally damaging someone's belongings is also physical bullying, says the centre.
2. Verbal bullying: involves the use of negative words, like name calling, insults, homophobic or racist slurs, or words used to intentionally upset someone.
3. Social bullying: when lies, the spreading of rumours or nasty pranks are used. This includes repeated mimicking and deliberate exclusion.
4. Psychological bullying: involves the repeated and intentional use of words or actions which can cause psychological harm. Examples include intimidation, manipulation and stalking.
5. Cyber bullying: this is the big one at the moment and is when technology is used to verbally, socially or psychologically bully. It can occur in chat rooms, on social networking sites, through emails or on mobile phones.
- mutual arguments and disagreements
- single episodes of social rejection or dislike
- single-episode acts of nastiness or spite
- random acts of aggression or intimidation.
Find more bullying solutions and information
- 15 solutions to bullying and cyber bullying
- Helping when your child is bullied
- How bullies pick their victim
- My child is a bully
- What makes a bully
- What is bullying
- Facts and figures about bullying
- Is your child being bullied
- How to deal with bullying
- What parents can do about bullying
- When your child is a bully, here's what to do
- How to talk about bullying and cyber bullying
- Cyber bullying: here's what it is and how to tackle it
- How parents can prevent bullying
- School policies on bullying
This article was written by Fiona Baker, former editor in chief of Mother & Baby, Pregnancy & Birth and Wondertime magazines, for Kidspot, Australia's leading parenting and pregnancy resource. Sources include Bullying No Way , National Centre Against Bullying, Raising Children Network, Bullying Hurts brochure
- 1. Bunk beds for kids: The ultimate safety guide
- 2. 'Granny's gone to heaven': How to talk to your kids about death
- 3. How to get kids to listen
- 4. How to stop nagging
- 5. How birth order affects siblings
- 6. Pool safety
- 7. Kaz Cooke's 5 sibling rivalry tips
- 8. United parenting: how to be on the same page
- 9. How to tackle cyber bullies
- 10. When your child is the bully, here's what to do

Summer is usually the time for beach fun and barbeques but if you're stuck inside with a miserable cold, you may be sick longer than usual.
Medical experts are now saying that summer colds can last longer and have a higher chance of recurring than winter colds.
Winter viruses that cause upper respiratory infections are joined in the warmer months by enterovirus. This virus spread by coughing, sneezing and fecal matter. On top of the typical common cold symptoms, enterovirus can cause diarrhea, sore throats and rashes and linger around longer.
Another summer-specific factors is constant exposure to re-circulated air, which can dry out the lining of the nostrils and provide easier access to viruses. Dr. Muhammed Choudhry of Texas Health WNJ says there are several way to battle these summer colds.
"Most of these should respond to rest and plenty of hydration. They are usually caused by viruses and should get better in a few days. If they do not, you should talk to your doctor and see if there's something else that needs to be done such as a prescription to an antibiotic," said Choudhry.
You can prevent summer colds by following these tips:
WASH HANDS OFTEN
GET PLENTY OF SLEEP
EAT A BALANCED DIET
AVOID CONTACT WITH SICK PEOPLE
Designed by Gray Digital Media

Studies of a thigh bone fossil have uncovered strong evidence that a human-like creature walked upright six million years ago rather than the widely accepted four million years ago.
Walking on two feet, bipedalism , is one of the characteristics that distinguishes apes from humans.
‘Dating the beginnings of bipedalism is very important in the human story,' said Chris Stringer, human evolution expert at the Natural History Museum. 'Because, for many experts, it would mark a clear divergence from the ancestral/ape pattern and show that the human lineage had really begun.'
‘Bipedalism probably does represent a fundamental first step in human evolution,’ Stringer said. ‘As Darwin recognised, walking on two legs frees up the arms and hands for tasks like carrying, tool making, and tool use. And much of what happened in human evolution later on stemmed from it.’
CT (Computed tomography) scans were carried out on the fossil thigh bone and the density patterns of the bone were much closer to a modern human than to an ape.
Reported on the National Geographic website, Robert Eckhardt, who lead the research team at Pennsylvania State University, said ‘In present-day chimps and gorillas, the thicknesses in the upper and lower parts of that bone are approximately equal. In modern humans, the bone on top is thinner than on the bottom by a ratio of one to four or more.’ The ratio in the fossil was one to three, showing a bone formation more in line for an upright walker.
Eckhardt and the research team report their findings in the journal Science .

After failing to win reelection to the Congress Morris moved to Philadelphia and resumed his law practice. A series of newspaper articles on finance secured him the post of assistant to Robert Morris (no relative) in handling the finances of the new government (1781-85). In this position he planned the U.S. decimal coinage system. As a member of the U.S. Constitutional Convention of 1787 Morris played an active role, defending a strong centralized government and a powerful executive, opposing concessions on slavery, and putting the Constitution into its final literary form. He remained, however, a champion of aristocracy who distrusted democratic rule.
In 1789 Moris went to France as a private business agent, remained in Europe, and was appointed (1792) U.S. minister to France. During the French Revolution his sympathies lay with the royalists; he even helped plan a scheme to rescue Louis XVI. His recall was requested in 1794, but he traveled for several years before returning to America in 1798. From 1800 to 1803, Morris, a Federalist, was a U.S. senator from New York. He then retired to his estate. He condemned the War of 1812, going so far as to recommend the severance of the federal union. Morris was a strong advocate of the Erie Canal and served as chairman (1810-13) of the canal commission.
See his Diary of the French Revolution (1939), edited by his great-granddaughter, Beatrix Cary Davenport; biographies by T. Roosevelt (1888, repr. 1972), D. Walther (tr. 1934), and R. Brookhiser (2003); M. M. Mintz, Gouverneur Morris and the American Revolution (1970).
(born , Jan. 31, 1752, Morrisania house, Manhattan—died Nov. 6, 1816, Morrisania house) American statesman and financial expert. He was admitted to the bar (1771) and served in the New York Provincial Congress (1775–77) and the Continental Congress (1778–79). He distrusted the democratic tendencies of colonists who wanted to break with England, but his belief in independence led him to join their ranks. As assistant superintendent of finance (1781–85), he proposed the decimal coinage system that became the basis for U.S. currency. A delegate to the Constitutional Convention, he helped write the final draft of the Constitution of the United States. He served as minister to France (1792–94) and as a U.S. Senator (1800–03), and he was the first chairman of the Erie Canal commission (1810–16).
Learn more about Morris, Gouverneur with a free trial on Britannica.com.
Born in what is now part of New York City in 1752, Gouverneur Morris was of Welsh and Huguenot background. Morris graduated from King's College, known since the American Revolution as Columbia University, in 1768. He practiced law in the city starting in 1771.
Morris had a wooden leg as a result of an accident that occurred while he was climbing onto a carriage without anyone tending to the horses, which suddenly took off, catching his left leg in one of the carriage wheels on May 14, 1780. Physicians told Morris that they had no choice but to remove the leg below the knee.
On May 8, 1775, Morris was elected to represent his family estate in the New York Provincial Congress, an extralegal assembly dedicated to achieving independence. His advocacy of independence brought him into conflict with his family, as well as his mentor William Smith, who had abandoned the patriot cause when it moved towards independence.
Despite an automatic exemption from military duty because of his handicap and his service in the legislature, he joined a special "briefs" club for the protection of New York City, a forerunner of the modern New York Guard.
After the Battle of Long Island in August 1776, the British seized New York City and his family's estate. His mother, a Loyalist, gave the estate over to the British for military use. Because his estate was now in the possession of the enemy, he was no longer eligible for election to the New York state legislature and was instead appointed as a delegate to the Continental Congress.
He took his seat in Congress on January 28, 1778 and was immediately selected to a committee in charge of coordinating reforms in the military with General Washington. On a trip to Valley Forge, he was so appalled by the conditions of the troops that he became the spokesman for the Continental Army in Congress and pushed for substantial reforms in the training and methods of the army. He also signed the Articles of Confederation in 1778.
In 1779, he was defeated for re-election to Congress, largely because his advocacy of a strong central government was at odds with the decentralist views in New York. Defeated in his home state, he moved to Philadelphia to work as a lawyer and merchant.
In Philadelphia, he was appointed assistant superintendent of finance (1781-1785), and was a Pennsylvania delegate to the Constitutional Convention in 1787, before returning to live in New York in 1788.
During the convention, he was a friend and ally of George Washington and others who favored a stronger central government. Morris was elected to serve on a committee of five (chaired by William Samuel Johnson) that would draft the final language of the proposed Constitution. Catherine Drinker Bowen, in Miracle at Philadelphia, called Morris the committee's "amanuensis," meaning that it was his pen that was responsible for most of the draft.
"An aristocrat to the core," Morris believed that "there never was, nor ever will be a civilized Society without an Aristocracy". He also thought that common people were incapable of self-government and feared that the poor would sell their votes to rich people, and consequently thought that voting should be restricted to property owners. Morris also opposed admitting new Western states on an equal basis with the existing Eastern states, fearing that the interior wilderness could not furnish "enlightened" statesmen. At the Convention he gave more speeches than any other delegate, totaling 173.
He went to Europe on business in 1789 and served as Minister Plenipotentiary to France from 1792-1794. His diaries written during that time have become an invaluable chronicle of the French Revolution, capturing much of the turbulence and violence of that era. He returned to the United States in 1798 and was elected in 1800 as a Federalist to the United States Senate to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of James Watson, serving from April 3, 1800, to March 3, 1803. He was an unsuccessful candidate for reelection in 1802. After leaving the Senate, he served as chairman of the Erie Canal Commission, 1810-1813.
At the age of 57, he married Anne Cary ("Nancy") Randolph, who was the sister to Thomas Mann Randolph, husband of Thomas Jefferson's daughter Martha Jefferson Randolph. He died at the family estate of Morrisania and is buried at St. Ann's Episcopal Church in the Bronx borough of New York City.
Morris's half-brother, Lewis Morris (1726-1798), was a signer of the Declaration of Independence. Another half-brother, Staats Long Morris, was a Loyalist and major-general in the British army during the American Revolution. His nephew, Lewis Richard Morris, served in the Vermont legislature and in the United States Congress. His grandnephew was William M. Meredith, United States Secretary of the Treasury under Zachary Taylor. Morris's great-grandson, also named Gouverneur (1876-1953), was an author of pulp novels and short stories during the early twentieth century. Several of his works were adapted into films, including the famous Lon Chaney, Sr. film The Penalty.
Envoy to the Terror: Gouverneur Morris and the French Revolution.(Napoleon's Troublesome Americans: Franco-American Relations, 1804-1815)(Book review)
Jun 22, 2007; Envoy to the Terror: Gouverneur Morris and the French Revolution. By Melanie Randolph Miller. (Dulles, VA: Potomac Books, 2005....

Habitat Affects Escape Behavior of Birds
It seems birds of the same species raised in diverse settings behave differently in the face of a threat. Birds raised in an urban environment react differently than country-bred birds when faced with a predator.
A study undertaken by Diego Ibanez-Alamo, researcher at the University of Granada (UGR) and Anders Pape Moller from Paris-Sud University, highlights the fact that urbanization plays an influential role in a bird's survival strategies.
They analyzed the escape techniques of 1,132 birds belonging to 15 species in different rural and urban areas.
Like Us on Facebook
The study showed that city birds have changed their behavior to adapt to new threats like cats, which are their main enemies in an urban habitat, instead of their more traditional enemies in the countryside, such as the sparrow hawk.
"When they are captured, city birds are less aggressive, they produce alarm calls more frequently, they remain more paralyzed when attacked by their predator and they lose more feathers than their countryside counterparts," explained by Juan Diego Ibanez-Alamo.
They were surprised to see that urbanization was directly linked with these differences. This finding gives rise to the concept that escape strategies evolve alongside the expansion of cities.
"It is crucial to discover how birds adapt to transformations in their habitat so that we can decrease their effects," said Ibanez-Alamo..
"Predation change caused by city growth is serious," outlined Ibanez-Alamo.
As the scientist indicates, tactics against their hunters are "crucial" so that birds can adapt to their new environment: "Birds should modify their behavior to be able to survive in cities because if not, they will become extinct at the mercy of urban growth."
These results appear in the journal, Animal Behavior.

FDA OKs Nexium for Kids 1-11
FDA Approves Nexium for Short-Term Treatment of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) in Young Children
Feb. 28, 2008 -- The FDA today approved short-term use of the drug Nexium for children aged 1-11 with gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD).
The FDA OK'd Nexium in two forms -- a delayed-release capsule and a liquid
form -- in doses of 10 milligrams or 20 milligrams for kids aged 1-11.
Nexium was already approved for children aged 12-17 in 20 mg or 40 mg
"This approval provides important information for appropriate dosing for
children ages 1-11 years with GERD," Julie Beitz, MD, director of the FDA's
Office for Drug Evaluation III in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
"Children prescribed this drug should be monitored by their physicians for
any adverse drug reactions."
Nexium is part of a class of drugs known as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).
PPIs decrease the amount of acid produced in the stomach and help heal erosions
in the lining of the esophagus, a condition known as erosive
The FDA approved Nexium's use in children aged 1-11 for short-term treatment
of GERD based data extrapolated from previous studies done in adults, as well
as studies done in children.
In one study, 109 GERD patients aged 1-11 were treated with Nexium once
daily for up to eight weeks to evaluate Nexium's safety and tolerability. Most
of the patients showed healing of their esophageal erosions after eight weeks
The most common adverse reactions in children treated with Nexium were headache, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, gas, constipation, dry mouth, and
Nexium isn't approved for children younger than 1. The drug's safety and
efficacy hasn't been established in children in that age range, the FDA
Nexium is made by the drug company AstraZeneca.

I was helping a friend with setting up her iMac computer yesterday for genealogy and she said something that caught my attention. She said, "I have to learn what all the genealogy terms mean." That brought home a common problem with all specializations; learning the jargon.
Jargon is a really a technical term I became acquainted with during my graduate studies in Linguistics at the University of Utah. It is defined as special words or expressions that are used by a particular profession or group and are difficult for others to understand. The main problem with jargon is that we often do not even know we are using it.
Take for example, the word "genealogy" itself, as in "I am doing my genealogy" or "I am working on my genealogy." What does that statement communicate to a non-genealogist? And sometimes we wonder why we get blank stares. The challenge is that there is really no way to avoid jargon. It is present in every (I mean every) activity and profession and interest in the entire world from skydiving to sewing. Every human activity has its own special set of insider terms.
Jargon can be very exclusionary. If you are the outsider, trying to understand what the "insiders" are talking about can be a formidable challenge. An extreme type of jargon is called an argot. Sometimes the word argot is associated with criminal activities so using the word jargon is more appropriate. Usually term "argot" is used to identify an extreme jargon specifically designed to exclude outsiders. What is more difficult is that the people who are using the jargon are usually not even aware that they are using specialized words and terminology.
I have noticed that many people who are new to genealogy are put off immediately by genealogists using terms they don't immediately understand. For example, they are asked if they have a pedigree chart or family group record. Although these terms seem so simple and fundamental, they are in fact very specialized uses of common words. If you add in the jargon associated with computers and computer use, coming into the world of genealogy can be formidable.
By the way, it often doesn't help to try to explain or define our "jargon" terms because we end up using even more jargon to define the terms. I suggest that when you are talking to non-genealogists, you think carefully about the terms you are using and ask frequent questions to see if those you are speaking to understand what you are saying.

Editor’s Note: Ronald E. Hall, Ph.D. is a professor at Michigan State University and the author of "The Melanin Millennium." He has lectured on skin color both domestically and internationally, and testified as an expert witness in skin color discrimination cases. His forthcoming book is a revised edition of "The Color Complex."
By Ronald E. Hall, Special to CNN
(CNN) - In the early part of this century, there were separate facilities for blacks and whites, the Ku Klux Klan was a popular white supremacist organization and racism was easy to see.
In 1964, civil rights legislation outlawed racial discrimination, and there has been an advance of racial equality, including the election, and re-election of the first black president.
But while overt acts of racism have declined, discrimination continues in another form: colorism.
Colorism is a manifestation of how Western imperialism has exported European ideals, most notably the universal idealization of light skin, to American shores.
Not only have whites discriminated against blacks because of skin color, but people of color have also discriminated against one another. While colorism has existed for some time, it has only been recently acknowledged, as seen in the increase of legal cases and studies examining this “ism.”
Colorism is rooted in the long span of American history. The NAACP’s Crisis magazine printed an editorial on a heated exchange between the light-skinned W. E. B. DuBois and the dark-skinned Marcus Garvey. DuBois referred to Garvey as "fat, black” and “ugly," as if to suggest that a dark skin color denoted inferiority. Such an exchange was not an anomaly. A prominent NAACP official referred to Garvey by skin color, as a "Jamaican Negro of unmixed stock.” The not-so-subtle derogatory remark implied that having dark skin was unattractive.
Recently, I was retained as an expert witness for a suit filed against Sears Holding Management Corp. in Chicago. The plaintiff in the case was African-American, and previously employed by the defendant as an executive. In filing suit, the plaintiff alleged she was denied equal pay, promotion and then terminated on the basis of her age, race and skin color. According to testimony, a light-skinned African-American male employee of the company with less seniority cooperated in the plaintiff’s eventual termination. The case is ongoing.
In 1989, the Federal District Court of Atlanta heard the case of Walker vs. the Internal Revenue Service. Tracey Walker, the plaintiff, alleged that her IRS supervisor discriminated against her via performance evaluations on the basis of skin color. This is a landmark case as both the plaintiff and her supervisor are African-Americans. The plaintiff is light-skinned, whereas the defendant, by comparison, is dark-skinned. The presiding judge determined that such discrimination is a fact in the African-American community but that the plaintiff had failed to prove it to his satisfaction in her particular case.
The issue has not only been among African-Americans. In Felix v. Marquez, a case litigated in 1981 by the U.S. District Court of the District of Columbia, the litigants were employees of the Office of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in Washington. The darker-skinned Felix alleged that the lighter-skinned defendant did not promote her because of colorism. During the trial, Felix contended that only two of her 28 fellow employees were as dark or darker in skin color than she, which Felix suggested is the reason she was not promoted.
The increase in legal cases has been telling of the increase in acknowledging colorism in the United States, and recent studies have also explored the topic around the world.
Eurogamy is a discriminatory marital pattern based on having light skin. Eurogamy was demonstrated in a study done in Asia using random samples of a mail-order bride magazine published from 1991 through 2000. In the study, 620 Asian females were questioned about their spousal preferences. When light skin was a requirement for marriage, 96% of the females requested Caucasian men, 2% requested Asian men and 2% requested Hispanic men.
Colorism is manifested in discriminatory references to skin color, even who is seen as a suitable mate: If there is no action, it will continue as another insidious “ism” of the new millennium.
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Ronald E. Hall.

Title IX built generation of better athletesby Alex Friedrich, Minnesota Public Radio
ST. PAUL, Minn. — For the girls at this year's Minnesota high school track and field championships, Title IX is a lesson in a history book.
The sports it helped open up now dominate the lives of many of the girls.
Take 18-year-old Aitkin, Minn., High School senior Emily Lundgren, who runs the 400 meters.
Lundgren, who has been captain of her track and basketball teams and also plays tennis, said sports have been a big part of her life since the first grade.
"That's what you do in your summer — you practice your sports," she said. "They mean a lot to me, to say the least. They've really made me who I am today."
Lundgren and her teammates are arguably better athletes because of Title IX. It has given them better coaching, training facilities and even sports and nutrition research than girls received 40 years ago.
The change is the result of Title IX, a landmark piece of federal legislation enacted 40 years ago tomorrow.
Designed to prevent gender discrimination in the nation's education system, Title IX has paid dividends. Ten times more young women now play high-school sports than in 1972, according to statistics from National Federation of State High School Associations. There are six times as many female college athletes in NCAA colleges.
But it has become better known for opening up sports to women. Critics, meanwhile, say that progress has come at the cost of men's programs.
Stronger high school athletes grow into better college players -- and a few into professional athletes.
One example of the resources now available is the basketball camp held for young girls this month at the University of St. Thomas in St. Paul. Varsity women's basketball players helped run the girls through drills, teach them special moves and immerse them in the game.
One of the teachers is Alyssa Favilla, a St. Thomas sophomore varsity forward who said sports gave her structure.
"They taught me time management — and how to be a competitor," she said. "And I use that in the classroom, too."
With each generation since Title IX, female athletes have grown bigger, stronger and faster, said Mary Jo Kane, director of the University of Minnesota's center for research on women's sports.
"They are infinitely more gifted than they have ever been," Kane said. "And it is a direct result of the decision of Title IX."
Kane, 61, knows what it's like to have been excluded. She grew up a tomboy in Illinois in the 1950s and '60s and played touch football, basketball and baseball in her neighborhood. But her high school had no organized sports for girls.
The choice was little better for JoAnn Andregg, now associate athletic director at the University of St. Thomas. At her California high school, women's volleyball and basketball held second-class status: No coaches. No budget. No rights to the gym.
"That usually meant we got in there after the boys' team was finished practicing," Andregg said. "Then we got in there. And we had to wear these God-awful uniforms, these one-piece uniforms for practice and games. I remember that so distinctly. "
Title IX changed that. Now, high schools and colleges typically provide sports opportunities proportional to the number of enrolled students of each gender.
In the last four decades, the number of women's college teams per campus has almost quadrupled, according to a report by Brooklyn College professors R. Vivian Acosta and Linda Jean Carpenter. But that has led to criticism that growth has come at the expense of men's programs.
While women now outnumber men on many college campuses, critics note that fewer women play college sports.
The American Sports Council, a group that wants to Congress to overhaul Title IX, has filed two lawsuits contesting the requirement of proportional sports offerings. Council media director Jim McCarthy said cash-strapped colleges have limited or slashed men's sports such as swimming, volleyball and soccer to make room for women's sports such as rowing, ice hockey and bowling.
McCarthy said Title IX requirements have led to a quota system that excludes male athletes who normally would have a shot at sports.
"That's been an absolute outrage, because the law is supposed to protect against discrimination," he said.
The solution, McCarthy said, is to end proportionality -- or at least survey all students about their real sports interests.
"Let the students themselves have a voice in how the law is applied," he said.
Kane and other Title IX supporters don't oppose surveys. But she said the methodology of past attempts has been flawed, and new surveys would have to be constructed and administered correctly.
Title IX supporters also say colleges are
Kane says colleges could cut the fat from large football programs and use the savings to pay for women's sports without dropping men's.
Students still seem to prefer men's sports, judging from what some college athletes say.
"We've earned a lot of respect," Favilla said. "But I can see how they don't see us as equal sometimes. We don't dunk or don't sprint as fast. But usually they treat us well."
Andregg, of St. Thomas, is concerned with one ironic outcome of the legislation.
Thanks to Title IX, women's college sports have become more competitive. So men now want to coach them. According to the Brooklyn College report, more than half of women's college sports teams have male coaches. Before Title IX, only one in 10 did.
"We're going to have daughters coming up who never see a female coach," Andregg said of the trend. "And I just think that's a shame."
If that happens, Andregg says, girls won't have many female athletic role models - and that might risk the gains they've made in the past 40 years.

Great apes go through mid-life crisis
They may not take up surfing or start second careers as cupcake-makers, but chimpanzees and orangutans seem to go through a ‘mid-life crisis’, just like humans.
A study of 508 great apes in captivity shows that the animals’ sense of well-being bottoms out in their late 20s to mid-30s, the ape equivalent of middle age, before rebounding in old age.
The finding that mid-life crises may not be uniquely human suggests that the events might have a biological, rather than a sociological, cause.
Men and women worldwide, regardless of their wealth or status, experience a dip in happiness at middle-age, generally defined as from the mid-30s to late 50s. Despite this universality, social scientists have struggled to identify the underlying cause of the dissatisfaction. Social and economic factors, such as financial hardship and the failure to realize unrealistic ambitions, are possible causes.
Alexander Weiss, a psychologist at the University of Edinburgh, UK, and his team set out to see if there might be a biological factor involved in the crises. They sought to assess the well-being of captive chimpanzees and orangutans as judged by their keepers or those who knew them well.
The apes covered all age ranges, and their ‘happiness’ was rated through a survey answered by their keepers. The survey covered four criteria: the animals’ overall mood; how much pleasure they got out of socializing; their success in achieving goals such as obtaining food and objects they desire; and how happy the keeper would be if he or she were that animal for a week.
The survey is admittedly anthropomorphic, says Weiss, but he adds that it is easy for someone who spends a lot of time with an ape to gauge its mood. Moreover, his previous work shows that the measure of well-being is consistent when measured by different caretakers, and is based, in part, on inherited genetic factors.
Among three different groups of chimps and orangutans surveyed, the happiest tended to be the oldest and youngest, and the most dissatisfied tended to be in their 30s. The study, however, is a snapshot — it didn’t follow any of the apes over time — which means there could be confounding factors such as the early death of unhappy apes. Nonetheless, Weiss believes the results offer a true picture.

Even if, internationally, Austria is not considered to be a special case, there is still widespread agreement on the fact that cooperation and the coordination of interests between the federations is one of this country’s distinctive features. The common definition for this type of cooperation is “social partnership”.
The federations and chambers work in close contact with one or other of the two political parties, the Austrian People’s Party or the Social Democratic Party of Austria. The considerable economic growth and rise in employment and wages during the 1950s and 1960s created a favourable basis for the exchange of economic and socio-political interests. All this contributed to the wide-spread establishment of the Austrian system of social partnership in the 1960s. If the 1970s could be regarded as its heyday, the 1990s, in particular, have witnessed a change in this system’s significance.
Social partnership is neither anchored in the Austrian constitution nor laid down in any specific act. It is rooted in the free will of the players concerned. To a large extent, it is implemented informally and confidentially and is not normally accessible to the general public.
The umbrella federations of the social partners wield great influence as regards political opinion-forming and decision-making. Their co-operation has thus often been criticised as a “secondary government”, although the political omnicompetence often attributed to the social partners has, in fact, never existed as such. The co-operation and coordination of interests among the associations and with the government have only ever applied to specific fields of politics, such as income policies and certain aspects of economic and social policies, (e.g. industrial safety regulations, agrarian market legislation, labour market policies and principles of equal treatment). In these areas, during the past decades the social partners have substantially contributed to Austria’s economic, social and political stability – evidence of which can be found in economic growth, in the rise of employment, in the expansion of the welfare state and also in the often quoted “social peace”.
Several avenues for political decision-making are open to the large national federations. A traditionally used channel is their close relationship with one or the other of the long-standing government parties, i.e. the Social Democratic Party or the Austrian People’s Party. In addition, the federations are incorporated, both formally and informally, into the political opinion-forming process of the relevant ministries, as evidenced by their participation in a number of committees, advisory boards and commissions. Even at the parliamentary level, involvement of experts from the federations and chambers is a normal practice.
Austria’s accession to the European Union has expanded the federations’ scope in that they not only have privileged access to relevant information and documentation. Of even greater importance are their possibilities for influencing the Austrian position in proposing EU legislation. All in all, by comparison with many other countries, this means that the large national federations in Austria have excellent possibilities for shaping the policies relating to their interests. However, social partnership in the true sense of the word goes beyond this: its core task consists of the balancing of opposing interests in the aforementioned political fields through contextual compromises among federations or between the federations and the government.
Since the 1980s, economic, social and political changes have become apparent in Austria, too. Evidence of this lies in reduced economic growth, rising budgetary deficits, increasing competition and unemployment, and an expanding rivalry between the political parties. Against this backdrop, it has not only become more difficult for the federations to align the different interests of their members to a common denominator: reduced turnout in elections to the chambers and the general calling into question of compulsory membership are symptoms of change. In addition, it is not only becoming increasingly difficult, but also rarer, to strike a balance between the federations’ interests. Well-known institutions, such as the Paritätische Kommission für Lohn- und Preisfragen (Parity Commission for Wages and Prices), which – particularly in the comments of foreign observers – has been widely recognised as a central institution of the Austrian social partnership, have lost some of their significance. The changes are mainly manifest in the re-weighting of the influence of the players involved in the political decision-making process; the government has gained formative power and influence. In important budgetary, economic and socio-political questions it decides both the procedure and the core contents. Austria’s accession to the European Union has reinforced this development. At the same time, however, EU membership also entails a loss of terrain for the federations. Decisions on topics such as agricultural, competition and monetary policies are decided at EU level. Here, the influence of the federations is essentially limited to formulating the Austrian position, which is just one out of 15.
All this does not currently mean that the system of social partnership has come to an end. There are also visible signs of continuity. The privileged position of the national federations remains unchanged. In the political decision-making process a balance of interests can still be achieved. However, the influence has lessened. Not the end, but certainly changes and reforms of the social partnership, are currently on the agenda.

"From the creators of Animachines, a playful way for kids to learn actions, animals, and opposites."
Opposites are everywhere in our world. A day at the park will reveal busy kids and active animals doing opposite actions. There, on the slide: Sam goes up as Hiroko zips down. And there, in the tree: one squirrel climbs up and another scurries down. Not far away, Daddy is quiet but Simon is LOUD, while a mother bird is silent as she feeds her chirping babies.
In Kids Do, Animals Too ten pairs explain opposites to young children. Each pair features people and a different animal, including: fast, slow -- dogs in, out -- mice up, down -- squirrels on, off -- frogs ahead, behind -- ants quiet, loud -- birds under, over -- spiders wet, dry -- ducks toward, away -- butterflies asleep, awake -- squirrels, bats
The softly colored artwork features familiar park settings, and includes look-and-find details that cleverly connect each active scene. Meanwhile, the aptly crafted language keeps the action moving and the learning fun.

January 10, 2002
Parshat Vaerah (Exodus 6:2-9:35)
From the Torah's beginning until its end, God is portrayed as being personally involved in the welfare of humanity. Deism is not a Jewish notion. God is not an "unmoved mover," the proverbial clockmaker who after assembling and winding his ware, steps back watching it tick down, never to again involve Himself with it. On the contrary, God hears our innermost thoughts, feels our deepest concerns, judges us and guides us through our lives. A traditional Jewish concept of God is one that is interactive and intimately personal.
This week's Torah portion, Vaerah, begins with God hearing, and ultimately reacting to, the Israelites brutal enslavement. "I have now heard the moaning of the Israelites because the Egyptians are holding them in slavery, and I have remembered My covenant." (Exodus 6:5) The covenant being remembered is between God and the Israelite people. Curiously, it was the king of Egypt, and not God, or the Israelites themselves, who coined the phrase, "Israelite People." Acting out of panic, Pharaoh wanted to do away with the Hebrews, when he declared they were becoming too numerous. (Exodus 1:9)
Even so, the distinction placed on our understanding of covenant is an important one. The covenant serves to bind God to an entire group, not to an individual, or a handful of individuals. "The God of Israel is no mythological deity who mingles freely with men in history," writes philosopher Rabbi Emil Fackenheim in his book, "God's Presence in History." "Nevertheless, not messengers, not angels, not intermediaries, but God himself acts in human history."
God hears the cries of the people Israel and responds. The plagues used to dislodge the Hebrew slaves are physical indicators of God's personal involvement. Admittedly, not all the Hebrew slaves were liberated from their miserable environment. Over the span of several hundred years, countless generations of Israelites were born and died while held captive by Pharaoh and his cohorts, never having experienced the beauty of life.
Collectively, we have survived as a people, and the covenant between God and us continues. While unimaginably large numbers of Jews have suffered and died throughout history, the Jewish People continue to thrive; the covenant remains intact. To those who are turned off to faith because of great personal, or even national loss, little can be said; out of respect, perhaps nothing ought to be said. After the Holocaust, for example, a number of Jewish theologians have felt the covenant was so compromised that it is no longer binding.
All that notwithstanding, the spiritual question most of us encounter is whether life is little more than a series of coincidences. To some, our existence is the outgrowth of luck, possibly karma, astrology or magic. To the Jew, our people's existence is the result of God, and the covenant we have with Him. No doubt, life is made more palatable because of it. And, if the message conveyed throughout the Torah is correct, all peoples, Jewish or not, are additionally blessed to have a God who is personally involved in the day-to-day affairs of their lives.
Michael Gotlieb is the rabbi of Kehillat Ma'arav in Santa Monica.

By Vendor > AgBio Communications > grassland plants of south dakota and the northern great plains
grassland plants of south dakota and the northern great plains
"Learning to identify and understand the plants that produce the forage, provide the cover, protect the soil, and enrich our lives in many ways is an essential first step to conserving our native grassland, whether they are the grasslands we own and manage, or the grasslands we hunt and hike over, or simply the grasslands we view from our vehicles. This photographic guide can help you discover and learn about the plants inhabitating our northern prairies and plains." David J. Ode, Botanist/Ecologist, South Dakota Game, Fish and Parks Department Authors are James R. Johnson and Gary E. Larson
$19.95 and Free Shipping
As Done By:
AgBio Communications — Click to view all items by this member.

Herbal In Italy
( Originally Published 1912 )
The Italian botanists of the Renaissance devoted them-selves chiefly to interpreting the works of the classical writers on Natural History, and to the identification of the plants to which they referred. This came about quite naturally, from the fact that the Mediterranean flora, which they saw around them, was actually that with which the writers in question had been, in their day, familiar. The botanists of southern Europe were not compelled, as were those whose homes lay north of the Alps, to distort facts before they could make the plants of their native country fit into the procrustean bed of classical descriptions.
One of the chief of the commentators and herbalists of this period was Pierandrea Mattioli [or Matthiolus] (Text-fig. 40), who was born at Siena in 1501, and died of the plague in 1577. We realise something of the frightful extent of this scourge, when we remember that it claimed as victims no less than three of the small company of Renaissance botanists, Gesner, Mattioli and Zaluzian. Leonhard Fuchs was brought into fame by his successful treatment of one of these epidemics. It should also be recalled that, while Gaspard Bauhin, one of the best known of the later herbalists, was practising as a physician at Basle, no less than three of these terrible outbreaks occurred in the town.
Mattioli was the son of a doctor, and his early life was passed in Venice, where his father was in practice. He was destined for the law, but his inherited tastes led him away from jurisprudence to medicine. He practised in several different towns, and became physician, successively, to the Archduke Ferdinand, and to the Emperor Maximilian II.
Mattioli's ` Commentarii in sex libros Pedacii Dioscoridis,' his chef-d'oeuvre, the gradual production and improvement of which occupied his leisure hours throughout his life, was first published in 1544. It was translated into many languages and appeared in countless editions. The success of the work was phenomenal, and it is said that 32,000 copies of the earlier editions were sold. The title does not do the book justice, for it contains, besides an exposition of Dioscorides, a Natural History dealing with all the plants known to Mattioli. The early editions had small illustrations only (Text-figs. 41, 42, 93 and 94), but, later on, editions with large and very beautiful figures were published, such as that which appeared at Venice in 1565.
Mattioli's descriptions of the plants with which he deals are not so good as those of some of his contemporaries.
He found and recorded a certain number of new plants, especially from the Tyrol, but most of the species, which he described for the first time, were not his own discoveries, but were communicated to him by others. Luca Ghini, for instance, had projected a similar work, but handed over all his material to Mattioli, who also placed on record the discoveries made by the physician, Wilhelm Quakelbeen, who had accompanied the celebrated diplomatist, Auger-Gislain Busbecq, on a mission to Turkey.
Busbecq brought from Constantinople a wonderful collection of Greek manuscripts, including Juliana Anicia's copy of the Materia Medica of Dioscorides, now in the Vienna Library (see pp. 8 and 154). He discovered this great manuscript in the hands of a Jew, who required a hundred ducats for it. This price was almost prohibitive, but Busbecq was an enthusiast, and he successfully urged the Emperor, whose representative he was, to redeem so illustrious an author from that servitudes." His purpose in buying the manuscript seems to have been largely in order to communicate it to Mattioli, who would thus be able to make use of it in preparing his Commentaries on Dioscorides.
The personal character of Mattioli does not appear to have been a pleasant one. He engaged in numerous controversies with his fellow botanists, and hurled the most abusive language at those who ventured to criticise him.
Another Italian herbalist, Castor Durante, slightly later in date than Mattioli, should perhaps be mentioned here, not because of the intrinsic value of his work, but because of its widespread popularity. At least two of his books appeared in many editions and translations.
Durante was a physician who issued a series of botanical compilations, bedizened with Latin verse. The best known of his works is the Herbaro Nuovo,' published at Rome in 1585 (Text-figs. 45 and 103). A second book, the original version of which is seldom met with, has survived in the form of a German translation, by Peter Uffenbach. The German version was named ` Hortulus Sanitatis.' As an illustration of Durante's charmingly unscientific manner, we may take the legend of the " Arbor tristis " which occurs in both these works. The figure which accompanies it (Text-fig. 45) shows, beneath the moon and stars, a drawing of a tree whose trunk has a human form. The description, as it occurs in the ` Hortulus Sanitatis,' ay be translated as follows :
"Of this tree the Indians say, there was once a very beautiful maiden, daughter of a mighty lord called Parisa taccho. This maiden loved the Sun, but the Sun forsook her because he loved another. So, being scorned by the Sun, she slew herself, and when her body had been burned, according to the custom of that land, this tree sprang from her ashes. And this is the reason why the flowers of this tree shrink so intensely from the Sun, and never open in his presence. And thus it is a special delight to see this tree in the night time, adorned on all sides with its lovely flowers, since they give forth a delicious perfume, the like of which is not to be met with in any other plant, but no sooner does one touch the plant with one's hand than its sweet scent vanishes away. And however beautiful the tree has appeared, and however sweetly it has bloomed at night, directly the Sun rises in the morning it not only fades but all its branches look as though they were withered and dead."
Much more famous than Durante was Fabio Colonna, or, as he is more generally called, Fabius Columna (Plate IX), who was born at Naples in 1567. His father was a well-known littérateur. Fabio Colonna's profession was that of law, but he was also well acquainted with languages, music, mathematics and optics. He tells us in the preface to his principal work that his interest in plants was aroused by his difficulty in obtaining a remedy for epilepsy, a disease from which he suffered. Having tried all sorts of prescriptions without result, he examined the literature on the subject, and discovered that most of the writers of his time merely served up the results obtained by the ancients, often in a very incorrect form. So he went to the fountain head, Dioscorides, and after much research identified Valerian as being the herb which that writer had recommended against epilepsy, and succeeded in curing himself by its use.
This experience convinced Colonna that the knowledge of the identity of the plants described by the ancients was in a most unsatisfactory condition, and he set himself to produce a work which should remedy this state of things. This book was published in 1592, under the name of ` Phytobasanos,' which embodies a quaint conceit after the fashion of the time. The title is a compound Greek word meaning "plant torture," and was apparently employed by Colonna to explain that he had subjected the plants to ordeal by torture, in order to wrest from them the secret of their identity. But it must be confessed that Colonna himself is by no means free from error, as regards the names which he assigns to them.
The great feature of the `Phytobasanos,' however, is the excellence of the descriptions and figures. The latter are famous as being the first etchings on copper used to illustrate a botanical work (Text-figs. 46 and 105). They were an advance on all previous plant drawings, except the work of Gesner and Camerarius, in giving, in many cases, detailed analyses of the flowers and fruit as well as habit drawings. We owe to Colonna also the technical use of the word "petaI," which he suggested as a descriptive term for the coloured floral leaves'.
By means of his wide scientific correspondence, Colonna kept in touch with many of the naturalists of his time, notably with de l'Écluse and Gaspard Bauhin.
A passing reference may be made here to a book which is rather of the nature of a local flora than a herbal, entitled Prosperi Alpini de plantis .iEgypti,' which was published at Venice in 1592. It contains a number of wood-cuts, which appear to be original. The one reproduced (Text-fig. 47) represents Salicornia, the Glasswort. The author was a doctor who went to Egypt with the Venetian consul, Giorgio Emo, and had opportunities of collecting plants there. He is said to have been the first European writer to mention the Coffee plant, which he saw growing at Cairo. Prospero Alpino eventually became Professor of Botany at Padua, and enriched the botanical garden of that town with Egyptian plants.

NASA scientists captured some footage of Plasma Indirection, a plasma shift on the surface of the Sun that looks like huge tornadoes churning. Pretty amazing stuff.
As if it could not make up its mind . . . darker, cooler plasma slid and shifted back and forth above the Sun’s surface seen here for 30 hours (Feb. 7-8, 2012) in extreme ultraviolet light. An active region rotating into view provides a bright backdrop to the gyrating streams of plasma. The particles are being pulled this way and that by competing magnetic forces. They are tracking along strands of magnetic field lines. This kind of detailed solar observation with high-resolution frames and a four-minute cadence was not possible until SDO, which launched two years ago on Feb. 11, 2010. So it’s our 2nd Anniversary!

The benefits of a post-secondary degree are plentiful. For example, an employee with a four year college degree earns 60 percent more than a worker with only a high school diploma. Paying for college, however, has become a daunting task and strain for many American students and families. The cost of higher education across the country is rapidly increasing, at almost double the rate of inflation, outpacing increases in financial aid and many families ability to pay. The combination of these factors result in too many students being unable to earn or complete their degrees due to financial constraints.
By one estimate, the federal government spent over $367 billion in 2005 aloneon subsidizing Americans' retirement savings and tax breaks to build upother assets like buying a home. Unfortunately, those subsidies gooverwhelmingly to those Americans who already have high-incomes; almostnone of it goes to the poorest Americans who need the most helpbuilding the financial assets that can lead to long-term economicopportunities and security.

We Can End Domestic Abuse
If your friend or loved one is experiencing domestic violence or is a survivor, there are many ways you can help to support them.
Do respect what she wants to do.
Every step is up to her.
Do share resources with your friend or loved one.
Professionals who work at shelters and on hotlines can help. You can’t do it all alone!
Do offer your unconditional understanding and support.
Start by helping them feel good about themselves. Emphasize their strengths.
Do be clear that you are there to listen, and not to judge.
There is an important balance between expressing concern and telling someone what to do. Encourage them to express their feelings and make their own decisions.
Do tell her it's not her/his fault.
Stress that she doesn’t deserve the abuse and that abuse is NEVER okay. Remind them often that you’re there for support whenever necessary.
Do identify the unhealthy behaviors.
Keep track of things you have noticed about the relationship and the abuser. Identify the changes you have seen in your loved one's behavior.
Do acknowledge the scariness of domestic violence.
It is scary and difficult to talk about interpersonal violence. Be prepared with good information.
Do encourage your loved one to build a support system.
A good support system includes the safe and healthy people in her life.
Don't spread gossip.
Gossip can put a victim in danger if it gets back to the abuser, so think before you speak. Your friend or loved one has taken a big step in coming to you—it is critical that they can trust you with confidential information.
Don't blame your friend or loved one for the abuse.
The victim should never feel as though the abuse is her fault.
Don't make them do something.
Don't force her to do something she is uncomfortable doing. They can make their own decisions. Don't try to end the relationship for them.
Don't criticize your loved one or her partner.
Even if you disagree with her choices. This may isolate them even more by making them feel that no one approves, or that they have to hide their relationship.

new zealand curriculum
The New Zealand Curriculum is
built around the acquisition of essential academic and practical
skills. It identifies 7 academic or essential
These are balanced by 8 practical
or essential skills:
- Language and languages
- Social sciences
- The arts
- Health & physical
- Communication skills
- Numeracy skills
- Information skills
- Problem-solving skills
- Self-management and
- Social and co-operative
- Physical skills
- Work and study skills
Each term, most schools prepare
student Progress Reports and hold parent-teacher evenings.
Subjects Taught At New Zealand Schools
The following is a general list of subjects taught in
New Zealand schools. Not all schools offer all the subjects
listed and others may offer additional disciplines. Some subjects
||Agriculture & Horticulture |
||Business Studies |
||Classical Studies |
||Media Studies |
||Physical Education |
||Social Studies |
||Graphics & Design |
||Clothing & Design
The school year begins in late January or early
February, after a summer holiday of about 6 weeks, and ends in
December. It is divided into 4 terms with breaks of two to three
weeks between them.
Secondary school students have slightly longer holidays
then primary school students.
Check with your local New Zealand school for actual term dates,
however the terms usually run as follows:
Term 1 - End of January to early April
Term 2 - Late April to end of June
Term 3 - Mid July to late September
Term 4 - Mid October to mid December (or early December for
New Zealand’s qualifications system is changing from traditional examination based awards to standards based qualifications. In 2002, level 1 of the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) replaced School Certificate. The NCEA will replace Sixth Form Certificate in 2003 and University Bursaries in 2004.
National Certificate of Educational Achievement
NCEA (National Certificate of Educational Achievement) is New Zealand's main national qualification for secondary school students and part of the National Qualifications Framework.
The Qualifications Framework covers industry and education qualifications from year 11 (formerly Form 5) of secondary schooling and entry level to vocations, through to post-graduate level.
All qualifications currently on the Framework are made up of national standards. A standard describes what a learner should aim to achieve in a skill or knowledge area. Standards are set by written criteria along with a national moderation system. Learners who meet all requirements get credit for that standard; those who don't may be reassessed when they are ready.
Each standard is at a level from 1 to 8. Level 1 is similar to School Certificate level; level 2 to Sixth Form Certificate; levels 3 and 4 are similar to University Bursaries. Each standard also has a credit rating.
Schools can also use many standards from beyond the school curriculum. Any number or combination of standards may be assessed within a course, so schools can develop courses to suit their students.
Students accumulate Framework credits towards National Certificates and National Diplomas. As well as being able to work towards a range of National Certificates, eg, National Certificate in Computing, from 2002 school students will work towards a general qualification, the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA). Students can start on Framework qualifications at school and carry on in the workplace or tertiary studies.
NCEA provides the pathway to tertiary education and workplace training and gives everyone a full picture of what students know and can do.
- Challenges students of all abilities, in all learning areas
- Reports more details about a student's achievement
- Is officially recognised in New Zealand and internationally
- Is recognised by employers, universities and polytechnics and used as the benchmark for selection
- Provides opportunities to begin studying for tertiary and industry qualifications * Enables students to gain credits from traditional school curriculum areas AND alternative school curriculum programmes
- Has exams as well as internal assessment
- Has a national system for checking internal assessments
- Shows credits and grades for separate skills and knowledge in some standards
The National Qualifications Framework contains two types of national standards: achievement standards and unit standards. Credits from all achievement standards and all unit standards count towards NCEA.
Choosing A School
Most New Zealand students attend state-funded schools
and every student has the right to enrol at the state school
nearest to their home. If the school is at risk of overcrowding,
it can set a home zone that is geographically
defined. Students living in this zone have the right to go to
that school. Those living outside the zone can be enrolled only
under special circumstances. These include situations where
students have brothers or sisters attending the school or require
access to special programmes such as special education or Maori
language. If the school is still at risk of over-crowding,
selection is made through a supervised ballot.
ERO reports are available at no charge from New Zealand schools
and ERO offices.
Families also have the right to visit schools and meet with the
principal and staff before deciding to enrol their children as
State schools are fully funded by the Government. At
primary and intermediate level they are co-educational with
classes that include both boys and girls. Both co-educational and
single-sex schooling is available at secondary level.
State schools do not charge fees, however parents are expected to
make donations towards the support of special programmes or
services. These are also charges for stationery and uniforms.
Meals are not provided but snacks can generally be purchased from
the school Tuck Shop, but many parents prefer to
provide a packed lunch.
The term integrated schools generally refers
to schools with a religious focus - usually Roman Catholic
in denomination that used to operate as private institutions. In
recent years, these schools have been integrated into the state
system, hence the name, integrated schools, and receive
government funding. Although they follow the state curriculum
requirements, all have retained their special religious or
philosophical character. A small number of institutions, such as
Montessori or Rudolf Steiner schools, are secular in character.
Private or independent schools receive only limited
government funding and are almost entirely dependent on income
derived from student fees. There are no standard fees as each
school determines its own fee scale. Fees also vary according to
levels, with fees in Years 12 and 13 usually significantly higher
than those charged in Years 9 and 10.
Fees at primary schools also vary according to level, although
these are generally much lower than secondary school fees.
Private schools are governed by their own independent boards but
must meet government standards in order to be registered and they
are also subject to the same ERO audits as state schools.
Boarding schools exist mainly at secondary school level.
Currently 78 state and integrated schools and 24 private schools
have boarding arrangements.
The Correspondence School teaches a full range of school
Home-based schooling must meet the same standards as
registered schools, and approval to exempt the student from
regular schooling must be obtained from the Ministry of
A small annual grant is available for teaching materials.
Home schooling accounts for less than 1% of school enrolments.
Most schools require students to wear a uniform at all
times unless the school has an optional uniform policy. School
uniforms are sold by most major department stores and some
schools also operate their own Uniform Shops and sell both new
and second-hand items.
Teachers are not allowed to physically punish students
in their care. Legal disciplinary methods include removal of
privileges, extra homework or detention. Parents or guardians are
advised in advance if a child is given detention, as this will
require the child to stay at school for a specified time after
the end of the standard school day.
For serious offences, students may be suspended from school for a
period of time and if they are over 16 years of age, they can be
expelled permanently. Expulsion generally occurs when a
students conduct either sets a dangerous example to other
students or threatens their safety. There are formal procedures
for suspending or expelling a student.
Most secondary and primary schools expect students to do
homework. Each school has its own rules on the amount and type of
Parents or guardians are responsible for ensuring that a
child can get to school. Each year about 100,000 children use
school buses. Although school bus services are contracted by the
Ministry of Education, students are expected to meet the costs of
If a child has to travel a long distance to school, and there is
no public transport or school bus service, financial assistance
can be provided. Financial assistance and/or bus and taxi
services are provided for special education students.
If you plan to change schools, the principal of your
childs current school should be informed as soon as
Transfer involving a change in the level of schooling, such as
from primary to intermediate or intermediate to secondary,
require additional documentation. Details of application
procedures are provided by the school the student plans to
transfer to. Most intermediate and secondary schools have open

NINE BANDED ARMADILLO
Photo Credit: U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service
SCIENTIFIC NAME: Dasypus novemcinctus
OTHER NAMES: Armadillo, Common Long-Nosed Armadillo
DESCRIPTION: The nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus) cannot easily be confused with any other North American wild mammal. The armadillo’s body is covered with an armored carapace or shell. The carapace is a double layer of horn and bone, segmented into three main divisions: an anterior scapular shield covering the shoulder; a posterior pelvic shield covering the hip region; and a middle section comprised of a series of bands connected by soft, infolded skin between the bands. The head and legs are covered with thick scales, and the tail is encased in a series of bony rings. Coloration of nine-banded armadillos is generally grayish brown, with yellowish-white scales along the side of the carapace. The armadillo has a long, pointed snout, small eyes, and large, cylindrical ears. The armadillo’s pointed snout, short, stout legs, and heavy claws are well suited for digging and burrowing. Armadillos have a limited number of vocalizations: a low, wheezy grunt associated with digging and rooting; a wheezy grunt uttered by recently captured individuals; an audible buzzing noise given when highly alarmed or fleeing, a pig-like squeal given by frightened individuals; and a weak purring given by young attempting to nurse from an unrelated female. Total length ranges from 24 to 31 inches and weights vary from 8 to 15 pounds. There are six subspecies of Dasypus novemcinctus in Central and South America, but only one subspecies, D. n. mexicanus occurs in North America.
DISTRIBUTION: Dasypus novemcinctus mexicanus’ original distribution was from the lower Rio Grande Valley between Mexico and Texas, southward through Mexico and Central America to northwestern Peru on the west side of the Andes, and all of South America to northern Argentina east of the Andes, including the islands of Grenada, Trinidad, Tobago, and Margarita. The range of the nine-banded armadillo has undergone rapid expansion into the southern United States since the late 1800s. The recent rapid expansion of the armadillo’s range was facilitated by a number of factors: reduction in the number of large carnivores; climatic and biotic changes; and accidental and deliberate relocations of animals to unoccupied areas. Armadillos now occur throughout the southern and southeastern U.S., as far north as Missouri, Kansas, Colorado, and Nebraska. These animals are common throughout most of Alabama, but less common in several northeastern counties.
HABITAT: The armadillo is very adaptable and does well in most habitat types found in Alabama. They generally avoid or are scarce in very wet or very dry habitats. Habitat suitability likely depends more on the characteristics of the substrate or soils, rather than vegetation type due to the armadillo’s feeding and burrowing behavior.
FEEDING HABITS: A major portion of the armadillo’s time spent outside its burrow is devoted to feeding. They typically start foraging as they emerge from their burrow and move at a slow pace following an often erratic course. Prey is apparently detected by smell, although sound also may play a role. Typical foraging behavior involves quickly probing with the nose and occasionally pausing to dig for prey. Armadillos are opportunistic feeders and consume a wide variety of food items. Invertebrates, primarily insects, make up roughly 90 percent of their diet. Small vertebrates and plant material make up the remainder of their diet. Researchers also have seen evidence of armadillos feeding on small reptiles and amphibians, the eggs of ground-nesting birds, and carrion.
LIFE HISTORY AND ECOLOGY: Armadillos seem to exhibit a polygynous mating system, with most females paired with a single male and most males paired with more than one female. Den burrows have an enlarged nest chamber and are more complicated than a burrow dug for other purposes. The nest is a bulky mass of dried plant debris crammed into the nest chamber without any obvious structure. Armadillos in areas with poorly drained soils will construct above ground nests of dry plant material. Most breeding among armadillos occurs during the summer (June-August). The normal gestation period is 8 to 9 months, with most young born between February and May. The armadillo exhibits monozygotic polyembryony in which a single fertilized egg normally gives rise to four separate embryos at the blastula stage of development. This results in a litter of four genetically identical haploid clone offspring. Dasypus is the only genus of vertebrates in which this reproductive phenomenon occurs. The offspring are precocial and begin accompanying the female outside of the burrow at about 2 to 3 months of age. By 3 to 4 months, the young are self-sufficient. Most males reach sexual maturity between 6 to 12 months of age, but females do not become sexually mature until they are 1 to 2 years old.
REFERENCES: Author: Chris Cook, Wildlife Biologist, June 2005
Armstrong, J. Controlling Armadillo Ddamage in Alabama. ANR-773. Alabama Cooperative Extension System. 2pp.
Layne, J. N. 2003. Armadillo. Pages 75-97 in G. A. Feldhamer, B. C. Thompson, and J. A. Chapman, eds. Wild Mammals of North America: Biology, Management, and Conservation. Second edition. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD and London, U.K.
Nowak, R. M. 1999. Walker’s Mammals of the World, sixth edition, volume one. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD and London, U.K. 903 pp.
Outdoor Alabama Magazine Article, Nine-banded Armadillo
Watchable Wildlife Article

Chatrooms, social networking sites “behind generation that can’t spell”November 23rd, 2010 - 6:33 pm ICT by ANI
London, Nov 23 (ANI): A study has suggested that Internet chatrooms and social networking sites are to be blamed for children spelling words incorrectly.
The study says as people type at speed online, there is now a “general attitude” that there is no need to correct mistakes or conform to regular spelling rules.
And this means that children who have been brought up with the Internet do not question wrongly spelt words.
“The increasing use of variant spellings on the internet has been brought about by people typing at speed in chatrooms and on social networking sites where the general attitude is that there isn’t a need . . . to conform to spelling rules,” the study stated.
“We are now witnessing the effect these linguistic variations are having on children born into the computer age with such a high level of access in and out of schools,” the Scotsman quoted report author Lucy Jones, a former student at Manchester University, as saying.
“They do not question their existence,” she stated.
The paper, which surveyed a group of 18 to 24 year olds as part of the research, found that the majority believe that unconventional spellings are used on the Internet because it is faster and has become the norm.
More than one in five (22 percent) said they would not be confident in writing an important e-mail without referring to a dictionary or spell checker.
Despite the widespread use of so-called “variant” spelling, almost a third of those questioned said that alternative non-standard spellings are “completely unacceptable”.
Two thirds believe that dictionaries should contain variant spellings.
“From this most recent survey we can conclude that the unprecedented reach and scale of the internet has given rise to new social practices and it is now an agent in spelling change,” Jack Bovill, chair of the English Spelling Society, added. (ANI)
- Traditional art of letter writing 'dying out' among kids - May 21, 2010
- Merriam-Webster's Word of the Summer is Sarah Palin's 'refudiate' - Sep 08, 2010
- Excessive Internet browsing affects mental health - Sep 26, 2010
- Indian kids worst victims of cyberbullying, says study - Jan 18, 2012
- Attempting to save English from horrors of 'text-speak' - Jun 07, 2010
- Twitter, MySpace, Facebook revamping dictionaries - Jan 09, 2010
- Teen drinking linked to higher internet use - May 10, 2011
- 'More Indian teens using networking sites to communicate' - May 23, 2012
- A million kids worldwide addicted to Facebook - Nov 04, 2011
- Social networking teens may turn drinks, drugs addicted - Aug 26, 2011
- Mobile phones can produce hilarious text - Jan 09, 2011
- Britain nurturing kids into becoming 'couch potatoes' - May 04, 2011
- Government all for Internet freedom: NSA - May 16, 2012
- Now, a robot that can read and learn like a human! - Dec 07, 2010
- UK kids with own Internet profile are 'vulnerable' to grooming online - Apr 20, 2011
Tags: bovill, computer age, dictionaries, dictionary, e mail, english spelling, internet chatrooms, linguistic variations, lucy jones, manchester university, report author, scotsman, social networking sites, social practices, spell checker, spelling change, spelling rules, spelling words, spelt, variant spellings

Time to think big
Did the designation of 2010 as the first-ever International Year of Biodiversity mean anything at all? Is it just a publicity stunt, with no engagement on the real, practical issues of conservation, asks Simon Stuart, Chair of IUCN’s Species Survival Commission.
Eight years ago 183 of the world’s governments committed themselves “to achieve by 2010 a significant reduction of the current rate of biodiversity loss at the global, regional and national level as a contribution to poverty alleviation and to the benefit of all life on Earth”. This was hardly visionary—the focus was not on stopping extinctions or loss of key habitats, but simply on slowing their rate of loss—but it was, at least, the first time the nations of the world had pledged themselves to any form of concerted attempt to face up to the ongoing degradation of nature.
Now the results of all the analyses of conservation progress since 2002 are coming in, and there is a unanimous finding: the world has spectacularly failed to meet the 2010 Biodiversity Target, as it is called. Instead species extinctions, habitat loss and the degradation of ecosystems are all accelerating. To give a few examples: declines and extinctions of amphibians due to disease and habitat loss are getting worse; bleaching of coral reefs is growing; and large animals in South-East Asia are moving rapidly towards extinction, especially from over-hunting and degradation of habitats.
|This month the world’s governments will convene in Nagoya, Japan, for the Convention on Biological Diversity’s Conference of the Parties. Many of us hope for agreement there on new, much more ambitious biodiversity targets for the future. The first test of whether or not the 2010 International Year of Biodiversity means anything will be whether or not the international community can commit itself to a truly ambitious conservation agenda.|
The early signs are promising. Negotiating sessions around the world have produced 20 new draft targets for 2020. Collectively these are nearly as strong as many of us hoped, and certainly much stronger than the 2010 Biodiversity Target. They include: halving the loss and degradation of forests and other natural habitats; eliminating overfishing and destructive fishing practices; sustainably managing all areas under agriculture, aquaculture and forestry; bringing pollution from excess nutrients and other sources below critical ecosystem loads; controlling pathways introducing and establishing invasive alien species; managing multiple pressures on coral reefs and other vulnerable ecosystems affected by climate change and ocean acidification; effectively protecting at least 15 per cent of land and sea, including the areas of particular importance for biodiversity; and preventing the extinction of known threatened species. We now have to keep up the pressure to prevent these from becoming diluted.
We at IUCN are pushing for urgent action to stop biodiversity loss once and for all. The well-being of the entire planet—and of people—depends on our committing to maintain healthy ecosystems and strong wildlife populations. We are therefore proposing, as a mission for 2020, “to have put in place by 2020 all the necessary policies and actions to prevent further biodiversity loss”. Examples include removing government subsidies which damage biodiversity (as many agricultural ones do), establishing new nature reserves in important areas for threatened species, requiring fisheries authorities to follow the advice of their scientists to ensure the sustainability of catches, and dramatically cutting carbon dioxide emissions worldwide to reduce the impacts of climate change and ocean acidification.
If the world makes a commitment along these lines, then the 2010 International Year of Biodiversity will have been about more than platitudes. But it will still only be a start: the commitment needs to be implemented. We need to look for signs this year of a real change from governments and society over the priority accorded to biodiversity.
|One important sign will be the amount of funding that governments pledge this year for replenishing the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the world’s largest donor for biodiversity conservation in developing countries. Between 1991 and 2006, it provided approximately $2.2 billion in grants to support more than 750 biodiversity projects in 155 countries. If the GEF is replenished at much the same level as over the last decade we shall know that the governments are still in “business as usual” mode. But if it is doubled or tripled in size, then we shall know that they are starting to get serious.|
IUCN estimates that even a tripling of funding would still fall far short of what is needed to halt biodiversity loss. Some conservationists have suggested that developed countries need to contribute 0.2 per cent of gross national income in overseas biodiversity assistance to achieve this. That would work out at roughly $120 billion a year—though of course this would need to come through a number of sources, not just the GEF. It is tempting to think that this figure is unrealistically high, but it is small change compared to the expenditures governments have committed to defence and bank bail outs.
It is time for the conservation movement to think big. We are addressing problems that are hugely important for the future of this planet and its people, and they will not be solved without a huge increase in funds.

Following Oceanaâ€™s newly released report on the harmful impacts of illegal fishing, one of the questions that I as Oceana's Northeast representative was asked most often was, â€śWhere is this happening?â€ť The short answer: Illegal fishing happens everywhere, from the most distant waters near Antarctica to just off the U.S. coast.
This week brought great news for shark populations that are dwindling both in U.S. waters and worldwide. Today, the Delaware House of Representatives introduced a bill prohibiting the possession, trade, sale and distribution of shark fins within the state. If passed, House Bill 41 would make Delaware the first East Coast state to pass a ban on the shark fin trade, following in the footsteps of Oregon, Washington, California, Hawaii and Illinois.
Current federal law prohibits shark finning in U.S. waters, requiring that sharks be brought into port with their fins still attached. However, this law does not prohibit the sale and trade of processed fins that are imported into the country from other regions that could have weak or even nonexistent shark protections in place.
This unsustainable catch is driven by the demand for shark fins, often used as an ingredient in shark fin soup, and kills millions of sharks every year. Delawareâ€™s bill would close the loopholes that fuel the trade and demand for fins, and ensure that the state is not a gateway for shark products to enter into other U.S. state markets.
Not only was there great news coming out of the U.S., international shark lovers have reason to celebrate as well. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), voted this week to place stricter regulations on the trade of manta rays, three species of hammerheads, oceanic whitetip and porbeagle sharks, acknowledging that these species are in dire need of protection. When countries export these species, they are required to possess special permits that prove these species were harvested sustainably. This decision will greatly curb illegal overfishing and reduce the numbers of endangered sharks killed globally.
History was made today in Bangkok, when Parties to CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna) voted to protect five species of sharks and two species of manta rays. The seven protected species are: oceanic whitetip (Carcharhinus longimanus), porbeagle (Lamna nasus), scalloped hammerhead (Sphyrna lewini), great hammerhead (S. mokarran), smooth hammerhead (S. zygaena), oceanic manta ray (Manta birostris) and reef manta ray (M. alfredi).
All seven species are considered threatened by international trade â€“ the sharks for their fins, and the manta rays for their gills, which are used in Traditional Chinese Medicine. CITES protection is an important complement to fisheries management measures, which, for these species, have failed to safeguard their survival.
The vote was to list the animals for protection under Appendix II which does not entail a ban on the trade, but instead means that trade must be regulated. Exporting countries are required to issue export permits, and can only do so if they can ensure that they have been legally caught, and that their trade is not detrimental to the speciesâ€™ survival.
All of the proposals received the two-thirds majority needed to be accepted â€“ but the listing is not yet final. Decisions can be overturned with another vote during the final plenary session of the meeting, which wraps up on Thursday. This is what happened with porbeagle sharks in the 2010 CITES meeting in Qatar â€“ an Appendix II listing approved by the Committee evaporated with another vote in plenary. As a result, at that meeting, none of the proposed shark species were granted protection. Now, three years later, weâ€™re hopeful that the international community finally sees the importance of regulating the trade that puts these animals at risk.
Keep your fingers crossed!
Happy Friday, everyone.
It's been a rough few weeks for the oceans at CITES, but now it's time to pick up the pieces. If CITES taught us anything, it's that the work of the ocean conservation community is more important than ever.
This week in ocean news,
....Rick at Malaria, Bed bugs, Sea Lice and Sunsets discussed one of the more shady aspects of CITES: the secret ballots, which were invoked for votes on bluefin tuna, sharks, polar bears, and deep water corals.
â€¦The Washington Post reported that Maryland is cracking down on watermen who catch oysters in protected sanctuaries or with banned equipment. Once a principal source of oysters, the Chesapeake now provides less than 5 percent of the annual U.S. harvest.
â€¦For the first time, scientists were able to use videos to observe octupusesâ€™ behavioral responses. The result? The octupuses had no consistent reaction to one film -- in other words, they had no â€śpersonality.â€ť Curiously, other cephalopods display consistent personalities for most of their lives.
â€¦The New York Times wondered if the 700,000 saltwater home aquariums in the United States and the associated trade in reef invertebrates are threatening real reef ecosystems.
This is the ninth in a series of dispatches from the CITES meeting in Doha, Qatar.
As Oceana marine scientist Elizabeth Griffin put it: â€śThis meeting was a flop.â€ť
CITES has been a complete failure for the oceans. The one success -- the listing of the porbeagle shark under Appendix II -- was overturned yesterday in the plenary session.
â€śIt appears that money can buy you anything, just ask Japan,â€ť said Dave Allison, senior campaign director. â€śUnder the crushing weight of the vast sums of money gained by unmanaged trade and exploitation of endangered marine species by Japan, China, other major trading countries and the fishing industry, the very foundation of CITES is threatened with collapse.â€ť
Maybe next time -- if these species are still around to be protected.
The failure of CITES means that Oceanaâ€™s work â€“ and your support and activism â€“ is more important than ever. You can start by supporting our campaign work to protect these creatures.
Here's Oceana's Gaia Angelini on the conclusion of CITES:
This is the eighth in a series of dispatches from the CITES conference in Doha, Qatar.
More difficult news out of Doha today.
While seven of the eight proposed shark species (including several species of hammerheads, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish) were not included in Appendix II, the one bright spot was for the porbeagle shark, which is threatened by widespread consumption in Europe.
The porbeagleâ€™s Appendix II listing is a huge improvement because it requires the use of export permits to ensure that the species are caught by a legal and sustainably managed fishery.
And there is a slight chance that the other shark decisions could be reversed during the plenary session in the final two days.
Here are Oceana scientists Elizabeth Griffin and Rebecca Greenberg reflecting on the shark decisions:
This is the seventh in a series of posts from CITES. Check out the rest of the dispatches from Doha here.
Eight shark species have been proposed for listing to Appendix II of CITES, including the oceanic whitetip, scalloped hammerhead, dusky, sandbar, smooth hammerhead, great hammerhead, porbeagle and spiny dogfish.
Listing these species, which are threatened by shark finning, is necessary to ensure international trade does not drive these shark species to extinction.
Here's Oceana's Ann Schroeer from our Brussels office with an optimistic outlook on the upcoming shark proposals at CITES.
This is the latest in a series of posts from CITES. See the rest of the dispatches here.
Over the weekend, CITES failed to include 31 species of red and pink coral in Appendix II, trade protections that were promised during the last CITES Conference more than two and a half years ago.
These corals are harvested to meet the growing demand for jewelry and souvenirs. The unregulated and virtually unmanaged collection and trade of these species is driving them to extinction.
Many of the corals are long-lived, reaching more than 100 years of age, and grow slowly, usually less than one millimeter in thickness per year. These colonies are fragile and extremely vulnerable to exploitation and destruction, and their biological characteristics severely limit their ability to recover.
Oceana campaign director Dave Allison had this to say about the corals decision (first video), as well as the failure of CITES to protect marine species in general (second video.)
Happy Friday, ocean fans. It's almost spring, and a surfing alpaca exists in the world. Things are looking up.
Before we get to the week's best marine tidbits, an important announcement: Oceana board member Ted Danson will be answering questions live on CNN.com on April 1, so send your ocean queries in, stat!
Also, don't forget that today is the last day to take the Ocean IQ quiz for a chance to win prizes, including a trip with SEE Turtles.
This week in ocean news,
â€¦Yes, CITES failed to deliver on bluefin tuna yesterday, but as Monterey Bay Aquariumâ€™s Julie Packard pointed out, at least the conversation is changing. Bluefin is now in the same rhetorical realm as endangered land creatures such as tigers and elephants.
â€¦Deep Sea News wrote a requiem for a robot -- the Autonomous Benthic Explorer (ABE) that was lost at sea last week during a research expedition to the Chilean Subduction Zone. On a recent dive, ABE had detected evidence of hydrothermal vents. At the time of its loss, ABE had just begun a second dive to home into a vent site and photograph it.
This is the fifth in a series of dispatches from CITES. You can read the other dispatches here.
Although there were repeated calls from delegates from the E.U., U.S. and Monaco to allow time for parties to meet and arrive at a compromise position, a Libya delegate forced a preemptory vote on the E.U. proposal, which resulted in a 43 to 72 vote, with 14 abstaining.
Campaign director Dave Allison called the defeat "a clear win by short-term economic interest over the long-term health of the ocean and the rebuilding of Atlantic bluefin tuna populations."
The decision could spell the beginning of the end for the tigers of the sea.
Here's Oceana's Maria Jose Cornax on the decision:

SULUJAM INDIANS. Although they were apparently native to the area lying between the San Antonio and Frio rivers south and southeast of San Antonio, the Sulujams were not encountered by the earliest Spanish travelers who traversed parts of southern Texas. They were first seen in 1709 at the site of present-day San Antonio. There is no indication that they had been displaced from some other area and had migrated into southern Texas. Sulujams are said to have entered Mission San José y San Miguel de Aguayo of San Antonio in considerable numbers when it was founded in 1720. As the registers of San José have not been found, no figure can be given for the total number of Sulujams in residence at the mission. A few entered nearby San Antonio de Valero Mission, whose surviving registers identify twelve Sulujam individuals for the period 1719–56. No Sulujams seem to have entered the remaining three missions of San Antonio or any missions elsewhere. It is generally thought that the Sulujams spoke a dialect of the Coahuilteco language, but this is not based on conclusive evidence. Nothing is known of the Sulujams' culture other than that they lived by hunting and gathering.
Thomas N. Campbell and T. J. Campbell, Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas (San Antonio: Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, 1981). J. Jesús Figueroa Torres, Fr. Juan Larios, defensor de los Indios y fundador de Coahuila (Mexico City: Editorial Jus, 1963). Frederick Webb Hodge, ed., Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico (2 vols., Washington: GPO, 1907, 1910; rpt., New York: Pageant, 1959).
The following, adapted from the Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition, is the preferred citation for this article.Thomas N. Campbell, "SULUJAM INDIANS," Handbook of Texas Online (http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/bms44), accessed May 21, 2013. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

European Decorative Arts and Sculpture
Arched Entrance from the Chapter House of the Carmelite Convent in Limoges (Les Grands Carmes des Arènes)Made in Limoges, western France, France, Europe
Second half of 13th century
Artist/maker unknown, French
1928-76-1Purchased with funds contributed by Mr. and Mrs. Isaac Tatnall Starr, 1928
LabelThis arched entrance served as one of two passages connecting the contemplative space of the convent's cloister to the communal area of the chapter house (a meeting room for the governing body of the monastery). During the French Revolution (1789–99), the convent—continuously occupied and much expanded since its foundation in the thirteenth century—was closed and the nuns expelled. The convent was then sold and many of the buildings demolished. The chapter house escaped destruction, and in the early twentieth century this arch was rediscovered in its original location and eventually came to the Museum.
Social Tags [?]european art 1100-1500 [x] european decorative arts and sculpture [x] fransiscan monestary too [x] of the child of jesus (carmelite) [x] st. terasea of the little flower [x] the st. francis [x] [Add Your Own Tags]
* Works in the collection are moved off view for many different reasons. Although gallery locations on the website are updated regularly, there is no guarantee that this object will be on display on the day of your visit.

Opportunities and Challenges in High Pressure Processing of Foods
By Rastogi, N K; Raghavarao, K S M S; Balasubramaniam, V M; Niranjan, K; Knorr, D
Consumers increasingly demand convenience foods of the highest quality in terms of natural flavor and taste, and which are free from additives and preservatives. This demand has triggered the need for the development of a number of nonthermal approaches to food processing, of which high-pressure technology has proven to be very valuable. A number of recent publications have demonstrated novel and diverse uses of this technology. Its novel features, which include destruction of microorganisms at room temperature or lower, have made the technology commercially attractive. Enzymes and even spore forming bacteria can be inactivated by the application of pressure-thermal combinations, This review aims to identify the opportunities and challenges associated with this technology. In addition to discussing the effects of high pressure on food components, this review covers the combined effects of high pressure processing with: gamma irradiation, alternating current, ultrasound, and carbon dioxide or anti-microbial treatment. Further, the applications of this technology in various sectors-fruits and vegetables, dairy, and meat processing-have been dealt with extensively. The integration of high-pressure with other matured processing operations such as blanching, dehydration, osmotic dehydration, rehydration, frying, freezing / thawing and solid- liquid extraction has been shown to open up new processing options. The key challenges identified include: heat transfer problems and resulting non-uniformity in processing, obtaining reliable and reproducible data for process validation, lack of detailed knowledge about the interaction between high pressure, and a number of food constituents, packaging and statutory issues.
Keywords high pressure, food processing, non-thermal processing
Consumers demand high quality and convenient products with natural flavor and taste, and greatly appreciate the fresh appearance of minimally processed food. Besides, they look for safe and natural products without additives such as preservatives and humectants. In order to harmonize or blend all these demands without compromising the safety of the products, it is necessary to implement newer preservation technologies in the food industry. Although the fact that “high pressure kills microorganisms and preserves food” was discovered way back in 1899 and has been used with success in chemical, ceramic, carbon allotropy, steel/alloy, composite materials and plastic industries for decades, it was only in late 1980′s that its commercial benefits became available to the food processing industries. High pressure processing (HPP) is similar in concept to cold isostatic pressing of metals and ceramics, except that it demands much higher pressures, faster cycling, high capacity, and sanitation (Zimmerman and Bergman, 1993; Mertens and Deplace, 1993). Hite (1899) investigated the application of high pressure as a means of preserving milk, and later extended the study to preserve fruits and vegetables (Hite, Giddings, and Weakly, 1914). It then took almost eighty years for Japan to re- discover the application of high-pressure in food processing. The use of this technology has come about so quickly that it took only three years for two Japanese companies to launch products, which were processed using this technology. The ability of high pressure to inactivate microorganisms and spoilage catalyzing enzymes, whilst retaining other quality attributes, has encouraged Japanese and American food companies to introduce high pressure processed foods in the market (Mermelstein, 1997; Hendrickx, Ludikhuyze, Broeck, and Weemaes, 1998). The first high pressure processed foods were introduced to the Japanese market in 1990 by Meidi-ya, who have been marketing a line of jams, jellies, and sauces packaged and processed without application of heat (Thakur and Nelson, 1998). Other products include fruit preparations, fruit juices, rice cakes, and raw squid in Japan; fruit juices, especially apple and orange juice, in France and Portugal; and guacamole and oysters in the USA (Hugas, Garcia, and Monfort, 2002). In addition to food preservation, high- pressure treatment can result in food products acquiring novel structure and texture, and hence can be used to develop new products (Hayashi, 1990) or increase the functionality of certain ingredients. Depending on the operating parameters and the scale of operation, the cost of highpressure treatment is typically around US$ 0.05-0.5 per liter or kilogram, the lower value being comparable to the cost of thermal processing (Thakur and Nelson, 1998; Balasubramaniam, 2003).
The non-availability of suitable equipment encumbered early applications of high pressure. However, recent progress in equipment design has ensured worldwide recognition of the potential for such a technology in food processing (Could, 1995; Galazka and Ledward, 1995; Balci and Wilbey, 1999). Today, high-pressure technology is acknowledged to have the promise of producing a very wide range of products, whilst simultaneously showing potential for creating a new generation of value added foods. In general, high-pressure technology can supplement conventional thermal processing for reducing microbial load, or substitute the use of chemical preservatives (Rastogi, Subramanian, and Raghavarao, 1994).
Over the past two decades, this technology has attracted considerable research attention, mainly relating to: i) the extension of keeping quality (Cheftel, 1995; Farkas and Hoover, 2001), ii) changing the physical and functional properties of food systems (Cheftel, 1992), and iii) exploiting the anomalous phase transitions of water under extreme pressures, e.g. lowering of freezing point with increasing pressures (Kalichevsky, Knorr, and Lillford, 1995; Knorr, Schlueter, and Heinz, 1998). The key advantages of this technology can be summarized as follows:
1. it enables food processing at ambient temperature or even lower temperatures;
2. it enables instant transmittance of pressure throughout the system, irrespective of size and geometry, thereby making size reduction optional, which can be a great advantage;
3. it causes microbial death whilst virtually eliminating heat damage and the use of chemical preservatives/additives, thereby leading to improvements in the overall quality of foods; and
4. it can be used to create ingredients with novel functional properties.
The effect of high pressure on microorganisms and proteins/ enzymes was observed to be similar to that of high temperature. As mentioned above, high pressure processing enables transmittance of pressure rapidly and uniformly throughout the food. Consequently, the problems of spatial variations in preservation treatments associated with heat, microwave, or radiation penetration are not evident in pressure-processed products. The application of high pressure increases the temperature of the liquid component of the food by approximately 3C per 100 MPa. If the food contains a significant amount of fat, such as butter or cream, the temperature rise is greater (8-9C/100 MPa) (Rasanayagam, Balasubramaniam, Ting, Sizer, Bush, and Anderson, 2003). Foods cool down to their original temperature on decompression if no heat is lost to (or gained from) the walls of the pressure vessel during the holding stage. The temperature distribution during the pressure-holding period can change depending on heat transfer across the walls of the pressure vessel, which must be held at the desired temperature for achieving truly isothermal conditions. In the case of some proteins, a gel is formed when the rate of compression is slow, whereas a precipitate is formed when the rate is fast. High pressure can cause structural changes in structurally fragile foods containing entrapped air such as strawberries or lettuce. Cell deformation and cell damage can result in softening and cell serum loss. Compression may also shift the pH depending on the imposed pressure. Heremans (1995) indicated a lowering of pH in apple juice by 0.2 units per 100 MPa increase in pressure. In combined thermal and pressure treatment processes, Meyer (2000) proposed that the heat of compression could be used effectively, since the temperature of the product can be raised from 70-90C to 105-120C by a compression to 700 MPa, and brought back to the initial temperature by decompression.
As a thermodynamic parameter, pressure has far-reaching effects on the conformation of macromolecules, the transition temperature of lipids and water, and a number of chemical reactions (Cheftel, 1992; Tauscher, 1995). Phenomena that are accompanied by a decrease in volume are enhanced by pressure, and vice-versa (principle of Le Chatelier). Thus, under pressure, reaction equilibriums are shifted towards the most compact state, and the reaction rate constant is increased or decreased, depending on whether the “activation volume” of the reaction (i.e. volume of the activation complex less volume of reactants) is negative or positive. It is likely that pressure a\lso inhibits the availability of the activation energy required for some reactions, by affecting some other energy releasing enzymatic reactions (Farr, 1990). The compression energy of 1 litre of water at 400 MPa is 19.2 kJ, as compared to 20.9 kJ for heating 1 litre of water from 20 to 25C. The low energy levels involved in pressure processing may explain why covalent bonds of food constituents are usually less affected than weak interactions. Pressure can influence most biochemical reactions, since they often involve change in volume. High pressure controls certain enzymatic reactions. The effect of high pressure on protein/enzyme is reversible unlike temperature, in the range 100-400 MPa and is probably due to conformational changes and sub-unit dissociation and association process (Morild, 1981).
For both the pasteurization and sterilization processes, a combined treatment of high pressure and temperature are frequently considered to be most appropriate (Farr, 1990; Patterson, Quinn, Simpson, and Gilmour, 1995). Vegetative cells, including yeast and moulds, are pressure sensitive, i.e. they can be inactivated by pressures of ~300-600 MPa (Knorr, 1995; Patterson, Quinn, Simpson, and Gilmour, 1995). At high pressures, microbial death is considered to be due to permeabilization of cell membrane. For instance, it was observed that in the case of Saccharomyces cerevasia, at pressures of about 400 MPa, the structure and cytoplasmic organelles were grossly deformed and large quantities of intracellular material leaked out, while at 500 MPa, the nucleus could no longer be recognized, and a loss of intracellular material was almost complete (Farr, 1990). Changes that are induced in the cell morphology of the microorganisms are reversible at low pressures, but irreversible at higher pressures where microbial death occurs due to permeabilization of the cell membrane. An increase in process temperature above ambient temperature, and to a lesser extent, a decrease below ambient temperature, increases the inactivation rates of microorganisms during high pressure processing. Temperatures in the range 45 to 50C appear to increase the rate of inactivation of pathogens and spoilage microorganisms. Preservation of acid foods (pH ≤ 4.6) is, therefore, the most obvious application of HPP as such. Moreover, pasteurization can be performed even under chilled conditions for heat sensitive products. Low temperature processing can help to retain nutritional quality and functionality of raw materials treated and could allow maintenance of low temperature during post harvest treatment, processing, storage, transportation, and distribution periods of the life cycle of the food system (Knorr, 1995).
Bacterial spores are highly pressure resistant, since pressures exceeding 1200 MPa may be needed for their inactivation (Knorr, 1995). The initiation of germination or inhibition of germinated bacterial spores and inactivation of piezo-resistive microorganisms can be achieved in combination with moderate heating or other pretreatments such as ultrasound. Process temperature in the range 90-121C in conjunction with pressures of 500-800 MPa have been used to inactivate spores forming bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum. Thus, sterilization of low-acid foods (pH > 4.6), will most probably rely on a combination of high pressure and other forms of relatively mild treatments.
High-pressure application leads to the effective reduction of the activity of food quality related enzymes (oxidases), which ensures high quality and shelf stable products. Sometimes, food constituents offer piezo-resistance to enzymes. Further, high pressure affects only non-covalent bonds (hydrogen, ionic, and hydrophobic bonds), causes unfolding of protein chains, and has little effect on chemical constituents associated with desirable food qualities such as flavor, color, or nutritional content. Thus, in contrast to thermal processing, the application of high-pressure causes negligible impairment of nutritional values, taste, color flavor, or vitamin content (Hayashi, 1990). Small molecules such as amino acids, vitamins, and flavor compounds remain unaffected by high pressure, while the structure of the large molecules such as proteins, enzymes, polysaccharides, and nucleic acid may be altered (Balci and Wilbey, 1999).
High pressure reduces the rate of browning reaction (Maillard reaction). It consists of two reactions, condensation reaction of amino compounds with carbonyl compounds, and successive browning reactions including metanoidin formation and polymerization processes. The condensation reaction shows no acceleration by high pressure (5-50 MPa at 50C), because it suppresses the generation of stable free radicals derived from melanoidin, which are responsible for the browning reaction (Tamaoka, Itoh, and Hayashi, 1991). Gels induced by high pressure are found to be more glossy and transparent because of rearrangement of water molecules surrounding amino acid residues in a denatured state (Okamoto, Kawamura, and Hayashi, 1990).
The capability and limitations of HPP have been extensively reviewed (Thakur and Nelson, 1998; Smelt, 1998;Cheftal, 1995; Knorr, 1995; Fair, 1990; Tiwari, Jayas, and Holley, 1999; Cheftel, Levy, and Dumay, 2000; Messens, Van Camp, and Huyghebaert, 1997; Ontero and Sanz, 2000; Hugas, Garriga, and Monfort, 2002; Lakshmanan, Piggott,and Paterson, 2003; Balasubramaniam, 2003; Matser, Krebbers, Berg, and Bartels, 2004; Hogan, Kelly, and Sun, 2005; Mor-Mur and Yuste, 2005). Many of the early reviews primarily focused on the microbial efficacy of high-pressure processing. This review comprehensively covers the different types of products processed by highpressure technology alone or in combination with the other processes. It also discusses the effect of high pressure on food constituents such as enzymes and proteins. The applications of this technology in fruits and vegetable, dairy and animal product processing industries are covered. The effects of combining high- pressure treatment with other processing methods such as gamma- irradiation, alternating current, ultrasound, carbon dioxide, and anti microbial peptides have also been described. Special emphasis has been given to opportunities and challenges in high pressure processing of foods, which can potentially be explored and exploited.
EFFECT OF HIGH PRESSURE ON ENZYMES AND PROTEINS
Enzymes are a special class of proteins in which biological activity arises from active sites, brought together by a three- dimensional configuration of molecule. The changes in active site or protein denaturation can lead to loss of activity, or changes the functionality of the enzymes (Tsou, 1986). In addition to conformational changes, enzyme activity can be influenced by pressure-induced decompartmentalization (Butz, Koller, Tauscher, and Wolf, 1994; Gomes and Ledward, 1996). Pressure induced damage of membranes facilitates enzymesubstrate contact. The resulting reaction can either be accelerated or retarded by pressure (Butz, Koller, Tauscher, and Wolf, 1994; Gomes and Ledward, 1996; Morild, 1981). Hendrickx, Ludikhuy ze, Broeck, and Weemaes ( 1998) and Ludikhuyze, Van Loey, and Indrawati et al. (2003) reviewed the combined effect of pressure and temperature on enzymes related to the ity of fruits and vegetables, which comprises of kinetic information as well as process engineering aspects.
Pectin methylesterase (PME) is an enzyme, which normally tends to lower the viscosity of fruits products and adversely affect their texture. Hence, its inactivation is a prerequisite for the preservation of such products. Commercially, fruit products containing PME (e.g. orange juice and tomato products) are heat pasteurized to inactivate PME and prolong shelf life. However, heating can deteriorate the sensory and nutritional quality of the products. Basak and Ramaswamy (1996) showed that the inactivation of PME in orange juice was dependent on pressure level, pressure-hold time, pH, and total soluble solids. An instantaneous pressure kill was dependent only on pressure level and a secondary inactivation effect dependent on holding time at each pressure level. Nienaber and Shellhammer (2001) studied the kinetics of PME inactivation in orange juice over a range of pressures (400-600 MPa) and temperatures (25-5O0C) for various process holding times. PME inactivation followed a firstorder kinetic model, with a residual activity of pressure-resistant enzyme. Calculated D-values ranged from 4.6 to 117.5 min at 600 MPa/50C and 400 MPa/25C, respectively. Pressures in excess of 500 MPa resulted in sufficiently faster inactivation rates for economic viability of the process. Binh, Van Loey, Fachin, Verlent, Indrawati, and Hendrickx (2002a, 2002b) studied the kinetics of inactivation of strawberry PME. The combined effect of pressure and temperature on inactivation kinetics followed a fractional-conversion model. Purified strawberry PME was more stable toward high-pressure treatments than PME from oranges and bananas. Ly-Nguyen, Van Loey, Fachin, Verlent, Hendrickx (2002) showed that the inactivation of the banana PME enzyme during heating at temperature between 65 and 72.5C followed first order kinetics and the effect of pressure treatment of 600-700 MPa at 10C could be described using a fractionalconversion model. Stoforos, Crelier, Robert, and Taoukis (2002) demonstrated that under ambient pressure, tomato PME inactivation rates increased with temperature, and the highest rate was obtained at 75C. The inactivation rates were dramatically reduced as soon as the essing pressure was raised beyond 75C. High inactivation rates were obtained at a pressure higher than 700 MPa. Riahi and Ramaswamy (2003) studied high- pressure inactivation kinetics of PME isolated from a variety of sources and showed that PME from a microbial source was more resistant \to pressure inactivation than from orange peel. Almost a full decimal reduction in activity of commercial PME was achieved at 400 MPa within 20 min.
Verlent, Van Loey, Smout, Duvetter, Nguyen, and Hendrickx (2004) indicated that the optimal temperature for tomato pectinmethylesterase was shifted to higher values at elevated pressure compared to atmospheric pressure, creating the possibilities for rheology improvements by the application of high pressure.
Castro, Van Loey, Saraiva, Smout, and Hendrickx (2006) accurately described the inactivation of the labile fraction under mild-heat and high-pressure conditions by a fractional conversion model, while a biphasic model was used to estimate the inactivation rate constant of both the fractions at more drastic conditions of temperature/ pressure (10-64C, 0.1-800 MPa). At pressures lower than 300 MPa and temperatures higher than 54C, an antagonistic effect of pressure and temperature was observed.
Balogh, Smout, Binh, Van Loey, and Hendrickx (2004) observed the inactivation kinetics of carrot PME to follow first order kinetics over a range of pressure and temperature (650800 MPa, 10-40C). Enzyme stability under heat and pressure was reported to be lower in carrot juice and purified PME preparations than in carrots.
The presence of pectinesterase (PE) reduces the quality of citrus juices by destabilization of clouds. Generally, the inactivation of the enzyme is accomplished by heat, resulting in a loss of fresh fruit flavor in the juice. High pressure processing can be used to bypass the use of extreme heat for the processing of fruit juices. Goodner, Braddock, and Parish (1998) showed that the higher pressures (>600 MPa) caused instantaneous inactivation of the heat labile form of the enzyme but did not inactivate the heat stable form of PE in case of orange and grapefruit juices. PE activity was totally lost in orange juice, whereas complete inactivation was not possible in case of grapefruit juices. Orange juice pressurized at 700 MPa for l min had no cloud loss for more than 50 days. Broeck, Ludikhuyze, Van Loey, and Hendrickx (2000) studied the combined pressure-temperature inactivation of the labile fraction of orange PE over a range of pressure (0.1 to 900 MPa) and temperature (15 to 65C). Pressure and temperature dependence of the inactivation rate constants of the labile fraction was quantified using the well- known Eyring and Arrhenius relations. The stable fraction was inactivated at a temperature higher than 75C. Acidification (pH 3.7) enhanced the thermal inactivation of the stable fraction, whereas the addition of Ca^sup ++^ ions (IM) suppressed inactivation. At elevated pressure (up to 900 MPa), an antagonistic effect of pressure and temperature on inactivation of the stable fraction was observed. Ly-Nguyen, Van Loey, Smout, Ozean, Fachin, Verlent, Vu- Truong, Duvetter, and Hendrickx (2003) investigated the combined heat and pressure treatments on the inactivation of purified carrot PE, which followed a fractional-conversion model. The thermally stable fraction of the enzyme could not be inactivated. At a lower pressure (<300 MPa) and higher temperature (>50C), an antagonistic effect of pressure and heat was observed.
High pressures induced conformational changes in polygalacturonase (PG) causing reduced substrate binding affinity and enzyme inactivation. Eun, Seok, and Wan ( 1999) studied the effect of high-pressure treatment on PG from Chinese cabbage to prevent the softening and spoilage of plant-based foods such as kimchies without compromising quality. PG was inactivated by the application of pressure higher than 200 MPa for l min. Fachin, Van Loey, Indrawati, Ludikhuyze, and Hendrickx (2002) investigated the stability of tomato PG at different temperatures and pressures. The combined pressure temperature inactivation (300-600 MPa/50 -50C) of tomato PG was described by a fractional conversion model, which points to Ist-order inactivation kinetics of a pressure-sensitive enzyme fraction and to the occurrence of a pressure-stable PG fraction. Fachin, Smout, Verlent, Binh, Van Loey, and Hendrickx (2004) indicated that in the combination of pressure-temperature (5- 55C/100-600 MPa), the inactivation of the heat labile portion of purified tomato PG followed first order kinetics. The heat stable fraction of the enzyme showed pressure stability very similar to that of heat labile portion.
Peelers, Fachin, Smout, Van Loey, and Hendrickx (2004) demonstrated that effect of high-pressure was identical on heat stable and heat labile fractions of tomato PG. The isoenzyme of PG was detected in thermally treated (140C for 5 min) tomato pieces and tomato juice, whereas, no PG was found in pressure treated tomato juice or pieces.
Verlent, Van Loey, Smout, Duvetter, and Hendrickx (2004) investigated the effect of nigh pressure (0.1 and 500 MPa) and temperature (25-80C) on purified tomato PG. At atmospheric pressure, the optimum temperature for enzyme was found to be 55-60C and it decreased with an increase in pressure. The enzyme activity was reported to decrease with an increase in pressure at a constant temperature.
Shook, Shellhammer, and Schwartz (2001) studied the ability of high pressure to inactivate lipoxygenase, PE and PG in diced tomatoes. Processing conditions used were 400,600, and 800 MPa for 1, 3, and 5 min at 25 and 45C. The magnitude of the applied pressure had a significant effect in inactivating lipoxygenase and PG, with complete loss of activity occurring at 800 MPa. PE was very resistant to the pressure treatment.
Polyphenoloxidase and Pemxidase
Polyphenoloxidase (PPO) and peroxidase (POD), the enzymes responsible for color and flavor loss, can be selectively inactivated by a combined treatment of pressure and temperature. Gomes and Ledward (1996) studied the effects of pressure treatment (100-800 MPa for 1-20 min) on commercial PPO enzyme available from mushrooms, potatoes, and apples. Castellari, Matricardi, Arfelli, Rovere, and Amati ( 1997) demonstrated that there was a limited inactivation of grape PPO using pressures between 300 and 600 MPa. At 900 MPa, a low level of PPO activity was apparent. In order to reach complete inactivation, it may be necessary to use high- pressure processing treatments in conjunction with a mild thermal treatment (40-50C). Weemaes, Ludikhuyze, Broeck, and Hendrickx (1998) studied the pressure stabilities of PPO from apple, avocados, grapes, pears, and plums at pH 6-7. These PPO differed in pressure stability. Inactivation of PPO from apple, grape, avocado, and pear at room temperature (25C) became noticeable at approximately 600, 700, 800 and 900 MPa, respectively, and followed first-order kinetics. Plum PPO was not inactivated at room temperature by pressures up to 900 MPa. Rastogi, Eshtiaghi, and Knorr (1999) studied the inactivation effects of high hydrostatic pressure treatment (100-600 MPa) combined with heat treatment (0-60C) on POD and PPO enzyme, in order to develop high pressure-processed red grape juice having stable shelf-life. The studies showed that the lowest POD (55.75%) and PPO (41.86%) activities were found at 60C, with pressure at 600 and 100 MPa, respectively. MacDonald and Schaschke (2000) showed that for PPO, both temperature and pressure individually appeared to have similar effects, whereas the holding time was not significant. On the other hand, in case of POD, temperature as well as interaction between temperature and holding time had the greatest effect on activity. Namkyu, Seunghwan, and Kyung (2002) showed that mushroom PPO was highly pressure stable. Exposure to 600 MPa for 10 min reduced PPO activity by 7%; further exposure had no denaturing effect. Compression for 10 and 20 min up to 800 MPa, reduced activity by 28 and 43%, respectively.
Rapeanu, Van Loey, Smout, and Hendrickx (2005) indicated that the thermal and/or high-pressure inactivation of grape PPO followed first order kinetics. A third degree polynomial described the temperature/pressure dependence of the inactivation rate constants. Pressure and temperature were reported to act synergistically, except in the high temperature (≥45C)-low pressure (≥300 MPa) region where an antagonistic effect was observed.
Gomes, Sumner, and Ledward (1997) showed that the application of increasing pressures led to a gradual reduction in papain enzyme activity. A decrease in activity of 39% was observed when the enzyme solution was initially activated with phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) and subjected to 800 MPa at ambient temperature for 10 min, while 13% of the original activity remained when the enzyme solution was treated at 800 MPa at 60C for 10 min. In Tris buffer at pH 6.8 after treatment at 800 MPa and 20C, papain activity loss was approximately 24%. The inactivation of the enzyme is because of induced change at the active site causing loss of activity without major conformational changes. This loss of activity was due to oxidation of the thiolate ion present at the active site.
Weemaes, Cordt, Goossens, Ludikhuyze, Hendrickx, Heremans, and Tobback (1996) studied the effects of pressure and temperature on activity of 3 different alpha-amylases from Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, and Bacillus licheniformis. The changes in conformation of Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus subtilis, and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens amylases occurred at pressures of 110, 75, and 65 MPa, respectively. Bacillus licheniformis amylase was more stable than amylases from Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens to the combined heat/pressure treatment.
Riahi and Ramaswamy (2004) demonstrated that pressure inactivation of amylase in apple juice was significantly (P < 0.01 ) influenced by pH, pressure, holding time, and temperature. The inactivation was described using a bi-phasic model. The application of high pressure was sh\own to completely inactivate amylase. The importance of the pressure pulse and pressure hold approach for inactivation of amylase was also demonstrated.
High pressure denatures protein depending on the protein type, processing conditions, and the applied pressure. During the process of denaturation, the proteins may dissolve or precipitate on the application of high pressure. These changes are generally reversible in the pressure range 100-300 MPa and irreversible for the pressures higher than 300 MPa. Denaturation may be due to the destruction of hydrophobic and ion pair bonds, and unfolding of molecules. At higher pressure, oligomeric proteins tend to dissociate into subunits becoming vulnerable to proteolysis. Monomeric proteins do not show any changes in proteolysis with increase in pressure (Thakur and Nelson, 1998).
High-pressure effects on proteins are related to the rupture on non-covalent interactions within protein molecules, and to the subsequent reformation of intra and inter molecular bonds within or between the molecules. Different types of interactions contribute to the secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure of proteins. The quaternary structure is mainly held by hydrophobic interactions that are very sensitive to pressure. Significant changes in the tertiary structure are observed beyond 200 MPa. However, a reversible unfolding of small proteins such as ribonuclease A occurs at higher pressures (400 to 800 MPa), showing that the volume and compressibility changes during denaturation are not completely dominated by the hydrophobic effect. Denaturation is a complex process involving intermediate forms leading to multiple denatured products. secondary structure changes take place at a very high pressure above 700 MPa, leading to irreversible denaturation (Balny and Masson, 1993).
Figure 1 General scheme for pressure-temperature phase diagram of proteins, (from Messens, Van Camp, and Huyghebaert, 1997).
When the pressure increases to about 100 MPa, the denaturation temperature of the protein increases, whereas at higher pressures, the temperature of denaturation usually decreases. This results in the elliptical phase diagram of native denatured protein shown in Fig. 1. A practical consequence is that under elevated pressures, proteins denature usually at room temperature than at higher temperatures. The phase diagram also specifies the pressure- temperature range in which the protein maintains its native structure. Zone III specifies that at high temperatures, a rise in denaturation temperature is found with increasing pressure. Zone II indicates that below the maximum transition temperature, protein denaturation occurs at the lower temperatures under higher pressures. Zone III shows that below the temperature corresponding to the maximum transition pressure, protein denaturation occurs at lower pressures using lower temperatures (Messens, Van Camp, and Huyghebaert, 1997).
The application of high pressure has been shown to destabilize casein micelles in reconstituted skim milk and the size distribution of spherical casein micelles decrease from 200 to 120 nm; maximum changes have been reported to occur between 150-400 MPa at 20C. The pressure treatment results in reduced turbidity and increased lightness, which leads to the formation of a virtually transparent skim milk (Shibauchi, Yamamoto, and Sagara, 1992; Derobry, Richard, and Hardy, 1994). The gels produced from high-pressure treated skim milk showed improved rigidity and gel breaking strength (Johnston, Austin, and Murphy, 1992). Garcia, Olano, Ramos, and Lopez (2000) showed that the pressure treatment at 25C considerably reduced the micelle size, while pressurization at higher temperature progressively increased the micelle dimensions. Anema, Lowe, and Stockmann (2005) indicated that a small decrease in the size of casein micelles was observed at 100 MPa, with slightly greater effects at higher temperatures or longer pressure treatments. At pressure >400 MPa, the casein micelles disintegrated. The effect was more rapid at higher temperatures although the final size was similar in all samples regardless of the pressure or temperature. At 200 MPa and 1O0C, the casein micelle size decreased slightly on heating, whereas, at higher temperatures, the size increased as a result of aggregation. Huppertz, Fox, and Kelly (2004a) showed that the size of casein micelles increased by 30% upon high-pressure treatment of milk at 250 MPa and micelle size dropped by 50% at 400 or 600 MPa.
Huppertz, Fox, and Kelly (2004b) demonstrated that the high- pressure treatment of milk at 100-600 MPa resulted in considerable solubilization of alphas 1- and beta-casein, which may be due to the solubilization of colloidal calcium phosphate and disruption of hydrophobic interactions. On storage of pressure, treated milk at 5C dissociation of casein was largely irreversible, but at 20C, considerable re-association of casein was observed. The hydration of the casein micelles increased on pressure treatment (100-600 MPa) due to induced interactions between caseins and whey proteins. Pressure treatment increased levels of alphas 1- and beta-casein in the soluble phase of milk and produced casein micelles with properties different to those in untreated milk. Huppertz, Fox, and Kelly (2004c) demonstrated that the casein micelle size was not influenced by pressures less than 200 MPa, but a pressure of 250 MPa increased the micelle size by 25%, while pressures of 300 MPa or greater, irreversibly reduced the size to 50% ofthat in untreated milk. Denaturation of alpha-lactalbumin did not occur at pressures less than or equal to 400 MPa, whereas beta-lactoglobulin was denatured at pressures greater than 100 MPa.
Galazka, Ledward, Sumner, and Dickinson (1997) reported loss of surface hydrophobicity due to application of 300 MPa in dilute solution. Pressurizing beta-lactoglobulin at 450 MPa for 15 minutes resulted in reduced solubility in water. High-pressure treatment induced extensive protein unfolding and aggregation when BSA was pressurized at 400 MPa. Beta-lactoglobulin appears to be more sensitive to pressure than alpha-lactalbumin. Olsen, Ipsen, Otte, and Skibsted (1999) monitored the state of aggregation and thermal gelation properties of pressure-treated beta-lactoglobulin immediately after depressurization and after storage for 24 h at 50C. A pressure of 150 MPa applied for 30 min, or pressures higher than 300 MPa applied for 0 or 30 min, led to formation of soluble aggregates. When continued for 30 min, a pressure of 450 MPa caused gelation of the 5% beta-lactoglobulin solution. Iametti, Tansidico, Bonomi, Vecchio, Pittia, Rovere, and DaIl’Aglio (1997) studied irreversible modifications in the tertiary structure, surface hydrophobicity, and association state of beta-lactoglobulin, when solutions of the protein at neutral pH and at different concentrations, were exposed to pressure. Only minor irreversible structural modifications were evident even for treatments as intense as 15 min at 900 MPa. The occurrence of irreversible modifications was time-dependent at 600 MPa but was complete within 2 min at 900 MPa. The irreversibly modified protein was soluble, but some covalent aggregates were formed. Subirade, Loupil, Allain, and Paquin (1998) showed the effect of dynamic high pressure on the secondary structure of betalactoglobulin. Thermal and pH sensitivity of pressure treated beta-lactoglobulin was different, suggesting that the two forms were stabilized by different electrostatic interactions. Walker, Farkas, Anderson, and Goddik (2004) used high- pressure processing (510 MPa for 10 min at 8 or 24C) to induce unfolding of beta-lactoglobulin and characterized the protein structure and surface-active properties. The secondary structure of the protein processed at 8C appeared to be unchanged, whereas at 24C alpha-helix structure was lost. Tertiary structures changed due to processing at either temperature. Model solutions containing the pressure-treated beta-lactoglobulin showed a significant decrease in surface tension. Izquierdo, Alli, Gmez, Ramaswamy, and Yaylayan (2005) demonstrated that under high-pressure treatments (100-300 MPa), the β-lactoglobulin AB was completely hydrolyzed by pronase and α-chymotrypsin. Hinrichs and Rademacher (2005) showed that the denaturation kinetics of beta-lactoglobulin followed second order kinetics while for alpha-lactalbumin it was 2.5. Alpha- lactalbumin was more resistant to denaturation than beta- lactoglobulin. The activation volume for denaturation of beta- lactoglobulin was reported to decrease with increasing temperature, and the activation energy increased with pressure up to 200 MPa, beyond which it decreased. This demonstrated the unfolding of the protein molecules.
Drake, Harison, Apslund, Barbosa-Canovas, and Swanson (1997) demonstrated that the percentage moisture and wet weight yield of cheese from pressure treated milk were higher than pasteurized or raw milk cheese. The microbial quality was comparable and some textural defects were reported due to the excess moisture content. Arias, Lopez, and Olano (2000) showed that high-pressure treatment at 200 MPa significantly reduced rennet coagulation times over control samples. Pressurization at 400 MPa led to coagulation times similar to those of control, except for milk treated at pH 7.0, with or without readjustment of pH to 6.7, which presented significantly longer coagulation times than their non-pressure treated counterparts.
Hinrichs and Rademacher (2004) demonstrated that the isobaric (200-800 MPa) and isothermal (-2 to 70C) denaturation of beta- lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin of whey protein followed 3rd and 2nd order kinetics, respectively. Isothermal pressure denaturation of both beta-lactoglobulin A and B did not differ significantly and an increase in temperature resulted in an increase in thedenaturation rate. At pressures higher than 200 MPa, the denaturation rate was limited by the aggregation rate, while the pressure resulted in the unfolding of molecules. The kinetic parameters of denaturation were estimated using a single step non- linear regression method, which allowed a global fit of the entire data set. Huppertz, Fox, and Kelly (2004d) examined the high- pressure induced denaturation of alpha-lactalbumin and beta- lactoglobulin in dairy systems. The higher level of pressure- induced denaturation of both proteins in milk as compared to whey was due to the absence of casein micelles and colloidal calcium phosphate in the whey.
The conformation of BSA was reported to remain fairly stable at 400 MPa due to a high number of disulfide bonds which are known to stabilize its three dimensional structure (Hayakawa, Kajihara, Morikawa, Oda, and Fujio, 1992). Kieffer and Wieser (2004) indicated that the extension resistance and extensibility of wet gluten were markedly influenced by high pressure (up to 800 MPa), while the temperature and the duration of pressure treatment (30-80C for 2-20 min) had a relatively lesser effect. The application of high pressure resulted in a marked decrease in protein extractability due to the restructuring of disulfide bonds under high pressure leading to the incorporation of alpha- and gamma-gliadins in the glutenin aggregate. The change in secondary structure following high- pressure treatment was also reported.
The pressure treatment of myosin led to head-to-head interaction to form oligomers (clumps), which became more compact and larger in size during storage at constant pressure. Even after pressure treatment at 210 MPa for 5 minutes, monomieric myosin molecules increased and no gelation was observed for pressure treatment up to 210 MPa for 30 minutes. Pressure treatment did not also affect the original helical structure of the tail in the myosin monomers. Angsupanich, Edde, and Ledward (1999) showed that high pressure- induced denaturation of myosin led to formation of structures that contained hydrogen bonds and were additionally stabilized by disulphide bonds.
Application of 750 MPa for 20 minutes resulted in dimerization of metmyoglobin in the pH range of 6-10, whereas maximum pH was not at isoelectric pH (6.9). Under acidic pH conditions, no dimers were formed (Defaye and Ledward, 1995). Zipp and Kouzmann ( 1973) showed the formation of precipitate when pressurized (750 MPa for 20 minutes) near the isoelectric point, the precipitate redissolved slowly during storage. Pressure treatment had no effect on lipid oxidation in the case of minced meat packed in air at pressure less than 300 MPa, while the oxidation increased proportionally at higher pressures. However, on exposure to higher pressure, minced meat in contact with air oxidized rapidly. Pressures > 300-400 MPa caused marked denaturation of both myofibriller and sarcoplasmic proteins in washed pork muscle and pork mince (Ananth, Murano and Dickson, 1995). Chapleau and Lamballerie (2003) showed that high-pressure treatment induced a threefold increase in the surface hydrophobicity of myofibrillar proteins between O and 450 MPa. Chapleau, Mangavel, Compoint, and Lamballerie (2004) reported that high pressure modified the secondary structure of myofibrillar proteins extracted from cattle carcasses. Irreversible changes and aggregation were reported at a pressure higher than 300 MPa, which can potentially affect the functional properties of meat products. Lamballerie, Perron, Jung, and Cheret (2003) indicated that high pressure treatment increases cathepsin D activity, and that pressurized myofibrils are more susceptible to cathepsin D action than non- pressurized myofibrils. The highest cathepsin D activity was observed at 300 MPa. Cariez, Veciana, and Cheftel ( 1995) demonstrated that L color values increased significantly in meat treated at 200-350 MPa, the meat becoming pink, and a-value decreased in meat treated at 400-500 MPa to give a grey-brown color. The total extractable myoglobin decreased in meat treated at 200- 500 MPa, while the metmyoglobin content of meat increased and the oxymyoglobin decreased at 400500 MPa. Meat discoloration from pressure processing resulted in a whitening effect at 200-300 MPa due to globin denaturation, and/or haem displacement/release, or oxidation of ferrous myoglobin to ferric myoglobin at pressure higher than 400 MPa.
The conformation of the main protein component of egg white, ovalbumin, remains fairly stable when pressurized at 400 MPa, may be due to the four disulfide bonds and non-covalent interactions stabilizing the three dimensional structure of ovalbumin (Hayakawa, Kajihara, Morikawa, Oda, and Fujio, 1992). Hayashi, Kawamura, Nakasa and Okinada (1989) reported irreversible denaturation of egg albumin at 500-900 MPa with concomitant increase in susceptibility to subtilisin. Zhang, Li, and Tatsumi (2005) demonstrated that the pressure treatment (200-500 MPa) resulted in denaturation of ovalbumin. The surface hydrophobicity of ovalbumin was found to increase with increase in pressure treatment and the presence of polysaccharide protected the protein against denaturation. Iametti, Donnizzelli, Pittia, Rovere, Squarcina, and Bonomi (1999) showed that the addition of NaCl or sucrose to egg albumin prior to high- pressure treatment (up to 10 min at 800 MPa) prevented insolubulization or gel formation after pressure treatment. As a consequence of protein unfolding, the treated albumin had increased viscosity but retained its foaming and heat-gelling properties. Farr (1990) reported the modification of functionality of egg proteins. Egg yolk formed a gel when subjected to a pressure of 400 MPa for 30 minutes at 25C, kept its original color, and was soft and adhesive. The hardness of the pressure treated gel increased and adhesiveness decreased with an increase in pressure. Plancken, Van Loey, and Hendrickx (2005) showed that the application of high pressure (400- 700 MPa) to egg white solution resulted in an increase in turbidity, surface hydrophobicity, exposed sulfhydryl content, and susceptibility to enzymatic hydrolysis, while it resulted in a decrease in protein solubility, total sulfhydryl content, denaturation enthalpy, and trypsin inhibitory activity. The pressure- induced changes in these properties were shown to be dependent on the pressuretemperature and the pH of the solution. Speroni, Puppo, Chapleau, Lamballerie, Castellani, Aon, and Anton (2005) indicated that the application of high pressure (200-600 MPa) at 2OC to low- density lipoproteins did not change the solubility even if the pH is changed, whereas aggregation and protein denaturation were drastically enhanced at pH 8. Further, the application of high- pressure under alkaline pH conditions resulted in decreased droplet flocculation of low-density lipoproteins dispersions.
The minimum pressure required for the inducing gelation of soya proteins was reported to be 300 MPa for 10-30 minutes and the gels formed were softer with lower elastic modulus in comparison with heat-treated gels (Okamoto, Kawamura, and Hayashi, 1990). The treatment of soya milk at 500 MPa for 30 min changed it from a liquid state to a solid state, whereas at lower pressures and at 500 MPa for 10 minutes, the milk remained in a liquid state, but indicated improved emulsifying activity and stability (Kajiyama, Isobe, Uemura, and Noguchi, 1995). The hardness of tofu gels produced by high-pressure treatment at 300 MPa for 10 minutes was comparable to heat induced gels. Puppo, Chapleau, Speroni, Lamballerie, Michel, Anon, and Anton (2004) demonstrated that the application of high pressure (200-600 MPa) on soya protein isolate at pH 8.0 resulted in an increase in a protein hydorphobicity and aggregation, a reduction of free sulfhydryl content and a partial unfolding of the 7S and 11S fractions at pH 8. The change in the secondary structure leading to a more disordered structure was also reported. Whereas at pH 3.0, the protein was partially denatured and insoluble aggregates were formed, the major molecular unfolding resulted in decreased thermal stability, increased protein solubility, and hydorphobicity. Puppo, Speroni, Chapleau, Lamballerie, An, and Anton (2005) studied the effect of high- pressure (200, 400, and 600 MPa for 10 min at 10C) on the emulsifying properties of soybean protein isolates at pH 3 and 8 (e.g. oil droplet size, flocculation, interfacial protein concentration, and composition). The application of pressure higher than 200 MPa at pH 8 resulted in a smaller droplet size and an increase in the levels of depletion flocculation. However, a similar effect was not observed at pH 3. Due to the application of high pressure, bridging flocculation decreased and the percentage of adsorbed proteins increased irrespective of the pH conditions. Moreover, the ability of the protein to be adsorbed at the oil- water interface increased. Zhang, Li, Tatsumi, and Isobe (2005) showed that the application of high pressure treatment resulted in the formation of more hydrophobic regions in soy protein, which dissociated into subunits, which in some cases formed insoluble aggregates. High-pressure denaturation of beta-conglycinin (7S) and glycinin (11S) occurred at 300 and 400 MPa, respectively. The gels formed had the desirable strength and a cross-linked network microstructure.
Soybean whey is a by-product of tofu manufacture. It is a good source of peptides, proteins, oligosaccharides, and isoflavones, and can be used in special foods for the elderly persons, athletes, etc. Prestamo and Penas (2004) studied the antioxidative activity of soybean whey proteins and their pepsin and chymotrypsin hydrolysates. The chymotrypsin hydrolysate showed a higher antioxidative activity than the non-hydrolyzed protein, but the pepsin hydrolysate showed an opposite trend. High pressure processing at 100 MPa inc\reased the antioxidative activity of soy whey protein, but decreased the antioxidative activity of the hydrolysates. High pressure processing increased the pH of the protein hydrolysates. Penas, Prestamo, and Gomez (2004) demonstrated that the application of high pressure (100 and 200 MPa, 15 min, 37C) facilitated the hydrolysis of soya whey protein by pepsin, trypsin, and chymotrypsin. It was shown that the highest level of hydrolysis occurred at a treatment pressure of 100 MPa. After the hydrolysis, 5 peptides under 14 kDa with trypsin and chymotrypsin, and 11 peptides with pepsin were reported.
COMBINATION OF HIGHPRESSURE TREATMENT WITH OTHER NON-THERMAL PROCESSING METHODS
Many researchers have combined the use of high pressure with other non-thermal operations in order to explore the possibility of synergy between processes. Such attempts are reviewed in this section.
Crawford, Murano, Olson, and Shenoy (1996) studied the combined effect of high pressure and gamma-irradiation for inactivating Clostridium spmgenes spores in chicken breast. Application of high pressure reduced the radiation dose required to produce chicken meat with extended shelf life. The application of high pressure (600 MPa for 20 min at 8O0C) reduced the irradiation doses required for one log reduction of Clostridium spmgenes from 4.2 kGy to 2.0 kGy. Mainville, Montpetit, Durand, and Farnworth (2001) studied the combined effect of irradiation and high pressure on microflora and microorganisms of kefir. The irradiation treatment of kefir at 5 kGy and high-pressure treatment (400 MPa for 5 or 30 min) deactivated the bacteria and yeast in kefir, while leaving the proteins and lipids unchanged.
The exposure of microbial cells and spores to an alternating current (50 Hz) resulted in the release of intracellular materials causing loss or denaturation of cellular components responsible for the normal functioning of the cell. The lethal damage to the microorganisms enhanced when the organisms are exposed to an alternating current before and after the pressure treatment. High- pressure treatment at 300 MPa for 10 min for Escherichia coli cells and 400 MPa for 30 min for Bacillus subtalis spores, after the alternating current treatment, resulted in reduced surviving fractions of both the organisms. The combined effect was also shown to reduce the tolerant level of microorganisms to other challenges (Shimada and Shimahara, 1985, 1987; Shimada, 1992).
The pretreatment with ultrasonic waves (100 W/cm^sup 2^ for 25 min at 25C) followed by high pressure (400 MPa for 25 min at 15C) was shown to result in complete inactivation of Rhodoturola rubra. Neither ultrasonic nor high-pressure treatment alone was found to be effective (Knorr, 1995).
Carbon Dioxide and Argon
Heinz and Knorr (1995) reported a 3 log reduction of supercritical CO2 pretreated cultures. The effect of the pretreatment on germination of Bacillus subtilis endospores was monitored. The combination of high pressure and mild heat treatment was the most effective in reducing germination (95% reduction), but no spore inactivation was observed.
Park, Lee, and Park (2002) studied the combination of high- pressure carbon dioxide and high pressure as a nonthermal processing technique to enhance the safety and shelf life of carrot juice. The combined treatment of carbon dioxide (4.90 MPa) and high-pressure treatment (300 MPa) resulted in complete destruction of aerobes. The increase in high pressure to 600 MPa in the presence of carbon dioxide resulted in reduced activities of polyphenoloxidase (11.3%), lipoxygenase (8.8%), and pectin methylesterase (35.1%). Corwin and Shellhammer (2002) studied the combined effect of high-pressure treatment and CO2 on the inactivation of pectinmethylesterase, polyphenoloxidase, Lactobacillus plantarum, and Escherichia coli. An interaction was found between CO2 and pressure at 25 and 50C for pectinmethylesterase and polyphenoloxidase, respectively. The activity of polyphenoloxidase was decreased by CO2 at all pressure treatments. The interaction between CO2 and pressure was significant for Lactobacillus plantarum, with a significant decrease in survivors due to the addition of CO2 at all pressures studied. No significant effect on E. coli survivors was seen with CO2 addition. Truong, Boff, Min, and Shellhammer (2002) demonstrated that the addition of CO2 (0.18 MPa) during high pressure processing (600 MPa, 25C) of fresh orange juice increases the rate of PME inactivation in Valencia orange juice. The treatment time due to CO2 for achieving the equivalent reduction in PME activity was from 346 s to 111 s, but the overall degree of PME inactivation remained unaltered.
Fujii, Ohtani, Watanabe, Ohgoshi, Fujii, and Honma (2002) studied the high-pressure inactivation of Bacillus cereus spores in water containing argon. At the pressure of 600 MPa, the addition of argon reportedly accelerated the inactivation of spores at 20C, but had no effect on the inactivation at 40C.
The complex physicochemical environment of milk exerted a strong protective effect on Escherichia coli against high hydrostatic pressure inactivation, reducing inactivation from 7 logs at 400 MPa to only 3 logs at 700 MPa in 15 min at 20C. A substantial improvement in inactivation efficiency at ambient temperature was achieved by the application of consecutive, short pressure treatments interrupted by brief decompressions. The combined effect of high pressure (500 MPa) and natural antimicrobial peptides (lysozyme, 400 g/ml and nisin, 400 g/ml) resulted in increased lethality for Escherichia coli in milk (Garcia, Masschalck, and Michiels, 1999).
OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH PRESSURE ASSISTED PROCESSING
The inclusion of high-pressure treatment as a processing step within certain manufacturing flow sheets can lead to novel products as well as new process development opportunities. For instance, high pressure can precede a number of process operations such as blanching, dehydration, rehydration, frying, and solid-liquid extraction. Alternatively, processes such as gelation, freezing, and thawing, can be carried out under high pressure. This section reports on the use of high pressures in the context of selected processing operations.
Eshtiaghi and Knorr (1993) employed high pressure around ambient temperatures to develop a blanching process similar to hot water or steam blanching, but without thermal degradation; this also minimized problems associated with water disposal. The application of pressure (400 MPa, 15 min, 20C) to the potato sample not only caused blanching but also resulted in a four-log cycle reduction in microbial count whilst retaining 85% of ascorbic acid. Complete inactivation of polyphenoloxidase was achieved under the above conditions when 0.5% citric acid solution was used as the blanching medium. The addition of 1 % CaCl^sub 2^ solution to the medium also improved the texture and the density. The leaching of potassium from the high-pressure treated sample was comparable with a 3 min hot water blanching treatment (Eshtiaghi and Knorr, 1993). Thus, high- pressures can be used as a non-thermal blanching method.
Dehydration and Osmotic Dehydration
The application of high hydrostatic pressure affects cell wall structure, leaving the cell more permeable, which leads to significant changes in the tissue architecture (Fair, 1990; Dornenburg and Knorr, 1994, Rastogi, Subramanian, and Raghavarao, 1994; Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998; Rastogi, Raghavarao, and Niranjan, 2005). Eshtiaghi, Stute, and Knorr (1994) reported that the application of pressure (600 MPa, 15 min at 70C) resulted in no significant increase in the drying rate during fluidized bed drying of green beans and carrot. However, the drying rate significantly increased in the case of potato. This may be due to relatively limited permeabilization of carrot and beans cells as compared to potato. The effects of chemical pre-treatment (NaOH and HCl treatment) on the rates of dehydration of paprika were compared with products pre-treated by applying high pressure or high intensity electric field pulses (Fig. 2). High-pressure (400 MPa for 10 min at 25C) and high intensity electric field pulses (2.4 kV/cm, pulse width 300 s, 10 pulses, pulse frequency 1 Hz) were found to result in drying rates comparable with chemical pre-treatments. The latter pre-treatments, however, eliminated the use of chemicals (Ade- Omowaye, Rastogi, Angersbach, and Knorr, 2001).
Figure 2 (a) Effects of various pre-treatments such as hot water blanching, high pressure and high intensity electric field pulse treatment on dehydration characteristics of red paprika (b) comparison of drying time (from Ade-Omowaye, Rastogi, Angersbach, and Knorr, 2001).
Figure 3 (a) Variation of moisture and (b) solid content (based on initial dry matter content) with time during osmotic dehydration (from Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998).
Generally, osmotic dehydration is a slow process. Application of high pressures causes permeabilization of the cell structure (Dornenburg and Knorr, 1993; Eshtiaghi, Stute, and Knorr, 1994; Fair, 1990; Rastogi, Subramanian, and Raghavarao, 1994). This phenomenon has been exploited by Rastogi and Niranjan (1998) to enhance mass transfer rates during the osmotic dehydration of pineapple (Ananas comsus). High-pressure pre-treatments (100-800 MPa) were found to enhance both water removal as well as solid gain (Fig. 3). Measured diffusivity values for water were found to be four-fold greater, whilst solute (sugar) diffusivity values were found to be two-fold greater. Compression and decompression occurring during high pressure pre-treatment itself caused the removal of a significant amount of water, which was attributed to the cell wall rupture (Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998). Differential interference contrast microscopic examination showed the ext\ent of cell wall break-up with applied pressure (Fig. 4). Sopanangkul, Ledward, and Niranjan (2002) demonstrated that the application of high pressure (100 to 400 MPa) could be used to accelerate mass transfer during ingredient infusion into foods. Application of pressure opened up the tissue structure and facilitated diffusion. However, higher pressures above 400 MPa induced starch gelatinization also and hindered diffusion. The values of the diffusion coefficient were dependent on cell permeabilization and starch gelatinization. The maximum value of diffusion coefficient observed represented an eight-fold increase over the values at ambient pressure.
The synergistic effect of cell permeabilization due to high pressure and osmotic stress as the dehydration proceeds was demonstrated more clearly in the case of potato (Rastogi, Angersbach, and Knorr, 2000a, 2000b, 2003). The moisture content was reduced and the solid content increased in the case of samples treated at 400 MPa. The distribution of relative moisture (M/M^sub o^) and solid (S/S^sub o^) content as well as the cell permeabilization index (Zp) (shown in Fig. 5) indicate that the rate of change of moisture and solid content was very high at the interface and decreased towards the center (Rastogi, Angersbach, and Knorr, 2000a, 2000b, 2003).
Most dehydrated foods are rehydrated before consumption. Loss of solids during rehydration is a major problem associated with the use of dehydrated foods. Rastogi, Angersbach, Niranjan, and Knorr (2000c) have studied the transient variation of moisture and solid content during rehydration of dried pineapples, which were subjected to high pressure treatment prior to a two-stage drying process consisting of osmotic dehydration and finish-drying at 25C (Fig. 6). The diffusion coefficients for water infusion as well as for solute diffusion were found to be significantly lower in high-pressure pre- treated samples. The observed decrease in water diffusion coefficient was attributed to the permeabilization of cell membranes, which reduces the rehydration capacity (Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998). The solid infusion coefficient was also lower, and so was the release of the cellular components, which form a gel- network with divalent ions binding to de-esterified pectin (Basak and Ramaswamy, 1998; Eshtiaghi, Stute, and Knorr, 1994; Rastogi Angersbach, Niranjan, and Knorr, 2000c). Eshtiaghi, Stute, and Knorr (1994) reported that high-pressure treatment in conjunction with subsequent freezing could improve mass transfer during rehydration of dried plant products and enhance product quality.
Figure 4 Microstructures of control and pressure treated pineapple (a) control; (b) 300 MPa; (c) 700 MPa. ( 1 cm = 41.83 m) (from Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998).
Ahromrit, Ledward, and Niranjan (2006) explored the use of high pressures (up to 600 MPa) to accelerate water uptake kinetics during soaking of glutinous rice. The results showed that the length and the diameter the of the rice were positively correlated with soaking time, pressure and temperature. The water uptake kinetics was shown to follow the well-known Fickian model. The overall rates of water uptake and the equilibrium moisture content were found to increase with pressure and temperature.
Zhang, Ishida, and Isobe (2004) studied the effect of highpressure treatment (300-500 MPa for 0-380 min at 20C) on the water uptake of soybeans and resulting changes in their microstructure. The NMR analysis indicated that water mobility in high-pressure soaked soybean was more restricted and its distribution was much more uniform than in controls. The SEM analysis revealed that high pressure changed the microstructures of the seed coat and hilum, which improved water absorption and disrupted the individual spherical protein body structures. Additionally, the DSC and SDS-PAGE analysis revealed that proteins were partially denatured during the high pressure soaking. Ibarz, Gonzalez, Barbosa-Canovas (2004) developed the kinetic models for water absorption and cooking time of chickpeas with and without prior high-pressure treatment (275-690 MPa). Soaking was carried out at 25C for up to 23 h and cooking was achieved by immersion in boiling water until they became tender. As the soaking time increased, the cooking time decreased. High-pressure treatment for 5 min led to reductions in cooking times equivalent to those achieved by soaking for 60-90 min.
Ramaswamy, Balasubramaniam, and Sastry (2005) studied the effects of high pressure (33, 400 and 700 MPa for 3 min at 24 and 55C) and irradiation (2 and 5 kGy) pre-treatments on hydration behavior of navy beans by soaking the treated beans in water at 24 and 55C. Treating beans under moderate pressure (33 MPa) resulted in a high initial moisture uptake (0.59 to 1.02 kg/kg dry mass) and a reduced loss of soluble materials. The final moisture content after three hours of soaking was the highest in irradiated beans (5 kGy) followed by high-pressure treatment (33 MPa, 3 min at 55C). Within the experimental range of the study, Peleg’s model was found to satisfactorily describe the rate of water absorption of navy beans.
A reduction of 40% in oil uptake during frying was observed, when thermally blanched frozen potatoes were replaced by high pressure blanched frozen potatoes. This may be due to a reduction in moisture content caused by compression and decompression (Rastogi and Niranjan, 1998), as well as the prevalence of different oil mass transfer mechanisms (Knorr, 1999).
Solid Liquid Extraction
The application of high pressure leads to rearrangement in tissue architecture, which results in increased extractability even at ambient temperature. Extraction of caffeine from coffee using water could be increased by the application of high pressure as well as increase in temperature (Knorr, 1999). The effect of high pressure and temperature on caffeine extraction was compared to extraction at 100C as well as atmospheric pressure (Fig. 7). The caffeine yield was found to increase with temperature at a given pressure. The combination of very high pressures and lower temperatures could become a viable alternative to current industrial practice.
Figure 5 Distribution of (a, b) relative moisture and (c, d) solid content as well as (e, f) cell disi

2010 is the International Year of Biodiversity. Why should you care?
Biodiversity is the number of different species that exist in a given area. The healthier an area is, the more biodiversity it has. Different forms of wildlife and plants inhabit areas, and these plants and animals learn to coexist and form ecological relationships with each other.
In unhealthy environments, only a few kinds of species of each plant or animal exist. This is what is known as a monoculture, and monocultures are unhealthy. Whether a monoculture is ten thousand or a hundred thousand acres planted all together of one kind of crop, or an entire subdivision with lawns all growing the same five plants, monocultures are vulnerable to pests and disease. For example, part of the fire ant problem in the United States is exacerbated by homeowners, because fire ants prefer monocultures and will shy away from biodiverse areas.
By contrast, the more kinds of species that inhabit an area, the more likely it is that at least a few strains of plants or animals will be resistant to pests and disease. If you have thirty kinds of plants, and a virus blows in across the ocean from a remote island, your lawn has a better chance of surviving and renewing itself than if you have only five kinds of plants. In the same way, having more species of wild birds will provide more secure insect control than having only a few kinds of wild birds. So, by growing more kinds of plants in your yard, you will attract more animals, and help to increase your neighbourhood’s biodiversity.

| This article or section is a Cataclysm stub. You can help expand it by editing it.
Ancient Shark Jaws is a common fossil archaeology artifact.
Sharks have no true bones, only cartilage. Because their feeding habits involve biting things with a great deal of force, losing Teeth is Common. Therefore, sharks have multiple rows of teeth which they replace constantly throughout their lifetimes.
Patches and hotfixes
- Patch 4.0.3 (15-Nov-2010): Added

Research and Tracking
Accurately tracking birth defects is the first step in preventing them and reducing their effect. Birth defects tracking systems are vital to help us find out where and when birth defects occur and who they affect. This gives us important clues about preventing birth defects and allows us to evaluate our efforts.
We base our research on what we learn from tracking. By analyzing the data collected, we can identify factors that increase or decrease the risk of birth defects and identify community or environmental concerns that need more study. In addition, research helps the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) answer critical questions about the causes of many of these birth defects.
What We’ve Learned
We know what causes some birth defects, such as Down syndrome and fetal alcohol syndrome. However, for about two-thirds of birth defects, the causes are unknown.1 Also, we don’t understand well how certain factors might work together to cause birth defects. While there is still more work to do, we have learned a lot about birth defects through past research. For example:
- Taking supplements containing folic acid, a B vitamin, at least 1 month before getting pregnant and during pregnancy lowers the risk of having a baby with serious birth defects of the brain and spine (neural tube defects). For this reason, all women who can become pregnant should take supplements containing 400 micrograms of folic acid every day.
- Drinking alcohol during pregnancy can cause the baby to be born with fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Pregnant women should not drink alcohol any time during pregnancy. Women also should not drink alcohol if they are planning to become pregnant or are sexually active and do not use effective birth control.
- Smoking in the month before getting pregnant and throughout pregnancy increases the chance of premature birth, certain birth defects (such as cleft lip, cleft palate, or both), and infant death. Quitting smoking before getting pregnant is best. However, for women who are already pregnant, quitting as early as possible can still help protect against some health problems.
- Women who are obese when they get pregnant have a higher risk of having a baby with serious birth defects of the brain and spine (neural tube defects) and some heart defects. Helping women to reach a healthy weight before they get pregnant could prevent birth defects.
- Poor control of diabetes in pregnant women increases the chance for birth defects, and might cause serious complications for the mother, too. If a woman with diabetes keeps her blood sugar well-controlled before and during pregnancy, she can reduce the chance of having a baby with birth defects.
- Taking certain medications during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects, but the safety of many medications taken by pregnant women has been difficult to determine. If you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, you should not stop taking medications you need or begin taking new medications without first talking with your doctor. This includes prescription and over-the-counter medications and dietary or herbal products.
Birth Defects Tracking and Research
The Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program (MACDP)
MACDP is a population-based tracking system for birth defects among children born to residents of metropolitan Atlanta. Population-based means that the researchers look at all babies with birth defects who live in a defined study area, which is important to get a complete picture of what is happening within this known population. Established in 1967, MACDP was the nation's first population-based system for active collection of information about birth defects. Active data collection means that committed staff members seek out information about birth defects and continually review medical records at multiple health care facilities in a given geographic area. Information obtained from MACDP is used to understand the characteristics of affected children, learn about other health outcomes associated with birth defects, and provide data for education and health policy decisions leading to prevention of birth defects. The system also serves as a model to help other programs develop and implement new tracking methods.
Learn more about the Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program (MACDP) »
State-Based Tracking Systems
CDC funds population-based birth defects tracking systems in 14 US states and territories. The tracking systems use the data to help prevent birth defects and to refer infants and children with birth defects to needed services. Identifying birth defects at a state level also strengthens public health officials' ability to estimate prevalence and evaluate risk factors that are the most important in their community. State-based birth defects tracking programs provide important insights into our continued efforts to prevent birth defects and support families affected by them.
National Birth Defects Prevention Network (NBDPN)
CDC supports and collaborates with the NBDPN. The NBDPN is a group of over 225 individuals working at the national, state, and local levels, who are involved in tracking, researching, and preventing birth defects. The NBDPN serves as a forum for exchanging ideas about preventing birth defects for tracking and researching birth defects, and providing technical support for state and local programs. Established in 1997, the NBDPN assesses the effect of birth defects on children, families, and the health care system. It also identifies risk factors for birth defects. This information can be used to develop strategies to prevent birth defects and to assist families and their providers in preventing other disabilities in children with birth defects.
International Clearinghouse for Birth Defects Surveillance and Research (ICBDSR)
The ICBDSR brings together birth defects programs from around the world with the aim of conducting worldwide tracking and research to prevent birth defects and to improve the lives of people born with these conditions. CDC supports and collaborates with the ICBDSR as a way to gain knowledge and expertise on birth defects worldwide and to further our domestic goals and those of the international community.
Environmental Public Health Tracking (EPHT)
Environmental public health tracking is the ongoing collection, integration, analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of data on environmental hazards, exposures to those hazards, and health effects that may be related to the exposures.
CDC has worked with representatives from 23 state and local health departments that have received EPHT grants to develop a monitoring system for 12 birth defects. These defects were selected because they are serious birth defects that are relatively easily identified at or around the time of birth, have some potential for environmental risk factors, and could be adequately ascertained by the different types of birth defects tracking systems. The EPHT Network tracks the prevalence of these defects and publishes annual data tables and maps in the national portal. Currently, the national portal has birth defects data for Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Utah, and Wisconsin.
National Birth Defects Prevention Study (NBDPS)
Established in 1997, NBDPS is the largest population-based U.S. study looking at risk factors and potential causes of over 30 major birth defects. CDC funds the study and collects data with researchers from other study sites, collectively called the Centers for Birth Defects Research and Prevention (CBDRP). Participating sites have included Arkansas, California, Georgia (CDC), Iowa, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Texas, and Utah.
Understanding the potential causes of birth defects can help us learn how to prevent them. The NBDPS has made key contributions in understanding the risk of specific medications when used just before and during pregnancy. Data from the NBDPS has also clearly demonstrated that maternal obesity is a strong risk factor for a number of major birth defects and has confirmed the association between maternal smoking and orofacial clefts. The NBDPS is one key step toward bringing us to a day when fewer babies are born with birth defects.
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
NHANES is a nationally-representative survey designed to look at the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the United States. The survey is unique in that it combines interviews and physical examinations, including the collection of blood samples.
CDC uses information from these studies to look at the amount of folic acid taken in from food and dietary supplements. Green vegetables, fruits, and juices have natural folate, and other foods, such as cereal and bread, have folic acid added to them. CDC is looking at NHANES data to see how people get folic acid and to see if they are getting the recommended amount. This information will help determine if adding different levels of folic acid to these foods or different types of foods would affect peoples’ intake. CDC is also using these data to look at folic acid intake and blood folate concentrations among women who are pregnant, or who may become pregnant, as well as specifically among women who are obese or who have diabetes. CDC also uses NHANES data to look at patterns of prescription medication use among pregnant women. This information will help determine the most commonly used medications during pregnancy, which CDC will use to identify medications that need future research to characterize their safety or risk during pregnancy.
- Nelson K, Holmes LB. 1989. Malformations due to presumed spontaneous mutations in newborn infants. New England Journal of Medicine 320:19-23.
- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities
Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
TTY: (888) 232-6348
New Hours of Operation

The issue of Nubian rights is an often neglected and poorly understood issue for public opinion. This is not a big surprise since Egyptians did not get any education on that part of their country and it hardly ever surfaces as part of the political discussion. Despite the active participation of Nubians in and before the revolution; their efforts to highlight their cause and their history of discrimination, little attention is given to them. Nubians have more recently become a part of the political discussion, more evident in the presidential race. However, as usual Nubians were excluded from participating in shaping their country’s future as none of them was selected to be in the constitution drafting committee.
Nubians are the inhabitants of a historical part in the South of Egypt and Northern Sudan. Their suffering started long before the building of the High Dam in 1964; it was in 1902 when Aswan Dam was built. The end result was about 44 villages that drowned along with the historic area that witnessed one of the humanity’s earliest civilizations. Some of the villages even drowned without prior notice; village inhabitants would wake up one day to find their property, their land and their cattle drowned. They were moved away to the desert land of Kom Ombo despite their heavy reliance on the Nile for agriculture all their life. They never received their rightful compensation for their displacement despite many promises made by successive regimes. They postponed the call for their rights several times for considerations of war and national crises. In addition, Nubians suffered from political, economic and cultural marginalization. School curricula exclude their cultural heritage and their language is not taught in schools (even in areas where they live) and it may become extinct if efforts are not made to preserve it.
Despite the marginalization, Nubian always asserted their “Egyptianness”. They have taken numerous patriotic stances and sacrificed several times for the sake of their country. They deserve respect not only for their struggle, but because they’re Egyptian and deserve full citizenship. They are fighting for their rights and their place in the new scene after the revolution. However their struggle exemplifies the many of the issues that Egypt suffers from:
Firstly, the “Nubian issue” reflects our crisis with growing racism and intolerance. Clearly, discrimination against different groups in Egypt is not uncommon whether it was based on gender, religious beliefs, class, etc. Activist Fatma Emam recently wrote an article of her experience as a black Egyptian and the racism she encounters on a daily basis. Her article served as a wakeup call for so many who were unaware of such experiences to “black Egyptians”. Moreover, a common issue often cited by Nubians is that most Egyptians assume they’re Sudanese or African as if Egypt doesn’t have that southern part where darker-skinned people live. The problem highlighted here is not only that we are being racist, but we are also in deep denial about it.
However, it’s not hard to find reasons why the situation has become so deteriorated. We lived under a centuries of authoritarianism and colonialism. Both systems usually play the cards of racism and divide-and-conquer very well; and they deprive societies from progressing towards pluralism. I am not justifying the racism or discrimination. However, I believe that’s a major lesson to be learnt. The more marginalized people are, the more likely people would want to rebel. And we can take South Sudan as an example. When people do not enjoy full participation and self-determination, they no longer want to be part of a country that denies them those rights.
Secondly, the “Nubian issue” also reflects a crisis with our “elite”, and by elite here I mean our opinion leaders, intellectuals, and media people. We may also add the emerging younger elite that started to gain more visibility after the revolution. A few of the elite come out to speak up about discrimination, racism, and Nubian rights. This can be seen a part of bigger elite crisis reflected in their detachment from the public and their failure to truly engage the public. Even when the revolution began, it was hardly credited for the efforts of the elite. It is sad that the people who should lead the change get trapped by infighting and at many cases follow their own personal interests.
One explanation that could be given as to why “the elite” shy away from the Nubian cause is considerations of populism. It seems like the Nubian issue is not “sexy” or “doesn’t sell” for intellectuals, so more favorable topics are preferred. For example, we will not find a lack of “elite” who spoke out against Palestinian displacement, but a handful who spoke against Nubian displacements.
We know that activism is more effective when there is more solidarity from different groups. That’s why women issues would be further promoted if more men stand by them, and Christians’ rights would be easier to attain if more Muslims speak up against their violations. It is true that more people now calling for inclusion and representation than ever before, but a strong stance against racism, sectarianism and discrimination is still much needed.
Thirdly, history tells us that many peoples were exploited under many guises. Arab nationalism was one of those ideologies under which lots of abuses and violations against minorities in different Arab countries were justified. The attack on other languages and cultures within Arab nations carried the banner of Arab nationalism. I would personally be happy with Arab union and with breaking geographical and economic barriers between us one day. However, all I can see that from now are big shiny words about Arab brotherhood and solidarity, while none of it is materializing.
Until now, Nubians are accused of separationism when they speak up for their rights. And more often than not they’re told it’s not the right time to bring it up. It’s time for us to realize that values of democracy and diversity must be respected and should never be taken away under any ideological guise or notion. Discrimination cannot be condoned or downplayed anymore; we can’t even afford it anymore.
Thanks Fatma Emam for the advice given for producing this piece.

HISTORICAL HIGHLIGHTS OF BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
Baylor University was founded under the leadership of Judge R.E.B. Baylor, Reverend James Huckins, and Reverend William Milton Tryon, three farsighted pioneer missionaries working through the Texas Baptist Education Society. They, along with other associations, sent representatives in 1848 to create the Baptist State Association, which later became the Baptist State Convention.
1845-Baylor chartered on February 1 by the Republic of Texas.
1849-Instruction in law begun.
1857-School of Law organized.
1883-School of Law closed.
1920-School of Law reorganized.
1886-Baylor merged with Waco University and moved to Waco.
1903-College of Medicine organized in Dallas by assuming responsibility for operating the University of Dallas Medical Department.
1943-Moved to Houston.
1969-Given independent status.
1903-College of Pharmacy organized in Dallas.
1930-College of Pharmacy terminated.
1905-Theological Seminary organized in Waco.
1907-Separated from Baylor University.
1910-Moved to Fort Worth.
1918-College of Dentistry organized in Dallas by taking over the State Dental College which had been founded in 1905.
1971-The College was separately incorporated in 1971, although Graduate programs continued to be offered through Baylor University.
1996 -The College became a part of the Texas A&M System on September 1, 1996.
1919-Baylor Hospital organized in Dallas – now Baylor University Medical Center.
1919-College of Arts and Sciences organized.
1919-College of Fine Arts organized, which consisted of offerings in music and in expression.
1921-Terminated in favor of the present School of Music.
1919-School of Education organized.
1920-School of Nursing organized as a diploma-granting program.
1921-School of Music organized.
1923-School of Business organized.
1959-Renamed Hankamer School of Business in honor of Mr. and Mrs. Earl Hankamer of Houston.
1947-Graduate School organized. Graduate study and degrees had been offered since 1894.
1950-The School of Nursing reorganized as an academic unit of Baylor University offering a Bachelor of Science in Nursing degree.
2000-Renamed Louise Herrington School of Nursing in honor of Louise Herrington Ornelas.
1951-Graduate program in hospital administration established in conjunction with the Army Medical
Field Service School, Fort Sam Houston.
1971-Graduate program in physical therapy added.
1971-Program in physicianʼs assistant added in collaboration with the Army Medical Field Service School, Fort Sam Houston. Terminated in 1977.
1972-Name of Army Medical Field Service School changed to Academy of Health Sciences of the U.S. Army.
1973-Baylor University Memorandum of Agreement with the U.S. Army Academy of Health Sciences affiliated more than 20 programs of instruction with 150 course offerings for academic credit at Baylor University. Terminated in 1977.
1987-University School organized. Responsibilities were reassigned to other academic units in 1992.
1993-George W. Truett Theological Seminary organized in Waco.
1994-Seminary classes begin.
1995-School of Engineering and Computer Science organized.
2002-Honors College organized.
2005-School of Social Work granted independent status from the College of Arts and Sciences.

You have been insulted, your ego is bruised, your
pride is hurt, you have been shown powerless and diminished in some way, and now you are hurt
and mad as hell! You have just
been humiliated, it is unfair, and you don't like feeling foolish. Humiliation often results
in violent retaliation and revenge.
Remember, at the end of the day, the only opinion of yourself that matters is
- Feeling disrespected.
- A loss of stature or image.
- An image change reflecting a decrease in what others believe about your
- Induced shame
- To reduce the pride or fail to recognize the
dignity of another
- An event perceived to cause loss of honor and induce
- Feeling powerless.
- Being unjustly forced into a degrading position.
- Ridicule, scorn, contempt or other treatment at the hands of others.
Root: from Latin humilis, low, lowly, from humus, ground.
Literally, “reducing to dirt”.
Synonyms include losing face, being made to feel like a fool, feeling
foolish, hurt, disgraced, indignity, put-down, debased, dejected, denigrated, dishonored,
disrespected, dis'ed, defamed,
humbled, scorned, slighted, slurred, shamed, mortified, rejected, being laughed
at. While humility is considered a strength, humiliation is hurtful; the
distinction pivots on autonomy.
Appreciation is the opposite of humiliation.
Humiliation involves an event that demonstrates unequal
power in a relationship where you are in
the inferior position and unjustly diminished. Often the painful experience is vividly
remembered for a long time. Your vindictive
passions are aroused and a humiliated fury may
result. There are three involved parties: 1) the perpetrator
exercising power, 2) the victim who is shown powerless and therefore humiliated,
and 3) the witness or observers to the event.
Because of the powerlessness and lack of control that it exposes, humiliation
may lead to anxiety.
Humility is recognizing and accepting our own limitations based on
an accurate and modest estimate of our importance and significance. The humble person
recognizes he is one among the six billion
interdependent people on this earth, earth is one planet circling the sun, and our sun
is one of a billion stars in
the presently known universe. Because of this broad and sound perspective on her
significance, the truly humble person cannot be humiliated.
Humility reduces our need for self-justification
and allows us to admit to and learn from our mistakes. Our ego
Humiliation and Shame
Shame is private, humiliation is public.
The essential distinction between humiliation and shame is this: you agree
with shame and you disagree with humiliation. Humiliation is suffering an insult. If you judge the insult to be credible,
then you feel shame. Others can insult and humiliate
you, but you will only feel shame if your self-image is reduced; and that
requires your own assessment and decision. A person who is insecure about their
genuine stature is more prone to feeling shame as a
result of an insult. This is because they give more credibility to what others
think of them than to what they think of themselves. This can result in
People believe they deserve their shame, they do not believe they deserve
their humiliation. Humiliation is seen as unjust.
Forms of Humiliation
Humans have many ways to slight others and humiliate them. For example:
- Overlooking someone, taking them for granted, ignoring them, giving them
the silent treatment, treating them as invisible, or making them wait unnecessarily for you,
- Rejecting someone, holding them distant, abandoned, or isolated,
- Withholding acknowledgement, denying recognition, manipulating
- Denying someone basic social amenities, needs, or human
- Manipulating people or treating them like objects (it) or animals, rather
than as a person (thou).
- Treating people unfairly,
- Domination, control, manipulation, abandonment,
- Threats or abuse including: verbal (e.g. name calling), physical, psychological, or sexual,
- Assault, attack, or injury
- Reduction in rank, responsibility, role, title, positional power, or
- Betrayal, or being cheated, lied to, defrauded, suckered, or duped,
- Being laughed at, mocked, teased, ridiculed, given a dirty look, spit on, or made
to look stupid or foolish.
- Being the victim of a practical joke, prank, or confidence scheme.
- False accusation or insinuation,
- Public shame, disrespect, or being dis'ed, downgraded, defeated, or
- Forced nakedness,
- Rape or incest,
- Seeing your love interest flirt with another, induced jealousy, violating
your love interest, cuckolding,
- Seeing your wife, girlfriend, sister, or daughter sexually violated,
- Poverty, unemployment, bad investments, debt, bankruptcy, foreclosure, imprisonment, homelessness, punishment,
- Denigration of a person's values,
beliefs, heritage, race, gender,
appearance, characteristics, or affiliations,
- Dependency, especially on weaker people,
- Losing a dominance contest. Being
forced to submit.
- Trespass such as violating privacy or other boundaries,
- Violating, denying, or suppressing
- Losing basic personal freedoms such a mobility, access, or autonomy; being
controlled, dominated, intruded on, exploited, or manipulated,
- Diminished competency resulting from being disabled, immobilized, tricked,
weakened, trapped, mislead, thwarted goals, opposed, sabotage, or let down.
- Diminished resources resulting from being defrauded, robbed, cheated,
evicted, or being deprived of privileges, or rights,
- Having safety or security reduced by intimidation or threat,
- Dismissing, discounting, or silencing your story,
- Being treated as an equal by a lower stature person.
The Paradox of Humiliation
An insult usually hurts, but it is important to resolve in your own
mind, based on evidence, why the insult hurts. What
loss does it represent to you? Decide if the insult:
- is an unjustified attack that does not decrease your stature, diminish your
self-image, nor tarnish your public image or reputation, or
- is justified and has diminished your public image or reputation, or
- is justified and has diminished or revised your self-image.
Begin the analysis by deciding if the insult is based on information
that accurately represents you. Then reflect and consider if your
image accurately represents your stature. If you decide the insult is unjustified
then you can simply ignore it (“don't take the bait”) or you can describe why it
is unfair and ask your offender for an
apology. If your public image exceeds your stature, then
the insult may a justifiable retaliation for your arrogance and
it may contain an important message you can learn from. If the insult is
justified it may cause you to feel
shame and then lead you to revise your
better align it with your stature. The insult is never
justified if it is an attempt to reduce your stature below the threshold of human
Public Image, Self-Image, Stature, and Revenge
For an insult to diminish your public image, the
public has to believe it is true. For an insult to diminish your
self-image or self-esteem, you have to believe it is
true. An insult cannot diminish your stature because
your self-image is not your self. An insult may cause you to reassess your
self-image or self-esteem.
Revenge is often sought as a remedy for
humiliation; perhaps using the phrase “protecting honor” as justification. But
revenge cannot be an effective remedy for humiliation, because it does nothing
to increase your stature.
Humiliation is more demeaning and hurtful than “taking offense” at something.
“Taking offense” is cognitive; you have questioned, disagreed with, or attacked
my beliefs and perhaps my values. We disagree, and I
think you are wrong. Offense is intellectual; it is about what I think.
“Humiliation” is visceral; you have attacked me, my being, my
self, and made me feel foolish about who I am. The attack is personal and
credible enough that you have caused me to doubt my own worth, and thereby
induced my shame. Humiliation is existential; it is
about who I am.
Humiliation has been linked to academic failure, low
self-esteem, social isolation,
conflict, delinquency, abuse, discrimination,
depression, learned helplessness, social
disruption, torture, and even death. People in power use humiliation as a form
of social control; it is a common tool of oppression. The fear of humiliation is
also a powerful motivating force.
Although shame and humiliation are
human universals, the particular circumstances
and events that cause humiliation can vary greatly from one culture to the next.
An event that is benign in one culture may cause great offense, shame, and
humiliation in another. For example:
- Under Islamic law a woman who spends time alone with an unrelated man
brings great shame to her family.
Victims of humiliation may be able to achieve resolution through either of
two paths. The first is to reappraise the
humiliating experience in some way that acknowledges the victim's strength and ability
to cope with a difficult situation. This approach
increases self-confidence and diminishes the fear of humiliation. The second
path is to leave the degrading environment and find a more appreciative
- “The most dangerous men on earth are those who are
afraid they are wimps.” ~ James Gilligan
- “No one can make you feel inferior without your consent.” ~
- “The truly humble person cannot be humiliated.” ~ Donald Klein
- “The fear of humiliation appears to be one of the most powerful
motivators in individual and collective human behavior.” ~ Donald Klein
- “Persistent humiliation robs you of the vantage of rebellion.” ~ M.
- “Ridicule is man's most potent weapon.” ~
- “The difference between how a person treats the powerless versus the
powerful is as good a measure of human character as I know.” ~ Robert I.
- “When you dismiss my story you dismiss who I am; you diminish me.” ~
Leland R. Beaumont
On Apology, by Aaron Lazare
Somebodies and Nobodies: Overcoming the Abuse of Rank, by Robert W. Fuller
Violence, by James
The No Asshole Rule,
by Robert I. Sutton
Threatened Egotism to Violence and Aggression: The Dark Side of High
Self-Esteem, Psychology Review, 1996, Vol. 103, No. 1, 5-33, by
Roy F. Baumeister, Laura Smart, Joseph M. Boden
Humiliation and Assistance: Telling the Truth About Power, Telling a
New Story, by Linda M. Hartling, Wellesley College
The Humiliation Dynamic,
Donald C. Klein, Ph.D., The Union Institute
Humiliation: Assessing the Specter of Derision, Degradation, and
Debasement, Linda M. Hartling (1995) Doctoral
dissertation. Cincinnati, OH: Union Institute Graduate School.

January 18, 1813
Joseph Farwell Glidden: The Father of Barbed Wire
Joseph Farwell Glidden was born on January 18, 1813, and became known as the "Father of Barbed Wire." In 1874, Glidden was issued patent #157,124 for the first wire technology that was capable of restraining cattle. While his barbed wire was neither the first nor the last, it was ruled the best after a three year legal battle.

By Margaret Southern
For many people in the United States, food comes from the grocery store. Most Americans would be hard pressed to determine the real origins of much of the food we eat. But residents of the Cayos Cochinos islands off the northern coast of Honduras know exactly where their food comes from: the ocean outside their doors.
Here, it’s not just their stomachs that rely on the bounty of the ocean—it’s almost their entire economy. But overfishing and industrial fishing continues to put pressure on their marine resources. The Nature Conservancy is working with partners and locals to protect their reefs through education, conservation and income-generating projects.
In 2007, the Conservancy and the Cayos Cochinos Foundation identified almost 20 income-generating projects with the goal of increasing income for households that depend heavily on the reef.
One of these projects was the construction of a small tourist complex managed by the East End community. The community hopes to attract tourists with two eco-friendly cabins, which were built with outside funding, and an ocean-view restaurant serving traditional Garifuna meals, funded by the Conservancy. The Conservancy is connecting the community with tourism service providers to promote best practices and ensure the protection of conservation targets.
The Cayos Cochinos Foundation, along with the Conservancy and other groups, has also worked with the communities to establish management plans that encourage no-take zones and the construction of artificial reefs that serve as nurseries for small fish. And through other partnerships, laws have been passed that will eventually prohibit industrial fishing around the marine protected area.
All of these initiatives are important in creating sustainability in the reefs and communities of Cayos Cochinos. According to Francisco Velasquez, a school teacher in East End, if it weren’t for the Conservancy, they wouldn’t still be living on that island.
“Our livelihood depends on fishing, but in the past large ships would come in and sweep the whole ocean clear of fish. There was nothing left for us to eat,” Velasquez said. “But now with the conservation of this area the fish are returning, and through the tourism project we are creating new solutions to increase our income and improve our lives.”
In Cayos Cochinos, these projects would not have been possible without Anthony Ives. A former San Francisco stock trader who at one point was managing 50 billion dollars for the state of California, Ives found his way to Honduras after Sept. 11 through the Peace Corps. He created the Foundation Heart Ventures-Grupo de Apoyo al Desarollo (IHV-GAD) to have a focus on education, conservation and job creation, with the idea that it is not possible to separate the three objectives.
“We have found that an integrated approach is much more sustainable, and we’re very happy that the Conservancy shares our long-term vision to sustainable conservation,” Ives said. “We hope to convince other organizations that through an integrated approach that involves education, we can achieve sustainable development while focusing on the environment.”January 03, 2011

Docs On Call: Blogs
Multiple Sclerosis in Children
Story Updated: Feb 1, 2013
A new study suggests obese girls may be at increased risk for multiple sclerosis.
Researchers in California identified 75 children, aged 2 to 18, who had been diagnosed with MS. Records of body mass index before symptoms appeared were also accessed.
The children with MS were then compared to more than 900-thousand children without the disease.
All were grouped by weight - normal, overweight, moderately obese or extremely obese.
Nearly 51-percent of the children with MS were overweight or obese, compared to 37-percent of the children who did not have MS.
The risk of developing MS was more than 1-and-half times higher for overweight girls compared to normal weight girls nearly 1-point-8 times higher in moderately obese girls- and nearly four times higher in extremely obese girls.
The same association was not found in boys.
Once considered rare in children, multiple sclerosis
has become more common, especially in teenage girls. Researchers say an increase in childhood obesity may be one cause.
I'm Dr. Cindy Haines of HealthDay TV with the news doctors are reading health news for healthier living.

1938 Buick Y Job
Concept cars have been a mainstay of automotive design and marketing for more than a century. While Henry Leland's Osceola is considered the world's first concept car that actually made it into production, the 1938 Buick Y Job is another early example of a true concept car.
Built under the direction of General Motors' first design director, Harley Earl, the Y-Job was never intended for production but instead foreshadowed the styling and engineering cues Earl and his team hoped to use on future GM vehicles. In its day, the Y-Job earned praise for its modern style that included integrated fenders, hidden headlamps, and no running boards. The positive reaction helped several of its design cues to make it into production, including the stubby tail fins that would appear on the iconic 1948 Cadillacs and the grille design that continues to influence Buick design.
Although the Y-Job didn't make production, it remains an example of the good a concept car can do for a company and the industry. We can't help but wonder what would have happened, though, if Buick put the Y-Job into production. The company would have been in an even better position postwar.

China has worked actively and seriously to tackle global climate change and build capacity to respond to it. We believe that every country has a stake in dealing with climate change and every country has a responsibility for the safety of our planet. China is at a critical stage of building a moderately prosperous society on all fronts, and a key stage of accelerated industrialization and urbanization. Yet, despite the huge task of developing the economy and improving people’s lives, we have joined global actions to tackle climate change with the utmost resolve and a most active attitude, and have acted in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities established by the United Nations. China voluntarily stepped up efforts to eliminate backward capacity in 2007, and has since closed a large number of heavily polluting small coal-fired power plants, small coal mines and enterprises in the steel, cement, paper-making, chemical and printing and dyeing sectors. Moreover, in 2009, China played a positive role in the success of the Copenhagen conference on climate change and the ultimate conclusion of the Copenhagen Accord. In keeping with the requirements of the Copenhagen Accord, we have provided the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change with information on China’s voluntary actions on emissions reduction and joined the list of countries supporting the Copenhagen Accord.
The targets released by China last year for greenhouse gas emissions control require that by 2020, CO2 emissions per unit of GDP should go down by 40% - 45% from the 2005 level, non-fossil energy should make up about 15% of primary energy consumption, and forest coverage should increase by 40 million hectares and forest stock volume by 1.3 billion cubic meters, both from the 2005 level. The measure to lower energy consumption alone will help save 620 million tons of standard coal in energy consumption in the next five years, which will be equivalent to the reduction of 1.5 billion tons of CO2 emissions. This is what China has done to step up the shift in economic development mode and economic restructuring. It contributes positively to Asia’s and the global effort to tackle climate change.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Green and sustainable development represents the trend of our times. To achieve green and sustainable development in Asia and beyond and ensure the sustainable development of resources and the environment such as the air, fresh water, ocean, land and forest, which are all vital to human survival, we countries in Asia should strive to balance economic growth, social development and environmental protection. To that end, we wish to work with other Asian countries and make further efforts in the following six areas.
First, shift development mode and strive for green development. To accelerate the shift in economic development mode and economic restructuring provides an important precondition for our efforts to actively respond to climate change, achieve green development and secure the sustainable development of the population, resources and the environment. It is the shared responsibility of governments and enterprises of all countries in Asia and around the world. We should actively promote a conservation culture and raise awareness for environmental protection. We need to make sure that the concept of green development, green consumption and a green lifestyle and the commitment to taking good care of Planet Earth, our common home are embedded in the life of every citizen in society.
Second, value the importance of science and technology as the backing of innovation and development. We Asian countries have a long way to go before we reach the advanced level in high-tech-powered energy consumption reduction and improvement of energy and resource efficiency. Yet, this means we have a huge potential to catch up. It is imperative for us to quicken the pace of low-carbon technology development, promote energy efficient technologies and raise the proportion of new and renewable energies in our energy mix so as to provide a strong scientific and technological backing for green and sustainable development of Asian countries. As for developed countries, they should facilitate technology transfer and share technologies with developing countries on the basis of proper protection of intellectual property rights.
Third, open wider to the outside world and realize harmonious development. In such an open world as ours, development of Asian countries and development of the world are simply inseparable. It is important that we open our markets even wider, firmly oppose and resist protectionism in all forms and uphold a fair, free and open global trade and investment system. At the same time, we should give full play to the role of regional and sub-regional dialogue and cooperation mechanisms in Asia to promote harmonious and sustainable development of Asia and the world.
Fourth, strengthen cooperation and sustain common development. Pragmatic, mutually beneficial and win-win cooperation is a sure choice of all Asian countries if we are to realize sustainable development. No country could stay away from or manage to meet on its own severe challenges like the international financial crisis, climate change and energy and resources security. We should continue to strengthen macro-economic policy coordination and vigorously promote international cooperation in emerging industries, especially in energy conservation, emissions reduction, environmental protection and development of new energy sources to jointly promote sustainable development of the Asian economy and the world economy as a whole.
Fifth, work vigorously to eradicate poverty and gradually achieve balanced development. A major root cause for the loss of balance in the world economy is the seriously uneven development between the North and the South. Today, 900 million people in Asia, or roughly one fourth of the entire Asian population, are living below the 1.25 dollars a day poverty line. We call for greater efforts to improve the international mechanisms designed to promote balanced development, and to scale up assistance from developed countries to developing countries, strengthen South-South cooperation, North-South cooperation and facilitate attainment of the UN Millennium Development Goals. This will ensure that sustainable development brings real benefits to poor regions, poor countries and poor peoples.
Sixth, bring forth more talents to promote comprehensive development. The ultimate goal of green and sustainable development is to improve people’s living environment, better their lives and promote their comprehensive development. Success in this regard depends, to a large extent, on the emergence of talents with an innovative spirit. We need to build institutions, mechanisms and a social environment to help people bring out the best of their talents, and to intensify education and training of professionals of various kinds. This will ensure that as Asia achieves green and sustainable development, our people will enjoy comprehensive development.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We demonstrated solidarity as we rose up together to the international financial crisis in 2009. Let us carry forward this great spirit, build up consensus, strengthen unity and cooperation and explore a path of green and sustainable development. This benefits Asia. It benefits the world, too.
In conclusion, I wish this annual conference of the Boao Forum for Asia a complete success.

There is new scientific evidence to support the time-honored advice to students cramming for exams to get themselves a good night's sleep after studying.
Researchers who analyzed brain activity in sleeping volunteers who had learned to navigate through a computer-generated virtual town have discovered evidence that spatial memories are consolidated during deep sleep.
Also, the researchers say that they have shown for the first time that the activity level in the brain's learning center, the hippocampus, correlates with the improvement in memory performance when the subjects are tested the next day.
According to Philippe Peigneux and his colleagues, "A growing body of experimental evidence shows the influence of sleep on the consolidation of recent memory traces. The underlying hypothesis posits that the information that is acquired during wakefulness is actively altered, restructured, and strengthened during sleep."
However, they said, exploring this consolidation process was difficult because of the complexities of both sleep and memory. For example, sleep consists of two major stages -- rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and non rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Evidence from animal studies of learning and sleep indicated that spatial memories seem to be replayed in the hippocampus during the deep "slow wave sleep" (SWS) during the NREM sleep stage.
Peigneux and his colleagues explored the memory consolidation process by asking volunteers to learn the layout of a virtual town that the researchers adapted from a popular computer game. They then tested the subjects on their knowledge of the town by challenging them to quickly find routes through the town to specific locations.
The researchers divided the subjects into three experimental groups:
- one that underwent training in the virtual town and whose brains were scanned during testing while they were awake;
- one that underwent training and testing and whose brains were then scanned during sleep;
- one that did not undergo any training and whose brains were scanned.
The researchers measured the subjects' brain activity using positron emission tomography (PET) to measure blood flow in the subjects' brain regions. In PET, test subjects receive a harmless dose of radioactive tracer, and their brains are scanned as the tracer infuses through the brain. Blood flow through specific brain structures constitutes a measure of activity in that structure.
The researchers found that the first group -- compared to the non-trained group -- showed greater activity in their hippocampus and an adjacent learning-related region as they took the route tests, with greater activity correlated with better performance. The group scanned during sleep after testing also showed greater hippocampal brain activity during sleep, compared to the non-trained group.
Importantly, when the researchers compared the hippocampal activity during SWS sleep in the trained group and the non-trained group, they found that the first group showed higher activity.
Next, the researchers tested the trained group after their sleep session and compared their performance with the brain activity measured during sleep. They found that the higher the gain in post-sleep performance, the higher had been their NREM brain activity during sleep. No such correlation was found in REM brain activity.
To ensure that they were, indeed, measuring brain activity due to spatial processing, Peigneux and his colleagues also compared brain activity data from the spatially trained group with data from a fourth group that had only taken a reaction time test. In that test, the subjects' brains were scanned as they pressed a key as fast and accurately as possible corresponding to the location of a dot on a computer screen.
Thus, the data from the fourth group allowed the researchers to distinguish brain activity changes due to spatial processing from those due to general mental processing. The researchers' comparisons of the brain activity in the groups confirmed that the hippocampal activity they detected was due to spatial processing.
"Our results provide critical evidence that spatial memory traces are processed during NREM sleep in humans," wrote the scientists. "Moreover, the hippocampal activity during sleep is shown to correlate with the improvement in memory performance on the next day. To the extent of our knowledge, this effect has not yet been reported in the animal hippocampus."
Source: Eurekalert & othersLast reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 21 Feb 2009
Published on PsychCentral.com. All rights reserved.
Hope is the thing with feathers that perches in the soul.
-- Emily Dickinson

Discovered in 1988, the Roman Hippodrome in Beirut is situated in Wadi Abou Jmil, next to the newly renovated Jewish Synagogue in Downtown Beirut. This monument, dating back for thousands of years, now risks to be destroyed.
The hippodrome is considered, along with the Roman Road and Baths, as one of the most important remaining relics of the Byzantine and Roman era. It spreads over a total area of 3500 m2.
Requests for construction projects in the hippodrome’s location have been ongoing since the monument’s discovery but were constantly refused by former ministers of culture of which we name Tarek Metri, Tamam Salam and Salim Warde. In fact, Tamam Salam had even issued a decree banning any work on the hippodrome’s site, effectively protecting it by law. Salim Warde did not contest the decree. Current minister of culture Gabriel Layoun authorized constructions to commence.
When it comes to ancient sites in cities that have lots of them, such as Beirut, the current adopted approach towards these sites is called a “mitigation approach” which requires that the incorporation of the monuments in modern plans does not affect those monuments in any way whatsoever. The current approval by minister Layoun does not demand such an approach to be adopted. The monument will have one of its main walls dismantled and taken out of location. Why? to build a fancy new high-rise instead. Minister Layoun sees nothing wrong with this. In fact, displacing ruins is never done unless due to some extreme circumstances. I highly believe whatever Solidere has in store for the land is considered an “extreme circumstance.”
The Roman Hippodrome in downtown Beirut is considered as one of the best preserved not only in Lebanon, but in the world. It is also the fifth to be discovered in the Middle East. In fact, a report (Arabic) by the General Director of Ruins in Lebanon, Frederick Al Husseini, spoke about the importance of the monument as one that has been talked about in various ancient books. It has also been correlated with Beirut’s infamous ancient Law School. He speaks about the various structures that are still preserved and only needing some restoration to be fully exposed. He called the monument as a highly important site for Lebanon and the world and is one of Beirut’s main facilities from the Byzantine and Roman eras, suggesting to work on preserving and making this site one of Beirut’s important cultural and touristic locations. His report dates back from 2008.
MP Michel Aoun, the head of the party of which Gabriel Layoun is part, defended his minsiter’s position by saying that: “there are a lot of discrepancies between Solidere and us. Therefore, a minister from our party cannot be subjected to Solidere. Minister Layoun found a way, which is adopted internationally, to incorporate ancient sites with newer ones… So I hope that media outlets do not discuss this issue in a way that would raise suspicion.”
With all due respect to Mr. Aoun and his minister but endangering Beirut’s culture to strip away even more of the identity that makes it Beirut is not something that should concern him or Solidere. What’s happening is a cultural crime to the entirety of the Lebanese population, one where the interests of meaningless politicians becomes irrelevant. Besides, for a party that has been anti-Solidere for years, I find it highly hypocritical that they are allowing Solidere to dismantle the Roman Hippodrome.
The conclusion is: never has a hippodrome been dismantled and displaced in any parts of the world. Beirut’s hippodrome will effectively become part of the parking of the high-rise to be built in its place. No mitigation approach will be adopted here. It is only but a diversion until people forget and plans go well underway in secrecy. But the time for us to be silent about this blatant persecution of our history cannot continue.
If there’s anything that we can do is let the issue propagate as much as we can. There shouldn’t be a Lebanese person in the 10452 km2 that remains clueless about any endangered monument for that matter. Sadly enough, this goes beyond the hippodrome. We have become so accustomed to the reality of it that we’ve become very submissive: the ancient Phoenician port is well behind us, there are constructions around the ancient Phoenician port of Tyre and the city itself risks of being removed off UNESCO’s list for Cultural Heritage Sites.
The land on which ancient monuments are built doesn’t belong to Solidere, to the Ministry of Culture or to any other contractor – no matter how much they’ve paid to buy it. It belongs to the Lebanese people in their entirety. When you realize that of the 200 sites uncovered at Solidere, those that have remained intact can be counted with the fingers of one hand, the reality becomes haunting. It’s about time we rise to our rights. Beirut’s hippodrome will not be destroyed.

The effect of monocular depth cues on the detection of moving objects by a moving observer
As observers move through the environment, they must detect moving objects. Previously, we showed that observers can use 2D image speed to detect moving objects in the radial optic flow field generated by a moving observer. However, a difference in image speed may signal either a moving object or a depth difference between stationary objects. Adding depth information may remove this ambiguity. We tested observers' ability to detect a moving object in scenes that contained increasingly salient monocular depth cues. We simulated observer motion in a straight line at a speed of 3 m/sec toward a scene that consisted of a textured ground plane with 8 objects located 12 m from the observer. In two conditions the objects were featureless red disks (diameter: 0.4 m) located on the horizontal midline that were either separate from the ground plane (condition 1) or connected to it with a thin line, giving a cue to distance (condition 2). In condition 3, the objects were textured blocks (width: 0.55 m; height: 1.6 m) located on the ground plane, giving further cues to depth. In half the trials one object moved faster (or slower) than the other objects in the scene. The speed differences ranged from 10% to 100% of the image speed of non-targets. Each trial lasted 1 sec. Observers indicated with a key press whether or not the scene contained a moving object. Thresholds were computed by fitting the data with a sigmoidal curve and determining the percent speed difference that led to 75% accuracy. For the 6 subjects tested, the results show a significant effect of scene condition, with average threshold speed changes of 43%, 37% and 25% for conditions 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Thus, monocular depth cues aid the detection of moving objects by moving observers.

Basics: What is the GRE®?
The Graduate Record Examination (GRE®) is a standardized test used by graduate programs to help determine who gets in and who receives grants and fellowships. The exam comes in two types: the general exam, which covers a range of non-specific skills developed over a long period of time and years of schooling, and the subject tests, which test depth of knowledge in eight different fields. Worldwide, about half a million people take the general test each year, while a much smaller number takes the subject exams.
The general test is computer-based and consists of three sections, verbal, quantitative, and analytical writing. Verbal and quant are each scored on a scale of 130-170, in 1-point increments, plus a percentile rank. The writing section is scored on a scale of 0-6, in half-point increments. The test does not cover specifics in any field of study, but rather a set of skills thought to be important for prospective grad students.
The subject tests, on the other hand, are paper-based and administered 3 times a year. Unlike the general test, the subject test assumes extensive knowledge. Tests cover the following areas: Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology; Biology; Chemistry; Computer Science; Literature in English; Mathematics; Physics; and Psychology. To determine whether you should take the general test or one of these subject-specific exams, you’ll need to check with the programs where you’re applying. For any field without a subject test, you’ll take the general exam.
Next Basics article: GRE® Test Format

Forty years ago, the Navajo Nation and Southern Ute tribes languished side by side, mired in high unemployment and poverty.
Today, worth billions, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe is one of the richest in the United States, while the Navajo still suffer as one of the most impoverished communities in the country.
The difference? Energy.
While the Southern Utes have natural gas, the Navajo Nation has coal, which has for decades been extracted to feed various large-scale power plants, including in the Four Corners. But that revenue has come under threat by tightening air-quality regulations. At the same time, natural gas, a cleaner fuel source for generating electricity, has grown cheaper and more abundant because of hydraulic fracturing.
The shift has left Navajo leaders in a quandary: either continue investing in coal in the hopes it will remain a significant fuel source, or cut their losses and choose another investment.
The tribe is staking its future on coal.
The Navajo Nation is in negotiations to buy the Navajo Mine from BHP Billiton in 2016 when BHP's lease expires.
Opponents say all the deal will do is saddle the tribe with a huge environmental cleanup. Tribal leaders say coal is a viable fuel source, and buying the Navajo Mine will save jobs and provide a foundation for the tribe to build a formidable energy portfolio similar to the Southern Utes.
Tribal leaders' plans will have far-reaching effects, not only for members – some of whom still live without electricity or plumbing – but also for residents throughout the region, who have seen haze cloud their views and threaten their health.
“We see how Southern Ute is using natural resources to advantage the tribe. We think they're doing well as far as adapting with the times,” said Navajo member Dailan Long, whose family lives near the Navajo Mine that is close to Fruitland on Navajo land.
“I definitely see a much older mind-set managing our economy, which has gotten us to the point where we are now. I think they (the Navajo leaders) could take a much more rational and logical approach to energy alternatives,” said Long, who formerly worked for Diné Citizens Against Ruining Our Environment, a Navajo environmental-activist organization.
The fossil fuel of the future
Dust billows at the Navajo Mine as a dragline excavator scoops dirt into its bucket and transfers it into a pile nearby, exposing coal for a bulldozer to grab.
Workers pour an ammonium-nitrate fuel-oil mixture into holes dug into the side of the mine to later blow up sections to reveal more coal in its depths.
The coal mine accounted for $53.6 million in direct revenue in 2012, about $110 million when taking into account lease and royalty revenue.
The 33,000-acre surface mine supplies the Four Corners Power Plant, about nine miles north, with about 8 million tons of coal a year.
BHP and Arizona Public Service approached Navajo Nation this summer about buying the Navajo Mine after the two entities failed to reach an agreement over coal prices, said Erny Zah, spokesman for the Navajo Nation president.
Under the preliminary negotiations, the tribe would give any federal and state tax revenue to BHP until 2016, when BHP's lease ends to pay for the mine, Zah said.
It's unclear who would take on the legal liabilities associated with eventual mandatory cleanup of the mine. The Navajo Nation emphatically says the tribe will not be responsible, and BHP says the issue is still part of the negotiations.
Going against the national energy tide
While global demand for coal remains high, coal production in the United States dropped about 7 percent in 2012, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. Coal still provided 42 percent of the nation's electricity in 2011, but just four years ago, it was providing nearly half.
“If we're talking about coal development and revenue as a major source of funding for the tribe, why didn't they negotiate this (sale) decades ago?” Long said.
He believes BHP wants to walk away from the cleanup responsibilities and leave the tribe with the bill.
“I think that it's definitely an exit strategy on behalf of BHP,” he said.
In contrast, the Southern Utes have focused on energy sources that will likely grow.
In 2008, the Southern Utes formed a separate company to manage its new-energy investments that include wind farms and biofuel projects.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration expects coal power to decline to 35 percent of total American electricity generation by 2040. Natural gas is expected to generate 30 percent of the nation's electricity within three decades.
Navajo Nation tribal officials acknowledge the new energy realities and have invested in alternatives, especially natural gas. Oil and gas contributed $48 million in revenue to the tribe in 2012.
The tribe also has invested in an 850-megawatt wind farm.
But coal will nonetheless remain the centerpiece of Navajo Nation's energy portfolio moving forward.
“We want to make sure coal is part of the picture for at least another couple of decades, if not longer,” Zah said.
But tightening environmental regulations that shutter coal-fired power plants could further strangle coal production.
Mike Eisenfeld and other environmental activists don't anticipate the Four Corners Power Plant will remain open for more than 10 years, as federal scrutiny of its environmental impact increases.
“I don't think they're sustainable now, and the sooner we figure out a transition plan to wean ourselves from big coal plants the better,” said Eisenfeld, New Mexico energy coordinator for the San Juan Citizen's Alliance.
APS is decommissioning its three oldest generating units at the Four Corners Power Plant rather than install new equipment to meet EPA regulations. This will result in a 30 percent reduction in production at Navajo Mine and layoffs at both the mine and power plant.
For a tribe with a roughly 50 percent unemployment rate and more than 50 percent of its members living below the poverty level, the closure will be a painful blow.
“One of the reasons we're exploring the possibility of taking over Navajo Mine is we're looking at saving jobs at the mine and also at the power plant because one cannot exist without the other,” Zah said.
If the power plant closes, Navajo Mine may have to shut its doors. This was the fate of the Black Mesa Mine in 2006 after the Mohave Generating Station, near Laughlin, Nev., which it supplied, shut down.
Navajo Nation's other plans to secure a future for its coal haven't been met with much success.
In 2003, The Navajo Nation proposed a new coal-fired power plant called the Desert Rock Energy Project, which would be supplied by an expanded Navajo Mine.
Under the project, international energy developer Sithe Global Power would have built a new 1,500-megawatt power plant on Navajo land about 25 miles outside Farmington. The plant would have been among the largest in the country, and it would have provided electricity for 1.5 million customers.
The tribe heralded the power plant as an economic victory, saying it would provide 400 jobs at the Desert Rock power plant, 200 additional jobs at Navajo Mine and $50 million in annual revenue – almost half of Navajo Nation's current total coal revenue.
The EPA approved Desert Rock in 2008 and touted it as “state-of-the-art,” but the agency reconsidered the project's air permit after New Mexico joined environmental groups in appealing the EPA's initial approval. In 2009, the EPA reversed its decision and revoked the air permit.
For the Navajos, losing the project was a crushing blow.
“(Navajo Nation) viewed Desert Rock as a huge economic opportunity,” said Tom Shipps, an Indian law lawyer who works for Colorado's Southern Ute tribe. “The technology employed at Desert Rock could have been great improvements. Concerns about the environment drove a lot of the criticism, especially around here.”
The project remains in the back of tribal leader's minds, Zah said. One idea is to convert it to a natural-gas plant.
Still, the question of what to do with the Navajo Mine would remain if a new power plant were to run on natural gas.
In the meantime, coal is the focus of the tribe's energy strategy.
BHP gives a qualified endorsement of that strategy.
“Coal will continue to be an important part of meeting the energy needs of the U.S.,” Norman Benally, spokesperson for BHP, said. “Granted there are mandates coming from the EPA that are limiting the use of coal and in some areas shutting down power plants that generate electricity. But we believe coal will be part of the energy portfolio, though limited, until such time that renewable energies have or will become viable.”

A surprising amount of what we think we know about the brain comes from neuropsychology; famous case studies such as HM have informed theories of memory so that they include short and long term storage, which are separable, and so on. These case studies can have a profound effect on research; my favourite story, though, was about a memory researcher who had a skiing accident and temporarily developed retrograde amnesia - he couldn't remember anything except that there was this guy in Connecticut (HM) who couldn't remember things either!
I always enjoyed classes in neuropsychology; the case studies are always fascinating. But they are deeply limited in what they can actually tell us about the brain. First, they are typically single patient case studies, which restricts how general the conclusions are. Second, they are data from damaged brains; the fairly linear assumption that some localised function has been subtracted out is simply not true, and the damage will have had complex effects on distributed functional networks.Third, the damage is never straight-forward, because these almost all come from accidents or strokes (HM's surgery being a rare example of more detail being known). This has not stopped the field being very excited by these cases, though, and from basing a lot of theory on these patterns of deficits.
In movement research, the most famous neuropsychology case study is Patient DF She suffered bilateral damage along the ventral stream of visual processing (James et al, 2003). The effect was visual form agnosia: she is able to control her actions with respect to objects, but cannot describe or recognise these objects verbally. Crucially, her accident did not damage her parietal lobe; specifically, the dorsal stream of visual processing was left intact. These two streams are well defined anatomical pathways leading out of primary visual cortex, and were first described by Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982). DF's pattern of deficits led Mel Goodale and David Milner (Goodale & Milner, 1992) to suggest functional roles for these streams. The ventral stream, they suggested, was for perception - things like object and scene recognition. The dorsal stream, in contrast, was for perception-for-action, and used visual information for the online control of action. This perception-action hypothesis has been hugely dominant in the field, and the theory rests heavily on DF's shoulders.
Recently, Thomas Schenk (2012a) published some data which claims to show that DF's visually guided reaching is not normal if she doesn't have access to haptic feedback about the object. His data suggests that the only reason she succeeds at reaching while failing judgment tasks is that haptic information is only normally available in the former case. If correct, this is actually quite a shot across the bow of the perception vs perception-for-action work; naturally Goodale and Milner don't buy it, and have published a reply to which Schenk has then replied.
I like seeing these arguments happen in the literature; but to be honest, the time scale is too slow. Schenk publishes, then Milner et al get to reply and Schenk gets right of reply to that. They may or may not iterate again and it's always left as 'we agree to disagree'. But these critiques have answers, and I think a blog comment feed might be the right place to work through the various cycles of suggestions and rebuttals until the obviously wrong things have been weeded out. It would also provide a place for other interested parties to weigh in. So if Schenk, Milner and Goodale (and anyone else!) feel like using the comments for this post or another made to purpose to bang around ideas until an obvious experiment or analysis pops out, please feel free!
Schenk (2012a): Patient DF and haptic feedback
The classic result from DF that inspired the Goodale and Milner account has two parts (a dissociation). When DF is asked to reach for an object, she can do so well and she shows appropriate pre-shaping of her hand which scales correctly with the size of the object. This suggests she has intact visual perception-for-action. However, if you ask her to judge the size of the object without reaching for it, she cannot do it; she has selectively impaired visual perception. Schenk ran the following experiments on DF and to demonstrate that her unimpaired reaching is not because of intact visual perception-for-action, but rather because of haptic feedback from real objects.
'Perception': these are the tasks DF typically fails due to her visual form agnosia, and she fails them here too.
- Size discrimination: Choose the largest of two objects
- Manual estimation: Judge the size of an object by shaping your hand correctly
- Standard grasping: Reach to grasp an object in the mirror and there is actually an object there (vision + haptic information match)
- Grasping without haptic feedback: Reach for the reflection but there is no actual object there.
- Grasping with intermittent haptic feedback: there was an object present on half the trials; these were scattered randomly throughout the session and a light cued participants when the object would be present.
- Grasping with dissociated positions: participants saw an object in the middle location, were asked to reach for an object at the far position, and there was a real object there.
|Figure 1. Grip performance for controls (open circles) and DF (red diamonds).|
Milner, Ganel & Goodale (2012)
Unsurprisingly, Milner et al (2012) do not agree that these data cast doubt on the perception-action hypothesis about the function of the dorsal and ventral streams. They make the following criticisms:
- They suggest that "so-called 'haptic feedback'" (to quote the paper) from trial n could only inform a reach on trial n+1 if the objects were the same size in both trials; object size was randomised across trials, however.
- They then claim that Schenk's interpretation means he thinks DF's reaches are prepared on the basis of previous haptic, rather than current visual information. Therefore, they suggest, Schenk must make 'the inescapable prediction' that a reach on trial n+1 should be appropriate for what happened on trial n, regardless of what is presented on trial n+1.They allow that there may be some 'minor intrusion' of haptic information from previous trials.
Again unsurprisingly, Schenk (2012b) does not agree with Milner et al's evaluation.
- He claims that the Milner et al critique assumes that prehension requires the visual computation of an object's size. He then cites recent work by Smeets & Brenner (1999) who claimed to show that prehension involves the independent targeting of the thumb and forefinger, and thus you don't need object size.
- He then suggests that DF is generally able to reach successfully because she has access to the necessary egocentric information (in hand-centred coordinates) about the location of object edges. This information requires regular calibration (Bingham et al, 2007) to remain accurate.
- He therefore predicts that if DF has egocentric information about the object, and this information has been calibrated recently, she can reach successfully, otherwise she fails. His 2012a data then support this pattern.
- Regarding the pantomime problem: Schenk tested this in Task 5 with the trials with no objects. DF knew there would be no object on these trials (the light cue) but still produced normal reaches because of the calibration on other trials.
There is a lot that is weird about the replies. Milner et al make some odd claims, and Schenk goes to strange places in his defence. Let's address those first.
1. "So-called 'haptic feedback'"
Milner et al want to keep claiming that DF reaches on the basis of current visual information, and not on the basis of previous haptic information. But there's a problem for them - this is the claim Schenk's data actually refutes! So they make an odd move, and simply claim that earlier haptic information does not affect reaches, and that even if it could, it won't here because the size changes from trial to trial.
However, Coats, Bingham & Mon-Williams (2008) have demonstrated (using a mirror rig similar to Schenk's) that if you systematically change the size of the grasped object while leaving the visual object the same size, people happily recalibrate their reach actions and change their grip apertures. Bingham et al (2007) have also shown that even occasional calibration allows stable reach behaviour to persist; calibration lasts some time. So even when the visual size remains unchanged, people's grip behaviour reflects the haptic calibration of the visual perception of size and if this calibration changes, so does grip.
Milner et al's second point - that haptic feedback can't help because the object size changes randomly - is actually addressed by Schenk's control data, which shows that neurologically intact people can happily scale their grips appropriately under these conditions (albiet slightly more noisily).
2. Reaching and the need for visual size
Schenk centres his reply on the idea that Milner et al assume you need to compute (or perceive) the size of objects in order to scale your grasp. He then cites Smeets & Brenner (1999) who claim that instead, you simply control your thumb and forefinger independently and bring them into alignment with the edges of the object.
The problem here is that Smeets & Brenner's work is highly controversial, and in fact more recent work from Mon-Williams & Bingham (2011) tested the predictions of this account in great detail and found no support for this claim. Instead, they showed that the unit of control is an opposition axis (Iberall, Bingham & Arbib, 1986). This is the space between the thumb and forefinger, and Mon-Williams & Bingham (2011) demonstrated that prehension is about aligning this space with the object. You do still therefore need to perceive object size, specifically the maximum object extent. I'll blog this paper in more detail sometime, it is a master class in affordance research.
I think Schenk had it basically right in the first paper; the explanation for his data is that in tasks 3 and 5, DF has sufficient access to haptic information about the object's size to allow her to bypass her visual perceptual deficit. She can therefore successfully reach to grasp. In all other tasks, she can't go round the problem and she fails. This suggests that her visual deficit is not simply restricted to 'perception'; the visual system involves both anatomical streams working in concert and these are not functionally independent of each other. What Schenk needs to do is treat haptic information as perceptual information for size in it's own right, not simply feedback or an 'egocentric cue'. DF has unimpaired access to this information and when it's available, she can reach-to-grasp.
Bingham, G. P., Coats, R., & Mon-Williams, M. (2007). Natural prehension in trials without haptic feedback but only when calibration is allowed. Neuropsychologia, 45, 288 –294. Download
Coats, R., Bingham, G.P. & Mon-Williams, M. (2008). Calibrating grasp size and reach distance: Interactions reveal integral organization in reaching-to-grasp movements. Experimental Brain Research, 189, 211-220. Download
Goodale, M. A., Jakobson, L. S., & Keillor, J.M. (1994). Differences in the visualcontrol of pantomimed and natural grasping movements. Neuropsychologia, 32(1), 1159-1178.
Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends in Neuroscience, 15(1), 20 –25. Download
Iberall, T., Bingham, G. P., & Arbib, M. A. (1986). Opposition space as a structuring concept for the analysis of skilled hand movements. In: Heuer H, From C (eds) Experimental Brain Research Series 15. Springer, Berlin, pp 158–173. Download
James, T.W., Culham, J., Humphrey, G.K., Milner, A.D, & Goodale, M.A. (2003). Ventral occipital lesions impair object recognition but not object-directed grasping: an fMRI study. Brain 126, 2463–2475. Download
Milner, A., Ganel, T., & Goodale, M. (2012). Does grasping in patient D.F. depend on vision? Trends in Cognitive Sciences DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.03.004
Mon-Williams, M. & Bingham, G.P. (2011). Discovering affordances that determine the spatial structure of reach-to-grasp movements. Experimental Brain Research, 211(1), 145-160. Download
Schenk, T. (2012a). No Dissociation between Perception and Action in Patient DF When Haptic Feedback is Withdrawn. Journal of Neuroscience, 32 (6), 2013-2017 DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3413-11.2012
Schenk, T. (2012b). Response to Milner et al.: Grasping uses vision and haptic feedback Trends in Cognitive Sciences DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.03.006
Smeets, J.B.J., & Brenner, E. (1999). A new view on grasping. Motor Control, 3, 237-231. Download
Ungerleider, L.G., & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In Analysis of Visual Behavior (Ingle DJ, Goodale MA, Mansfield RJ, eds). Cambridge, MA: MIT.

Cougar sightings in Louisiana not that long ago were considered figments of the imagination of spooked hunters, hikers and others in the outdoors.
A citizen sent LDWF a trail camera picture taken Aug. 13, 2011. LDWF Large Carnivore Program Manager Maria Davidson and biologist Brandon Wear conducted a site investigation that confirmed the authenticity of the photograph.
“It is quite possible for this animal to be captured on other trail cameras placed at deer bait sites,” Davidson said. “Deer are the primary prey item for cougars; therefore, they are drawn to areas where deer congregate.”
It is unlikely this cougar will remain in any one area longer than it would take to consume a kill. Cougars do not prefer to eat spoiled meat and will move on as soon as the Louisiana heat and humidity take its toll on the kill.
“It is impossible to determine if the animal in the photograph is a wild, free-ranging cougar, or an escaped captive,” Davidson added. “Although it is illegal to own a cougar in Louisiana, it is possible that there are some illegally held ‘pets’ in the state.”
LDWF has documented several occurrences since 2002. The first cougar sighting was in 2002 by an employee at Lake Fausse Point State Park. That sighting was later confirmed with DNA analysis from scat found at the site.
Three trail camera photos were taken of a cougar in Winn, Vernon and Allen parishes in 2008. Subsequently on Nov. 30, 2008, a cougar was shot and killed in a neighborhood by Bossier City Police Department.
The mountain lion, cougar, panther or puma are names that all refer to the same animal. Their color ranges from lighter tan to brownish grey. The only species of big cats that occur as black are the jaguar and leopard. Jaguars are native to South America and leopards are native to Africa. Both species can occur as spotted or black, although in both cases the spotted variety is much more common. Although LDWF receives numerous calls about black panthers, there has never been a documented case of a black cougar anywhere in North America.
The vast majority of these reports received by LDWF cannot be verified due to the very nature of a sighting. Many of the calls are determined to be cases of mistaken identity, with dog tracks making up the majority of the evidence submitted by those reporting cougar sightings. Other animals commonly mistaken for cougars are bobcats and house cats, usually seen from a distance or in varying shades of light.
The significant lack of physical evidence indicates that Louisiana does not have an established, breeding population of cougars. In states that have verified small populations of cougars, physical evidence can readily be found in the form of tracks, cached deer kills, scat and road kills.
The recent sightings of cougars in Louisiana are believed to be young animals dispersing from existing populations. An expanding population in Texas can produce dispersing individual cougars that move into suitable habitat in Louisiana. Young males are known to disperse from their birthplace and travel hundreds of miles seeking their own territories.
Cougars that occur in Louisiana are protected under state and federal law. Penalties for taking a cougar in Louisiana may include up to one year in jail and/or a $100,000 fine. Anyone with any information regarding the taking of a cougar should call the Operation Game Thief hotline at 1-800-442-2511. Callers may remain anonymous and may receive a cash reward.

by Gerry Everding
St. Louis MO (SPX) Feb 12, 2013
Nominated early this year for recognition on the UNESCO World Heritage List, which includes such famous cultural sites as the Taj Mahal, Machu Picchu and Stonehenge, the earthen works at Poverty Point, La., have been described as one of the world's greatest feats of construction by an archaic civilization of hunters and gatherers.
Now, new research in the current issue of the journal Geoarchaeology, offers compelling evidence that one of the massive earthen mounds at Poverty Point was constructed in less than 90 days, and perhaps as quickly as 30 days - an incredible accomplishment for what was thought to be a loosely organized society consisting of small, widely scattered bands of foragers.
"What's extraordinary about these findings is that it provides some of the first evidence that early American hunter-gatherers were not as simplistic as we've tended to imagine," says study co-author T.R. Kidder, PhD, professor and chair of anthropology in Arts and Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis.
"Our findings go against what has long been considered the academic consensus on hunter-gather societies - that they lack the political organization necessary to bring together so many people to complete a labor-intensive project in such a short period."
Co-authored by Anthony Ortmann, PhD, assistant professor of geosciences at Murray State University in Kentucky, the study offers a detailed analysis of how the massive mound was constructed some 3,200 years ago along a Mississippi River bayou in northeastern Louisiana.
Based on more than a decade of excavations, core samplings and sophisticated sedimentary analysis, the study's key assertion is that Mound A at Poverty Point had to have been built in a very short period because an exhaustive examination reveals no signs of rainfall or erosion during its construction.
"We're talking about an area of northern Louisiana that now tends to receive a great deal of rainfall," Kidder says. "Even in a very dry year, it would seem very unlikely that this location could go more than 90 days without experiencing some significant level of rainfall. Yet, the soil in these mounds shows no sign of erosion taking place during the construction period. There is no evidence from the region of an epic drought at this time, either."
Part of a much larger complex of earthen works at Poverty Point, Mound A is believed to be the final and crowning addition to the sprawling 700-acre site, which includes five smaller mounds and a series of six concentric C-shaped embankments that rise in parallel formation surrounding a small flat plaza along the river. At the time of construction, Poverty Point was the largest earthworks in North America.
Built on the western edge of the complex, Mound A covers about 538,000 square feet [roughly 50,000 square meters] at its base and rises 72 feet above the river. Its construction required an estimated 238,500 cubic meters - about eight million bushel baskets - of soil to be brought in from various locations near the site. Kidder figures it would take a modern, 10-wheel dump truck about 31,217 loads to move that much dirt today.
"The Poverty Point mounds were built by people who had no access to domesticated draft animals, no wheelbarrows, no sophisticated tools for moving earth," Kidder explains. "It's likely that these mounds were built using a simple 'bucket brigade' system, with thousands of people passing soil along from one to another using some form of crude container, such as a woven basket, a hide sack or a wooden platter."
To complete such a task within 90 days, the study estimates it would require the full attention of some 3,000 laborers. Assuming that each worker may have been accompanied by at least two other family members, say a wife and a child, the community gathered for the build must have included as many as 9,000 people, the study suggests.
"Given that a band of 25-30 people is considered quite large for most hunter-gatherer communities, it's truly amazing that this ancient society could bring together a group of nearly 10,000 people, find some way to feed them and get this mound built in a matter of months," Kidder says.
Soil testing indicates that the mound is located on top of land that was once low-lying swamp or marsh land - evidence of ancient tree roots and swamp life still exists in undisturbed soils at the base of the mound. Tests confirm that the site was first cleared for construction by burning and quickly covered with a layer of fine silt soil. A mix of other heavier soils then were brought in and dumped in small adjacent piles, gradually building the mound layer upon layer.
As Kidder notes, previous theories about the construction of most of the world's ancient earthen mounds have suggested that they were laid down slowly over a period of hundreds of years involving small contributions of material from many different people spanning generations of a society. While this may be the case for other earthen structures at Poverty Point, the evidence from Mound A offers a sharp departure from this accretional theory. Kidder's home base in St.
Louis is just across the Mississippi River from one of America's best known ancient earthen structures, the Monk Mound at Cahokia, Ill. He notes that the Monk Mound was built many centuries later than the mounds at Poverty Point by a civilization that was much more reliant on agriculture, a far cry from the hunter-gatherer group that built Poverty Point. Even so, Mound A at Poverty Point is much larger than almost any other mound found in North America; only Monk's Mound at Cahokia is larger.
"We've come to realize that the social fabric of these socieites must have been much stronger and more complex that we might previously have given them credit. These results contradict the popular notion that pre-agricultural people were socially, politically, and economically simple and unable to organize themselves into large groups that could build elaborate architecture or engage in so-called complex social behavior," Kidder says.
"The prevailing model of hunter-gatherers living a life 'nasty, brutish and short' is contradicted and our work indicates these people were practicing a sophisticated ritual/religious life that involved building these monumental mounds."
Washington University in St. Louis
All About Human Beings and How We Got To Be Here
|The content herein, unless otherwise known to be public domain, are Copyright 1995-2012 - Space Media Network. AFP, UPI and IANS news wire stories are copyright Agence France-Presse, United Press International and Indo-Asia News Service. ESA Portal Reports are copyright European Space Agency. All NASA sourced material is public domain. Additional copyrights may apply in whole or part to other bona fide parties. Advertising does not imply endorsement,agreement or approval of any opinions, statements or information provided by Space Media Network on any Web page published or hosted by Space Media Network. Privacy Statement|

Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. A sea-duck of the subfamily Fuligulinœ and genus Clangula; a garrot. The common goldeneye is C. glaucion or C. clangula of Europe and Americn. Barrow's goldeneye is the Rocky Mountain garrot, C. barrovi. See cut under
- n. A fish, Hyodon chrysopsis, having a large eye with yellow iris. —
- n. One of various neuropterous insects of the genus Chrysopa: so called in allusion to their golden or bronze-colored eyes. The larvæ are often called aphis-lions. Also called golden-eyed fly.
- n. Melithreptus lunulatus, a small species of honey-eater.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Zoöl.) A duck (Glaucionetta clangula), found in Northern Europe, Asia, and America. The American variety (var. Americana) is larger. Called
whistler, garrot, gowdy, pied widgeon, whiteside, curre, and doucker. Barrow's golden-eye of America (Glaucionetta Islandica) is less common.
- n. a variety of green lacewing
- n. large-headed swift-flying diving duck of Arctic regions
“One winter day, in prowling along the beach, I approached the spot where a day or two before I had been shooting whistlers (golden-eye ducks) over decoys.”
“The software can also automatically detect and remove red - and golden-eye defects.”
“OptiML Red-Eye uses embedded image processing automatically detects and corrects red- and golden-eye imperfections without the need for a PC or editing software.”
“The CMC golden-eye team comprises 15 people who look primarily at HD services and evaluate video quality in six categories of digital defects on a scale of one to five (one being unwatchable and five being spectacular).”
“In addition, Comcast is working to establish local golden-eye programs in at least two markets.”
“My two dogs are part wolf … they have that golden-eye of the wolf and the sharp nose … those animals look very much like two of my best friends … plwalsh: I'm glad it wasn't just us who saw the poor editing.”
‘golden-eye’ hasn't been added to any lists yet.
Looking for tweets for golden-eye.

By Pauline Hammerbeck
It's been a doozy of a wildfire season (Colorado's most destructive ever), leaving homeowners wondering what safety measures they can put in place to stave off flames in the event of a fire in their own neighborhood.
Landscaping, it turns out, can be an important measure in wildfire protection.
But fire-wise landscaping isn't just something for those dwelling on remote Western hilltops. Brush, grass and forest fires occur nearly everywhere in the United States, says the National Fire Protection Association. Here's how your landscaping can help keep you safe.
Create 'defensible' space
Most homes that burn during a wildfire are ignited by embers landing on the roof, gutters, and on decks and porches. So your first point of action should be creating a defensible space, a buffer zone around your home, to reduce sources of fuel.
Start by keeping the first 3 to 5 feet around your home free of all flammable materials and vegetation: plants, shrubs, trees and grasses, as well as bark and other organic mulches should all be eliminated (a neat perimeter of rock mulch or a rock garden can be a beautiful thing). Maintenance is also important:
- Clear leaves, pine needles and other debris from roofs, gutters and eaves
- Cut back tree branches that overhang the roof
- Clear debris from under decks, porches and other structures
Moving farther from the house, you might consider adding hardscaping - driveways, patios, walkways, gravel paths, etc. These features add visual interest, but they also maintain a break between vegetation and your home in the event of a fire. Some additional tasks to consider in the first 100 feet surrounding your home:
- Thin out trees and shrubs (particularly evergreens) within 30 feet
- Trim low tree branches so they're a minimum of 6 feet off the ground
- Mow lawn regularly and dispose of clippings and other debris promptly
- Move woodpiles to a space at least 30 feet from your home
Use fire-resistant plants
Populating your landscape with plants that are resistant to fire can also be an important tactic. Look for low-growing plants that have thick leaves (a sign that they hold water), extensive root systems and the ability to withstand drought.
This isn't as limiting as it sounds. Commonly used hostas, butterfly bushes and roses are all good choices. And there are plenty of fire-resistant plant lists to give you ideas on what to pick.
Where and how you plant can also have a dramatic effect on fire behavior. The plants nearest your home should be smaller and more widely spaced than those farther away.
Be sure to use a variety of plant types, which reduces disease and keeps the landscape healthy and green. Plant in small clusters - create a garden island, for instance, by surrounding a group of plantings with a rock perimeter - and use rock mulch to conserve moisture.
Maintain accessible water sources
Wildfires present a special challenge to local fire departments, so it's in your interest to be able to access or maintain an emergency water supply - particularly if you're in a remote location.
At a minimum, keep 100 feet of garden hose attached to a spigot (if your water comes from a well, consider an emergency generator to operate the pump during a power failure). But better protection can come from the installation of a small pond, cistern or, if budget allows, a swimming pool.
Good planning and a bit of elbow grease have a big hand in wildfire safety. In a year with record heat and drought, looking over your landscape with a firefighter's eye can offer significant peace of mind.
- Are You Properly Insured for Your Real Estate?
- The Ins and Outs of Homeowner's Insurance
- Tips for Fire Safety in Your Home
Guest blogger Pauline Hammerbeck is an editor for the Allstate Blog, which helps people prepare for the unpredictability of life.
Note: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the opinion or position of Zillow.

Long Term Player Development
What is LTPD?
Long Term Player Development (LTPD) is a systemic approach being developed and adopted by Golf Canada in partnership with the Canadian Professional Golfers’ Association to maximize a participant's potential and involvement in our sport. The LTPD framework aims to define optimal training, competition and recovery throughout an athlete's career to enable him / her to reach his / her full potential in golf and as an athlete. Tailoring a child's sports development program to suit basic principles of growth and maturation, especially during the 'critical' early years of their development, enables him / her to:
- Reach full potential
- Increase lifelong participation in golf and other physical activities
The LTPD model is split into stages in which a player will move from simple to more complex skills and from general to golf related skills. For example, a beginner may start by learning basic swinging actions and then once this has been mastered he / she will progress onto more advanced skills.
This framework will set out recommended training sequences and skills developments for the participant from the Active Start stage (6 and under) to the Active for Live Stage (adult recreational). It will address the physical, mental, emotional and technical needs of the athlete as they pass through each stage of development.
Where has it come from?
A combination of recent research and the knowledge of coaches from around the world are being used to write the LTPD model. The program will be sport-science supported and based on the best data and research available. Our work will be based on the work of Canadian sport scientists, such as Istvan Bayyi, and focuses on key, common principles of individual development, which many sports organizations consider good practice in long-term planning for athletes.
Many leading sports stars have also attributed part of their success to participating in different sports and activities at a young age by giving them a wider base of sports skills. Our goal will be to develop our players to their maximum potential by training and enhancing all the athletic skills that contribute to their success.
What will this mean for your child?
During your child's first few years of golf, the emphasis will be on physical literacy. Time should be spent learning the ABC's of athleticism (Agility, Balance, Coordination and Speed) to teach them how to control his / her own bodies. For this reason, your child may take part in exercises that do not look relevant to golf but are supporting their development. Games and other sports will teach your child to throw the ball (basic hitting actions), catch it (hand-eye coordination), and run properly. At each stage the child will be trained in the optimal systems and programs to maximize his / her potential as a golfer and as a long-term participant in sport.
What has this got to do with golf?
It is thought that taking part in golf-specific training too early can lead to an early drop out rate, create muscle imbalances and also neglect teaching the fundamental skills needed for most sports. In fact, research shows that early specialization in most late maturing sports results in these outcomes.
Research has also shown that it is during childhood that people are best at learning physical skills. For this reason we are advising coaches and parents to teach transferable skills first that will allow your child to become proficient in a number of different sports and therefore increase their chances of being physically active throughout their lifetime.
Who else is using LTPD?
The Council of Federal, Provincial and Territorial Ministers responsible for Sport have endorsed and established the goal of the implementation of a Long Term Athlete Development program throughout the sport community in Canada. Sport Canada has been working with National Sport Organizations to development sport-specific programs according to an overall framework established by an expert group of sport scientists.
To date, over 57 sports in Canada have started the process of designing and putting into place LTAD programs. There has been a sharing of best practices among resource personnel and National bodies and the overall program is gaining momentum.
Golf Canada is in the second wave of sports to start the LTPD process and is following closely the work of such groups as Rowing Canada, Athletics Canada, Speedskating Canada and Soccer to create the best opportunities for all children.
Various national sporting groups in the UK and Ireland are approximately 18 months ahead of their Canadian counterparts in the development of LTPD programs and we are using their experiences and best practices in process development to ensure we have the most comprehensive and effective system possible.
Where will Golf's LTPD model come from?
We will be consulting with a wide range of coaches, sports scientists and experienced volunteers from across Canada to represent the views of the whole golf community. Their knowledge and expertise will be used as input to form the LTPD framework for golf in Canada. We will be assisted in this process by the LTPD Resource paper and research of the expert group, in particular Stephen Norris (see www.ltad.ca for resource paper).
In developing this model and framework, Golf Canada is currently in the process of reviewing our programs in line with LTPD principles. Our competition program, coach education system, elite play structure and development initiatives will all evolve to be consistent with the principles established within this underpinning model.
One of the principles to be adopted will be a continuous improvement regime where the system will be benchmarked against the most current developmental principles and upgraded regularly. It will be a living document that provides a planning framework to enable us to always deliver the most appropriate training.
Golf Canada LTPD resources
Golf Canada will continually update this section to provide access to the most current materials and programs as they are developed.
We will add a range of LTPD resources designed to help all Coaches, Teachers, Players and Parents understand the stages that each player goes through and also the training principles and activities at each stage.
Please click here to download complete LTPD Guide (2.13 MB)

Upland Bird Regional Forecast
When considering upland game population levels during the fall hunting season, two important factors impact population change. First is the number of adult birds that survived the previous fall and winter and are considered viable breeders in the spring. The second is the reproductive success of this breeding population. Reproductive success consists of nest success (the number of nests that successfully hatched) and chick survival (the number of chicks recruited into the fall population). For pheasant and quail, annual population turnover is relatively high; therefore, the fall population is more dependent on reproductive success than breeding population levels. For grouse (prairie chickens), annual population turnover is not as rapid although reproductive success is still the major population regulator and important for good hunting. In the following forecast, breeding population and reproductive success of pheasants, quail, and prairie chickens will be discussed. Breeding population data were gathered during spring breeding surveys for pheasants (crow counts), quail (whistle counts), and prairie chickens (lek counts). Data for reproductive success were collected during late summer roadside surveys for pheasants and quail. Reproductive success of prairie chickens cannot be easily assessed using the same methods because they generally do not associate with roads like the other game birds.
Kansas experienced extreme drought this past year. Winter weather was mild, but winter precipitation is important for spring vegetation, which can impact reproductive success, and most of Kansas did not get enough winter precipitation. Pheasant breeding populations showed significant reductions in 2012, especially in primary pheasant range in western Kansas. Spring came early and hot this year, but also included fair spring moisture until early May, when the precipitation stopped, and Kansas experienced record heat and drought through the rest of the reproductive season. Early nesting conditions were generally good for prairie chickens and pheasants. However, the primary nesting habitat for pheasants in western Kansas is winter wheat, and in 2012, Kansas had one of the earliest wheat harvests on record. Wheat harvest can destroy nests and very young broods. The early harvest likely lowered pheasant nest and early brood success. The intense heat and lack of rain in June and July resulted in a decrease in brooding cover and insect populations, causing lower chick survival for all upland game birds.
Because of drought, all counties in Kansas were opened to Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) emergency haying or grazing. CRP emergency haying requires fields that are hayed to leave at least 50 percent of the field in standing grass cover. CRP emergency grazing requires 25 percent of the field (or contiguous fields) to be left ungrazed or grazing at 75-percent normal stocking rates across the entire field. Many CRP fields, including Walk In Hunting Areas (WIHA), may be affected across the state. WIHA property is privately-owned land open to the public for hunting access. Kansas has more than one million acres of WIHA. Often, older stands of CRP grass are in need of disturbance, and haying and grazing can improve habitat for the upcoming breeding season, and may ultimately be beneficial if weather is favorable.
Due to continued drought, Kansas will likely experience a below-average upland game season this fall. For those willing to hunt hard, there will still be pockets of decent bird numbers, especially in the northern Flint Hills and northcentral and northwestern parts of the state. Kansas has approximately 1.5 million acres open to public hunting (wildlife areas and WIHA combined). The regular opening date for the pheasant and quail seasons will be Nov. 10 for the entire state. The previous weekend will be designated for the special youth pheasant and quail season. Youth participating in the special season must be 16 years old or younger and accompanied by a non-hunting adult who is 18 or older. All public wildlife areas and WIHA tracts will be open for public access during the special youth season. Please consider taking a young person hunting this fall, so they might have the opportunity to develop a passion for the outdoors that we all enjoy.
PHEASANT – Drought in 2011 and 2012 has taken its toll on pheasant populations in Kansas. Pheasant breeding populations dropped by nearly 50 percent or more across pheasant range from 2011 to 2012 resulting in fewer adult hens in the population to start the 2012 nesting season. The lack of precipitation has resulted in less cover and insects needed for good pheasant reproduction. Additionally, winter wheat serves as a major nesting habitat for pheasants in western Kansas, and a record early wheat harvest this summer likely destroyed many nests and young broods. Then the hot, dry weather set in from May to August, the primary brood-rearing period for pheasants. Pheasant chicks need good grass and weed cover and robust insect populations to survive. Insufficient precipitation and lack of habitat and insects throughout the state’s primary pheasant range resulted in limited production. This will reduce hunting prospects compared to recent years. However, some good opportunities still exist to harvest roosters in the sunflower state, especially for those willing to work for their birds. Though the drought has taken its toll, Kansas still contains a pheasant population that will produce a harvest in the top three or four major pheasant states this year.
The best areas this year will likely be pockets of northwest and northcentral Kansas. Populations in southwest Kansas were hit hardest by the 2011-2012 drought (72 percent decline in breeding population), and a very limited amount of production occurred this season due to continued drought and limited breeding populations.
QUAIL – The bobwhite breeding population in 2012 was generally stable or improved compared to 2011. Areas in the northern Flint Hills and parts of northeast Kansas showed much improved productivity this year. Much of eastern Kansas has seen consistent declines in quail populations in recent decades. After many years of depressed populations, this year’s rebound in quail reproduction in eastern Kansas is welcomed, but overall populations are still below historic averages. The best quail hunting will be found throughout the northern Flint Hills and parts of central Kansas. Prolonged drought undoubtedly impacted production in central and western Kansas.
PRAIRIE CHICKEN – Kansas is home to greater and lesser prairie chickens. Both species require a landscape of predominately native grass. Lesser prairie chickens are found in westcentral and southwestern Kansas in native prairie and nearby stands of native grass within the conservation reserve program (CRP). Greater prairie chickens are found primarily in the tallgrass and mixed-grass prairies in the eastern one-third and northern one-half of the state.
The spring prairie chicken lek survey indicated that most populations remained stable or declined from last year. Declines were likely due to extreme drought throughout 2011. Areas of northcentral and northwest Kansas fared the best, while areas in southcentral and southwest Kansas experienced the sharpest declines where drought was most severe. Many areas in the Flint Hills were not burned this spring due to drought. This resulted in far more residual grass cover for much improved nesting conditions compared to recent years. There have been some reports of prairie chickens broods in these areas, and hunting will likely be somewhat improved compared to recent years.
Because of recent increases in prairie chicken (both species) populations in northwest Kansas, regulations have been revised this year. The early prairie chicken season (Sept. 15-Oct. 15) and two-bird bag limit has been extended into northwest Kansas. The northwest unit boundary has also been revised to include areas north of U.S. Highway 96 and west of U.S. Highway 281. Additionally, all prairie chicken hunters are now required to purchase a $2.50 prairie chicken permit. This permit will allow KDWPT to better track hunters and harvest, which will improve management activities. Both species of prairie chicken are of conservation concern and the lesser prairie chicken is a candidate species for federal listing under the Endangered Species Act.
This region has 11,809 acres of public land and 339,729 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – Spring breeding populations declined almost 50 percent from 2011 to 2012, reducing fall population potential. Early nesting conditions were decent due to good winter wheat growth, but early wheat harvest and severe heat and drought through the summer reduced populations. While this resulted in a significant drop in pheasant numbers, the area will still have the highest densities of pheasants this fall compared to other areas in the state. Some counties — such as Graham, Rawlins, Decatur, and Sherman — showed the relatively-highest densities of pheasants during summer brood surveys. Much of the cover will be reduced compared to previous years due to drought and resulting emergency haying and grazing in CRP fields. Good hunting opportunities will also be reduced compared to recent years, and harvest will likely be below average.
Quail – Populations in this region have been increasing in recent years although the breeding population had a slight decline. This area is at the extreme northwestern edge of bobwhite range in Kansas, and densities are relatively low compared to central Kansas. Some counties — such as Graham, Rawlins, and Decatur — will provide hunting opportunities for quail.
Prairie Chicken – Prairie chicken populations have expanded in both numbers and range within the region over the past 20 years. The better hunting opportunities will be found in the central and southeastern portions of the region in native prairies and nearby CRP grasslands. Spring lek counts in that portion of the region were slightly depressed from last year and nesting conditions were only fair this year. Extreme drought likely impaired chick survival.
This region has 75,576 acres of public land and 311,182 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – The Smoky Hills breeding population dropped about 40 percent from 2011 to 2012, reducing overall fall population potential. While nesting conditions were fair due to good winter wheat growth, the drought and early wheat harvest impacted the number of young recruited into the fall population. Certain areas had decent brood production, including portions of Mitchell, Rush, Rice, and Cloud counties. Across the region, hunting opportunities will likely be below average and definitely reduced from recent years. CRP was opened to emergency haying and grazing, reducing available cover.
Quail – Breeding populations increased nearly 60 percent from 2011 to 2012, increasing fall population potential. However, drought conditions were severe, likely impairing nesting and brood success. There are reports of fair quail numbers in certain areas throughout the region. Quail populations in northcentral Kansas are naturally spotty due to habitat characteristics. Some areas, such as Cloud County, showed good potential while other areas in the more western edges of the region did not fare as well.
Prairie Chicken – Greater prairie chickens occur throughout the Smoky Hills in large areas of native rangeland and some CRP. This region includes some of the highest densities and greatest hunting opportunities in the state for greater prairie chickens. Spring counts indicated that numbers were stable or slightly reduce from last year. Much of the rangeland cover is significantly reduced due to drought, which likely impaired production, resulting in reduced fall hunting opportunities..
This region has 60,559 acres of public land and 54,170 of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – Spring crow counts this year showed a significant increase in breeding populations of pheasants. While this increase is welcome, this region was nearing all-time lows in 2011. Pheasant densities across the region are still low, especially compared to other areas in western Kansas. Good hunting opportunities will exist in only a few pockets of good habitat.
Quail – Breeding populations stayed relatively the same as last year, and some quail were detected during the summer brood survey. The long-term trend for this region has been declining, largely due to unfavorable weather and degrading habitat. This year saw an increase in populations. Hunting opportunities for quail will be improved this fall compared to recent years in this region. The best areas will likely be in Marshall and Jefferson counties.
Prairie Chickens – Very little prairie chicken range occurs in this region, and opportunities are limited. The best areas are in the western edges of the region, in large areas of native rangeland.
This region has 80,759 acres of public land and 28,047 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – This region is outside the primary pheasant range and has very limited hunting. A few birds can be found in the northwestern portion of the region.
Quail – Breeding populations were relatively stable from 2011 to 2012 for this region although long term trends have been declining. In the last couple years, the quail populations throughout much of the region have been on the increase. Specific counties that showed relatively higher numbers are Coffey, Osage, and Wilson. However, populations remain far below historic levels across the bulk of the region due to extreme habitat degradation.
Prairie Chicken – Greater prairie chickens occur in the central and northwest parts of this region in large areas of native rangeland. Breeding population densities were up nearly 40 percent from last year, and opportunities may increase accordingly. However, populations have been in consistent decline over the long term. Infrequent fire frequency has resulted in woody encroachment of native grasslands in the area, gradually reducing the amount of suitable habitat.
This region has 128,371 acres of public land and 63,069 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – This region is on the eastern edge of pheasant range in Kansas and well outside the primary range. Pheasant densities have always been relatively low throughout the Flint Hills. Spring breeding populations were down nearly 50 percent, and reproduction was limited this summer. The best pheasant hunting will be in the northwestern edge of this region in Marion and Dickinson counties.
Quail – This region contains some of the highest densities of bobwhite in Kansas. The breeding population in this region increased 25 percent compared to 2011, and the long-term trend (since 1998) has been stable do to steadily increasing populations over the last four or five years. High reproductive success was reported in the northern half of this region, and some of the best opportunities for quail hunting will be found in the northern Flint Hills this year. In the south, Cowley County showed good numbers of quail this summer.
Prairie Chickens – The Flint Hills is the largest intact tallgrass prairie left in North America. It has served as a core habitat for greater prairie chickens for many years. Since the early 1980s, inadequate range burning frequencies have consistently reduced nest success in the area, and prairie chicken numbers have been declining as a result. Because of the drought this spring, many areas that are normally burned annually were left unburned this year. This left more residual grass cover for nesting and brood rearing. There are some good reports of prairie chicken broods, and hunting opportunities will likely increase throughout the region this year.
This region has 19,534 acres of public land and 73,341 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – The breeding population declined about 40 percent from 2011 to 2012. Prolonged drought for two years now and very poor vegetation conditions resulted in poor reproductive success this year. All summer indices showed a depressed pheasant population in this region, especially compared to other regions. Some of the relatively better counties in this area will be Reno, Pawnee, and Pratt although these counties have not been immune to recent declines. There will likely few good hunting opportunities this fall.
Quail – The breeding population dropped over 30 percent this year from 2011 although long term trends (since 1998) have been stable in this region. This region generally has some of the highest quail densities in Kansas, but prolonged drought and reduced vegetation have caused significant declines in recent years. Counties such as Reno, Pratt, and Stafford will likely have the best opportunities in the region. While populations may be down compared to recent years, this region will continue to provide fair hunting opportunities for quail.
Prairie Chicken – This region is almost entirely occupied by lesser prairie chickens. The breeding population declined nearly 50 percent from 2011 to 2012. Reproductive conditions were not good for the region due to extreme drought and heat for the last two years, and production was limited. The best hunting opportunities will likely be in the sand prairies south of the Arkansas River.
This region has 2,904 acres of public land and 186,943 acres of WIHA open to hunters this fall.
Pheasant – The breeding population plummeted more than 70 percent in this region from 2011 to 2012. Last year was one of the worst on record for pheasant reproduction. However, last fall there was some carry-over rooster (second-year) from a record high season in 2010. Those carry-over birds are mostly gone now, which will hurt hunting opportunities this fall. Although reproduction was slightly improved from 2011, chick recruitment was still fair to below average this summer due to continued extreme drought conditions. Moreover, there were not enough adult hens in the population yet to make a significant rebound. Generally, hunting opportunity will remain well below average in this region. Haskell and Seward counties showed some improved reproductive success, especially compared to other counties in the region.
Quail – The breeding population in this region tends to be highly variable depending on available moisture and resulting vegetation. The region experienced an increase in breeding populations from 2011 to 2012 although 2011 was a record low for the region. While drought likely held back production, the weather was better than last year, and some reproduction occurred. Indices are still well below average for the region. There will be some quail hunting opportunities in the region although good areas will be sparse.
Prairie Chicken – While breeding populations in the eastern parts of this region were generally stable or increasing, areas of extreme western and southwest portions (Cimarron National Grasslands) saw nearly 30-percent declines last year and 65 percent declines this year. Drought remained extreme in this region, and reproductive success was likely very low. Hunting opportunities in this region will be extremely limited this fall.

Oil & Natural Gas Projects
Transmission, Distribution, & Refining
Multispectral and Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Techniques for Natural Gas Transmission Infrastructure Systems
The goal is to help maintain the nation's natural gas transmission infrastructure through the timely and effective detection of natural gas leaks through evaluation of geobotanical stress signatures.
The remote sensing techniques being developed employ advanced spectrometer systems that produce visible and near infrared reflected light images with spatial resolution of 1 to 3 meters in 128 wavelength bands. This allows for the discrimination of individual species of plants as well as geological and man-made objects, and permits the detection of biological impacts of methane leaks or seepages in large complicated areas. The techniques employed do not require before-and-after imagery because they use the spatial patterns of plant species and health variations present in a single image to distinguish leaks. Also, these techniques should allow discrimination between the effects of small leaks and the damage caused by human incursion or natural factors such as storm run off, landslides and earthquakes. Because plants in an area can accumulate doses of leaked materials, species spatial patterns can record time-integrated effects of leaked methane. This can be important in finding leaks that would otherwise be hard to detect by direct observation of methane concentrations in the air.
This project is developing remote sensing methods of detecting, discriminating, and mapping the effects of natural gas leaks from underground pipelines. The current focus is on the effects that the increased methane soil concentrations, created by the leaks, will have on plants. These effects will be associated with extreme soil CH4 concentrations, plant sickness, and even death. Similar circumstances have been observed and studied in the effects of excessive CO2soil concentrations at Mammoth Mountain near Mammoth Lakes California, USA. At the Mammoth Mountain site, the large CO2 soil concentrations are due to the volcanic rumblings of the magma still active below Mammoth Mountain. At more subtle levels this research has been able to map, using hyperspectral air borne imagery, the tree plant stress over all of the Mammoth Mountain. These plant stress maps match, and greatly extend into surrounding regions, the on-ground CO2 emission mapping done by the USGS in Menlo Park, California.
In addition, vegetation health mapping along with altered mineralization mapping at Mammoth Mountain does reveal subtle hidden faults. These hidden faults are pathways for potential CO2 leaks, at least near the surface, over the entire region. The methods being developed use airborne hyperspectral and multi-spectral high-resolution imagery and very high resolution (0.6 meter) satellite imagery. The team has identified and worked with commercial providers of both airborne hyperspectral imagery acquisitions and high resolution satellite imagery acquisitions. Both offer competent image data post processing, so that eventually, the ongoing surveillance of pipeline corridors can be contracted for commercially. Current work under this project is focused on detecting and quantifying natural gas pipeline leaks using hyperspectral imagery from airborne or satellite based platforms through evaluation of plant stress.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) – project management and research products
NASA – Ames – Development of UAV platform used to carry hyperspectral payload
HyVista Corporation– Development and operation of the HyMap hyperspectral sensor
Livermore, CA 94511
The use of geobotanical plant stress signatures from hyperspectral imagery potential offers a unique means of detecting and quantifying the existence of natural gas leaks from the U.S. pipeline infrastructure. The method holds the potential to cover large expanses of pipeline with minimal man effort thus reducing the potential likelihood that a leak would go undetected. By increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of leak detection, the amount of gas leaked from a site can be reduced resulting in decreased environmental impact from fugitive emissions of gas, increased safety and reliability of gas delivery and increase in overall available gas; as less product is lost from the lines.
The method chosen for testing these techniques was to image the area surrounding known gas pipeline leaks. After receiving notice and location information for a newly discovered leak from research collaborator Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), researchers determined the area above the buried pipeline to be scanned, including some surrounding areas thought to be outside the influence of any methane that might percolate to within root depth of the surface. Flight lines were designed for the airborne acquisition program and researchers used a geographic positioning system (GPS) and digital cameras to visually record the soils, plants, minerals, waters, and manmade objects in the area while the airborne imagery was acquired. After the airborne imagery set for all flight lines was received (including raw data, data corrected to reflectance including atmospheric absorptions, and georectification control files), the data was analyzed using commercial computer software (ENVI) by a team of researchers at University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC), Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and one of the acquisition contractors.
- Created an advanced Geographic Information System (GIS) that will be able provide dynamic integration of airborne imagery, satellite imagery, and other GIS information to monitor pipelines for geobotanical leak signatures.
- Used the software to integrate hyperspectral imagery, high resolution satellite imagery, and digital elevation models of the area around a known gas leak to determine if evidence of the leak could be resolved.
- Helped develop hyperspectral imagery payload for use on an unmanned aerial vehicle developed by NASA-Ames.
- Participated in DOE-NETL sponsored natural gas pipeline leak detection demonstration in Casper, Wyoming on September 13-17, 2004. Using both the UAV hyperspectral payload (~1000 ft), and Hyvista hyperspectral platform (~5000 ft) to survey for plant stress.
Researchers used several different routines available within the ENVI program suite to produce “maps” of plant species types, plant health within species types, soil types, soil conditions, water bodies, water contents such as algae or sediments, mineralogy of exposed formations, and manmade objects. These maps were then studied for relative plant health patterns, altered mineral distributions, and other categories. The researchers then returned to the field to verify and further understand the mappings, fine-tune the results, and produce more accurate maps. Since the maps are georectified and the pixel size is 3 meters, individual objects can all be located using the maps and a handheld GPS.
These detailed maps show areas of existing anomalous conditions such as plant kills and linear species modifications caused by subtle hidden faults, modifications of the terrain due to pipeline work or encroachment. They are also the “baseline” that can be used to chart any future changes by re-imaging the area routinely to monitor and document any effects caused by significant methane leakage.
The sensors used for image acquisition are hyperspectral scanners, one of which provides 126 bands across the reflective solar wavelength region of 0.45 – 2.5 nm with contiguous spectral coverage (except in the atmospheric water vapor bands) and bandwidths between 15 – 20 nm. This sensor operates on a 3-axis gyro-stabilized platform to minimize image distortion due to aircraft motion and provides a signal to noise ratio >500:1. Geo-location and image geo-coding is achieved with an-on board Differential GPS (DGPS) and an integrated IMU (inertial monitoring unit).
During a DOE – NETL sponsored natural gas leak detection demonstration at the National Petroleum Reserve 3 (NPR3) site of the Rocky Mountain Oilfield Testing Center (RMOTC) outside of Casper, Wyoming, the project utilized hyperspectral imaging of vegetation to sense plant stress related to the presence of natural gas on a simulated pipeline using actual natural gas releases. The spectral signature of sunlight reflected from vegetation was used to determine vegetation health. Two different platforms were used for imaging the virtual pipeline path: a Twin Otter aircraft flying at an altitude of about 5,000 feet above ground level that imaged the entire site in strips, and an unmanned autonomous vehicle (UAV) flying at an altitude of approximately 1,000 feet above ground level that imaged an area surrounding the virtual pipeline.
The manned hyperspectral imaging took place on two days. Wednesday, September 9 and Wednesday, September 15. The underground leaks were started on August 30. This was done to allow time for the methane from the leaks to saturate the soils and produce plant stress by excluding oxygen from the plant root systems. On both days, the entire NPR3-RMOTC site was successfully imaged.
At that time of year, the vegetation at NPR3-RMOTC was largely in hibernation. The exception was in the gullies where there was some moisture. Therefore, the survey looked for unusually stressed plant “patches” in the gullies as possible leak points. Several spots were found in the hyperspectral imagery that had the spectral signature typical of sick vegetation that were several pixels in diameter in locations in the gullies or ravines along the virtual pipeline route. Due to the limited vegetation along the test route the successful detection of natural gas leaks through imaging of plant stress was limited in success. The technique did demonstrate an ability to show plant stress in areas near leak sites but was less successful in determining general leak severity based on those results. In areas with much denser vegetation coverage and less dormant plant life the method still shows promise.
| Airborne hyperspectral imagery unit - close-up
|| Airborne hyperspectral imagery unit - on plane
Overall results from the DOE-NETL sponsored natural gas leak detection demonstration can be found in the demonstration final report [PDF-7370KB] .
Current Status and Remaining Tasks:
All work under this project has been completed.
Project Start: August 13, 2001
Project End: December 31, 2005
DOE Contribution: $966,900
Performer Contribution: $0
NETL – Richard Baker (email@example.com or 304-285-4714)
LLNL – Dr. William L. Pickles (firstname.lastname@example.org or 925-422-7812)
DOE Leak Detection Technology Demonstration Final Report [PDF-7370KB]
DOE Fossil Energy Techline: National Labs to Strengthen Natural Gas Pipelines' Integrity, Reliability
Status Assessment [PDF-26KB]

Notes on the Bible, by Albert Barnes, , at sacred-texts.com
Now the word of the Lord - , literally, "And, ..." This is the way in which the several inspired writers of the Old Testament mark that what it was given them to write was united onto those sacred books which God had given to others to write, and it formed with them one continuous whole. The word, "And," implies this. It would do so in any language, and it does so in Hebrew as much as in any other. As neither we, nor any other people, would, without any meaning, use the word, And, so neither did the Hebrews. It joins the four first books of Moses together; it carries on the history through Joshua, Judges, the Books of Samuel and of the Kings. After the captivity, Ezra and Nehemiah begin again where the histories before left off; the break of the captivity is bridged over; and Ezra, going back in mind to the history of God's people before the captivity, resumes the history, as if it had been of yesterday, "And in the first year of Cyrus." It joins in the story of the Book of Ruth before the captivity, and that of Esther afterward. At times, even prophets employ it, in using the narrative form of themselves, as Ezekiel, "and it was in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, and I was in the captivity by the river of Chebar, the heavens opened and I saw." If a prophet or historian wishes to detach his prophecy or his history, he does so; as Ezra probably began the Book of Chronicles anew from Adam, or as Daniel makes his prophecy a whole by itself. But then it is the more obvious that a Hebrew prophet or historian, when he does begin with the word, "And," has an object in so beginning; he uses an universal word of all languages in its uniform meaning in all language, to join things together.
And yet more precisely; this form, "and the word of the Lord came to - saying," occurs over and over again, stringing together the pearls of great price of God's revelations, and uniting this new revelation to all those which had preceded it. The word, "And," then joins on histories with histories, revelations with revelations, uniting in one the histories of God's works and words, and blending the books of Holy Scripture into one divine book.
But the form of words must have suggested to the Jews another thought, which is part of our thankfulness and of our being Act 11:18, "then to the Gentiles also hath God given repentance unto life." The words are the self-same familiar words with which some fresh revelation of God's will to His people had so often been announced. Now they are prefixed to God's message to the pagan, and so as to join on that message to all the other messages to Israel. Would then God deal thenceforth with the pagan as with the Jews? Would they have their prophets? Would they be included in the one family of God? The mission of Jonah in itself was an earnest that they would, for God. Who does nothing fitfully or capriciously, in that He had begun, gave an earnest that He would carry on what He had begun. And so thereafter, the great prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, were prophets to the nations also; Daniel was a prophet among them, to them as well as to their captives.
But the mission of Jonah might, so far, have been something exceptional. The enrolling his book, as an integral part of the Scriptures, joining on that prophecy to the other prophecies to Israel, was an earnest that they were to be parts of one system. But then it would be significant also, that the records of God's prophecies to the Jews, all embodied the accounts of their impenitence. Here is inserted among them an account of God's revelation to the pagan, and their repentance. "So many prophets had been sent, so many miracles performed, so often had captivity been foreannounced to them for the multitude of their sins. and they never repented. Not for the reign of one king did they cease from the worship of the calves; not one of the kings of the ten tribes departed from the sins of Jeroboam? Elijah, sent in the Word and Spirit of the Lord, had done many miracles, yet obtained no abandonment of the calves. His miracles effected this only, that the people knew that Baal was no god, and cried out, "the Lord He is the God." Elisha his disciple followed him, who asked for a double portion of the Spirit of Elijah, that he might work more miracles, to bring back the people.
He died, and, after his death as before it, the worship of the calves continued in Israel. The Lord marveled and was weary of Israel, knowing that if He sent to the pagan they would bear, as he saith to Ezekiel. To make trial of this, Jonah was chosen, of whom it is recorded in the Book of Kings that he prophesied the restoration of the border of Israel. When then he begins by saying, "And the word of the Lord came to Jonah," prefixing the word "And," he refers us back to those former things, in this meaning. The children have not hearkened to what the Lord commanded, sending to them by His servants the prophets, but have hardened their necks and given themselves up to do evil before the Lord and provoke Him to anger; "and" therefore "the word of the Lord came to Jonah, saying, Arise and go to Nineveh that great city, and preach unto her," that so Israel may be shewn, in comparison with the pagan, to be the more guilty, when the Ninevites should repent, the children of Israel persevered in unrepentance."
Jonah the son of Amittai - Both names occur here only in the Old Testament, Jonah signifies "Dove," Amittai, "the truth of God." Some of the names of the Hebrew prophets so suit in with their times, that they must either have been given them propheticly, or assumed by themselves, as a sort of watchword, analogous to the prophetic names, given to the sons of Hosea and Isaiah. Such were the names of Elijah and Elisha, "The Lord is my God," "my God is salvation." Such too seems to be that of Jonah. The "dove" is everywhere the symbol of "mourning love." The side of his character which Jonah records is that of his defect, his want of trust in God, and so his unloving zeal against those, who were to be the instruments of God against his people. His name perhaps preserves that character by which he willed to be known among his people, one who moaned or mourned over them.
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city - The Assyrian history, as far as it has yet been discovered, is very bare of events in regard to this period. We have as yet the names of three kings only for 150 years. But Assyria, as far as we know its history, was in its meridian. Just before the time of Jonah, perhaps ending in it, were the victorious reigns of Shalmanubar and Shamasiva; after him was that of Ivalush or Pul, the first aggressor upon Israel. It is clear that this was a time Of Assyrian greatness: since God calls it "that great city," not in relation to its extent only, but its power. A large weak city would not have been called a "great city unto God" Jon 3:3.
And cry against it - The substance of that cry is recorded afterward, but God told to Jonah now, what message he was to cry aloud to it. For Jonah relates afterward, how he expostulated now with God, and that his expostulation was founded on this, that God was so merciful that He would not fulfill the judgment which He threatened. Faith was strong in Jonah, while, like Apostles "the sons of thunder," before the Day of Pentecost, he knew not" what spirit he was of." Zeal for the people and, as he doubtless thought, for the glory of God, narrowed love in him. He did not, like Moses, pray Exo 32:32, "or else blot me also out of Thy book," or like Paul, desire even to be "an anathema from Christ" Rom 9:3 for his people's sake, so that there might be more to love his Lord. His zeal was directed, like that of the rebuked Apostles, against others, and so it too was rebuked. But his faith was strong. He shrank back from the office, as believing, not as doubting, the might of God. He thought nothing of preaching, amid that multitude of wild warriors, the stern message of God. He was willing, alone, to confront the violence of a city of 600,000, whose characteristic was violence. He was ready, at God's bidding, to enter what Nahum speaks of as a den of lions Nah 2:11-12; "The dwelling of the lions and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses." He feared not the fierceness of their lion-nature, but God's tenderness, and lest that tenderness should be the destruction of his own people.
Their wickedness is come up before Me - So God said to Cain, Gen 4:10. "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto Me from the ground:" and of Sodom Gen 18:20 :21, "The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, because their sin is very grievous; the cry of it is come up unto Me." The "wickedness" is not the mere mass of human sin, of which it is said Jo1 5:19, "the whole world lieth in wickedness," but evil-doing toward others. This was the cause of the final sentence on Nineveh, with which Nahum closes his prophecy, "upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?" It bad been assigned as the ground of the judgment on Israel through Nineveh Hos 10:14-15. "So shall Bethel do unto you, on account of the wickedness of your wickedness." It was the ground of the destruction by the flood Gen 6:5. "God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth." God represents Himself, the Great Judge, as sitting on His Throne in heaven, Unseen but All-seeing, to whom the wickedness and oppressiveness of man against man "goes up," appealing for His sentence against the oppressor. The cause seems ofttimes long in pleading. God is long-suffering with the oppressor too, that if so be, he may repent. So would a greater good come to the oppressed also, if the wolf became a lamb. But meanwhile, " every iniquity has its own voice at the hidden judgment seat of God." Mercy itself calls for vengeance on the unmerciful.
But (And) Jonah rose up to flee ... from the presence of the Lord - literally "from being before the Lord." Jonah knew well, that man could not escape from the presence of God, whom he knew as the Self-existing One, He who alone is, the Maker of heaven, earth and sea. He did not "flee" then "from His presence," knowing well what David said Psa 139:7, Psa 139:9-10, "whither shall I go from Thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from Thy presence? If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall Thy hand lead me and Thy right hand shall hold me." Jonah fled, not from God's presence, but from standing before him, as His servant and minister. He refused God's service, because, as he himself tells God afterward Jon 4:2, he knew what it would end in, and he misliked it.
So he acted, as people often do, who dislike God's commands. He set about removing himself as far as possible from being under the influence of God, and from the place where he "could" fulfill them. God commanded him to go to Nineveh, which lay northeast from his home; and he instantly set himself to flee to the then furthermost west. Holy Scripture sets the rebellion before us in its full nakedness. "The word of the Lord came unto Jonah, go to Nineveh, and Jonah rose up;" he did something instantly, as the consequence of God's command. He "rose up," not as other prophets, to obey, but to disobey; and that, not slowly nor irresolutely, but "to flee, from" standing "before the Lord." He renounced his office. So when our Lord came in the flesh, those who found what He said to be "hard sayings," went away from Him, "and walked no more with Him" Joh 6:66. So the rich "young man went away sorrowful Mat 19:22, for he had great possessions."
They were perhaps afraid of trusting themselves in His presence; or they were ashamed of staying there, and not doing what He said. So men, when God secretly calls them to prayer, go and immerse themselves in business; when, in solitude, He says to their souls something which they do not like, they escape His Voice in a throng. If He calls them to make sacrifices for His poor, they order themselves a new dress or some fresh sumptuousness or self-indulgence; if to celibacy, they engage themselves to marry immediately; or, contrariwise, if He calls them not to do a thing, they do it at once, to make an end of their struggle and their obedience; to put obedience out of their power; to enter themselves on a course of disobedience. Jonah, then, in this part of his history, is the image of those who, when God calls them, disobey His call, and how He deals with them, when he does not abandon them. He lets them have their way for a time, encompasses them with difficulties, so that they shall "flee back from God displeased to God appeased."
"The whole wisdom, the whole bliss, the whole of man lies in this, to learn what God wills him to do, in what state of life, calling, duties, profession, employment, He wills him to serve Him." God sent each one of us into the world, to fulfill his own definite duties, and, through His grace, to attain to our own perfection in and through fulfilling them. He did not create us at random, to pass through the world, doing whatever self-will or our own pleasure leads us to, but to fulfill His will. This will of His, if we obey His earlier calls, and seek Him by prayer, in obedience, self-subdual, humility, thoughtfulness, He makes known to each by His own secret drawings, and, in absence of these, at times by His Providence or human means. And then , "to follow Him is a token of predestination." It is to place ourselves in that order of things, that pathway to our eternal mansion, for which God created us, and which God created for us.
So Jesus says Joh 10:27-28, "My sheep hear My voice and I know them, and they follow Me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of My Hand." In these ways, God has foreordained for us all the graces which we need; in these, we shall be free from all temptations which might be too hard for us, in which our own special weakness would be most exposed. Those ways, which people choose out of mere natural taste or fancy, are mostly those which expose them to the greatest peril of sin and damnation. For they choose them, just because such pursuits flatter most their own inclinations, and give scope to their natural strength and their moral weakness. So Jonah, disliking a duty, which God gave him to fulfill, separated himself from His service, forfeited his past calling, lost, as far as in him lay, his place among "the goodly fellowship of the prophets," and, but for God's overtaking grace, would have ended his days among the disobedient. As in Holy Scripture, David stands alone of saints, who had been after their calling, bloodstained; as the penitent robber stands alone converted in death; as Peter stands singly, recalled after denying his Lord; so Jonah stands, the one prophet, who, having obeyed and then rebelled, was constrained by the overpowering providence and love of God, to return and serve Him.
"Being a prophet, Jonah could not be ignorant of the mind of God, that, according to His great Wisdom and His unsearchable judgments and His untraceable and incomprehensible ways, He, through the threat, was providing for the Ninevites that they should not suffer the things threatened. To think that Jonah hoped to hide himself in the sea and elude by flight the great Eye of God, were altogether absurd and ignorant, which should not be believed, I say not of a prophet, but of no other sensible person who had any moderate knowledge of God and His supreme power. Jonah knew all this better than anyone, that, planning his flight, he changed his place, but did not flee God. For this could no man do, either by hiding himself in the bosom of the earth or depths of the sea or ascending (if possible) with wings into the air, or entering the lowest hell, or encircled with thick clouds, or taking any other counsel to secure his flight.
This, above all things and alone, can neither be escaped nor resisted, God. When He willeth to hold and grasp in His Hand, He overtaketh the swift, baffleth the intelligent, overthroweth the strong, boweth the lofty, tameth rashness, subdueth might. He who threatened to others the mighty Hand of God, was not himself ignorant of nor thought to flee, God. Let us not believe this. But since he saw the fall of Israel and perceived that the prophetic grace would pass over to the Gentiles, he withdrew himself from the office of preaching, and put off the command." "The prophet knoweth, the Holy Spirit teaching him, that the repentance of the Gentiles is the ruin of the Jews. A lover then of his country, he does not so much envy the deliverance of Nineveh, as will that his own country should not perish. - Seeing too that his fellow-prophets are sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to excite the people to repentance, and that Balaam the soothsayer too prophesied of the salvation of Israel, he grieveth that he alone is chosen to be sent to the Assyrians, the enemies of Israel, and to that greatest city of the enemies where was idolatry and ignorance of God. Yet more he feared lest they, on occasion of his preaching, being converted to repentance, Israel should be wholly forsaken. For he knew by the same Spirit whereby the preaching to the Gentiles was entrusted to him, that the house of Israel would then perish; and he feared that what was at one time to be, should take place in his own time." "The flight of the prophet may also be referred to that of man in general who, despising the commands of God, departed from Him and gave himself to the world, where subsequently, through the storms of ill and the wreck of the whole world raging against him, he was compelled to feel the presence of God, and to return to Him whom he had fled. Whence we understand, that those things also which men think for their good, when against the will of God, are turned to destruction; and help not only does not benefit those to whom it is given, but those too who give it, are alike crushed. As we read that Egypt was conquered by the Assyrians, because it helped Israel against the will of God. The ship is emperiled which had received the emperiled; a tempest arises in a calm; nothing is secure, when God is against us."
Tarshish - , named after one of the sons of Javan, Gen 10:4. was an ancient merchant city of Spain, once proverbial for its wealth (Psa 72:10. Strabo iii. 2. 14), which supplied Judaea with silver Jer 10:9, Tyre with "all manner of riches," with iron also, tin, lead. Eze 27:12, Eze 27:25. It was known to the Greeks and Romans, as (with a harder pronunciation) Tartessus; but in our first century, it had either ceased to be, or was known under some other name. Ships destined for a voyage, at that time, so long, and built for carrying merchandise, were naturally among the largest then constructed. "Ships of Tarshish" corresponded to the "East-Indiamen" which some of us remember. The breaking of "ships of Tarshish by the East Wind" Psa 48:7 is, on account of their size and general safety, instanced as a special token of the interposition of God.
And went down to Joppa - Joppa, now Jaffa (Haifa), was the one well-known port of Israel on the Mediterranean. There the cedars were brought from Lebanon for both the first and second temple Ch2 3:16; Ezr 2:7. Simon the Maccabee (1 Macc. 14:5) "took it again for a haven, and made an entrance to the isles of the sea." It was subsequently destroyed by the Romans, as a pirate-haven. (Josephus, B. J. iii. 9. 3, and Strabo xvi. 2. 28.) At a later time, all describe it as an unsafe haven. Perhaps the shore changed, since the rings, to which Andromeda was tabled to have been fastened, and which probably were once used to moor vessels, were high above the sea. Perhaps, like the Channel Islands, the navigation was safe to those who knew the coast, unsafe to others. To this port Jonah "went down" from his native country, the mountain district of Zabulon. Perhaps it was not at this time in the hands of Israel. At least, the sailors were pagan. He "went down," as the man who fell among the thieves, is said to "have gone down from Jerusalem to Jericho." Luk 10:30. He "went down" from the place which God honored by His presence and protection.
And he paid the fare thereof - Jonah describes circumstantially, how he took every step to his end. He went down, found a strongly built ship going where he wished, paid his fare, embarked. He seemed now to have done all. He had severed himself from the country where his office lay. He had no further step to take. Winds and waves would do the rest. He had but to be still. He went, only to be brought back again.
"Sin brings our soul into much senselessness. For as those overtaken by heaviness of head and drunkenness, are borne on simply and at random, and, be there pit or precipice or whatever else below them, they fall into it unawares; so too, they who fall into sin, intoxicated by their desire of the object, know not what they do, see nothing before them, present or future. Tell me, Fleest thou the Lord? Wait then a little, and thou shalt learn from the event, that thou canst not escape the hands of His servant, the sea. For as soon as he embarked, it too roused its waves and raised them up on high; and as a faithful servant, finding her fellow-slave stealing some of his master's property, ceases not from giving endless trouble to those who take him in, until she recover him, so too the sea, finding and recognizing her fellow-servant, harasses the sailors unceasingly, raging, roaring, not dragging them to a tribunal but threatening to sink the vessel with all its unless they restore to her, her fellow-servant."
"The sinner "arises," because, will he, nill he, toil he must. If he shrinks from the way of God, because it is hard, he may not yet be idle. There is the way of ambition, of covetousness, of pleasure, to be trodden, which certainly are far harder. 'We wearied ourselves (Wisdom 5:7),' say the wicked, 'in the way of wickedness and destruction, yea, we have gone through deserts where there lay no way; but the way of the Lord we have not known.' Jonah would not arise, to go to Nineveh at God's command; yet he must needs arise, to flee to Tarshish from before the presence of God. What good can he have who fleeth the Good? what light, who willingly forsaketh the Light? "He goes down to Joppa." Wherever thou turnest, if thou depart from the will of God, thou goest down. Whatever glory, riches, power, honors, thou gainest, thou risest not a whit; the more thou advancest, while turned from God, the deeper and deeper thou goest down. Yet all these things are not had, without paying the price. At a price and with toil, he obtains what he desires; he receives nothing gratis, but, at great price purchases to himself storms, griefs, peril. There arises a great tempest in the sea, when various contradictory passions arise in the heart of the sinner, which take from him all tranquility and joy. There is a tempest in the sea, when God sends strong and dangerous disease, whereby the frame is in peril of being broken. There is a tempest in the sea, when, thro' rivals or competitors for the same pleasures, or the injured, or the civil magistrate, his guilt is discovered, he is laden with infamy and odium, punished, withheld from his wonted pleasures. Psa 107:23-27. "They who go down to the sea of this world, and do business in mighty waters - their soul melteth away because of trouble; they reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and all their wisdom is swallowed up."
But (And) the Lord sent out - (literally 'cast along'). Jonah had done his all. Now God's part began. This He expresses by the word, "And." Jonah took "his" measures, "and" now God takes "His." He had let him have his way, as He often deals with those who rebel against Him. He lets them have their way up to a certain point. He waits, in the tranquility of His Almightiness, until they have completed their preparations; and then, when man has ended, He begins, that man may see the more that it is His doing . "He takes those who flee from Him in their flight, the wise in their counsels, sinners in their conceits and sins, and draws them back to Himself and compels them to return. Jonah thought to find rest in the sea, and lo! a tempest." Probably, God summoned back Jonah, as soon as he had completed all on his part, and sent the tempest, soon after he left the shore.
At least, such tempests often swept along that shore, and were known by their own special name, like the Euroclydon off Crete. Jonah too alone had gone down below deck to sleep, and, when the storm came, the mariners thought it possible to put back. Josephus says of that shore, "Joppa having by nature no haven, for it ends in a rough shore, mostly abrupt, but for a short space having projections, i. e., deep rocks and cliffs advancing into the sea, inclining on either side toward each other (where the traces of the chains of Andromeda yet shown accredit the antiquity of the fable,) and the north wind beating right on the shore, and dashing the high waves against the rocks which receive them, makes the station there a harborless sea. As those from Joppa were tossing here, a strong wind (called by those who sail here, the black north wind) falls upon them at daybreak, dashing straightway some of the ships against each other, some against the rocks, and some, forcing their way against the waves to the open sea, (for they fear the rocky shore ...) the breakers towering above them, sank."
The ship was like - (literally 'thought') To be broken Perhaps Jonah means by this very vivid image to exhibit the more his own dullness. He ascribes, as it were, to the ship a sense of its own danger, as she heaved and rolled and creaked and quivered under the weight of the storm which lay on her, and her masts groaned, and her yard-arms shivered. To the awakened conscience everything seems to have been alive to God's displeasure, except itself.
And cried, every man unto his God - They did what they could. "Not knowing the truth, they yet know of a Providence, and, amid religious error, know that there is an Object of reverence." In ignorance they had received one who offended God. And now God, "whom they ignorantly worshiped" Act 17:23, while they cried to the gods, who, they thought, disposed of them, heard them. They escaped with the loss of their wares, but God saved their lives and revealed Himself to them. God hears ignorant prayer, when ignorance is not willful and sin.
To lighten it of them - , literally "to lighten from against them, to lighten" what was so much "against them," what so oppressed them. "They thought that the ship was weighed down by its wonted lading, and they knew not that the whole weight was that of the fugitive prophet." "The sailors cast forth their wares," but the ship was not lightened. For the whole weight still remained, the body of the prophet, that heavy burden, not from the nature of the body, but from the burden of sin. For nothing is so onerous and heavy as sin and disobedience. Whence also Zechariah Zac 5:7 represented it under the image of lead. And David, describing its nature, said Psa 38:4, "my wickednesses are gone over my head; as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me." And Christ cried aloud to those who lived in many sins, Mat 11:28. "Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will refresh you."
Jonah was gone down - , probably before the beginning of the storm, not simply before the lightening of the vessel. He could hardly have fallen asleep "then." A pagan ship was a strange place for a prophet of God, not as a prophet, but as a fugitive; and so, probably, ashamed of what he had completed, he had withdrawn from sight and notice. He did not embolden himself in his sin, but shrank into himself. The conscience most commonly awakes, when the sin is done. It stands aghast as itself; but Satan, if he can, cuts off its retreat. Jonah had no retreat now, unless God had made one.
And was fast asleep - The journey to Joppa had been long and hurried; he had "fled." Sorrow and remorse completed what fatigue began. Perhaps he had given himself up to sleep, to dull his conscience. For it is said, "he lay down and was fast asleep." Grief produces sleep; from where it is said of the apostles in the night before the Lord's Passion, when Jesus "rose up from prayer and was come to His disciples, He found them sleeping for sorrow" Luk 22:45 . "Jonah slept heavily. Deep was the sleep, but it was not of pleasure but of grief; not of heartlessness, but of heavy-heartedness. For well-disposed servants soon feel their sins, as did he. For when the sin has been done, then he knows its frightfulness. For such is sin. When born, it awakens pangs in the soul which bare it, contrary to the law of our nature. For so soon as we are born, we end the travail-pangs; but sin, so soon as born, rends with pangs the thoughts which conceived it." Jonah was in a deep sleep, a sleep by which he was fast held and bound; a sleep as deep as that from which Sisera never woke. Had God allowed the ship to sink, the memory of Jonah would have been that of the fugitive prophet. As it is, his deep sleep stands as an image of the lethargy of sin . "This most deep sleep of Jonah signifies a man torpid and slumbering in error, to whom it sufficed not to flee from the face of God, but his mind, drowned in a stupor and not knowing the displeasure of God, lies asleep, steeped in security."
What meanest thou? - or rather, "what aileth thee?" (literally "what is to thee?") The shipmaster speaks of it (as it was) as a sort of disease, that he should be thus asleep in the common peril. "The shipmaster," charged, as he by office was, with the common weal of those on board, would, in the common peril, have one common prayer. It was the prophet's office to call the pagan to prayers and to calling upon God. God reproved the Scribes and Pharisees by the mouth of the children who "cried Hosanna" Mat 21:15; Jonah by the shipmaster; David by Abigail; Sa1 25:32-34; Naaman by his servants. Now too he reproves worldly priests by the devotion of laymen, sceptic intellect by the simplicity of faith.
If so be that God will think upon us - , (literally "for us") i. e., for good; as David says, Psa 40:17. "I am poor and needy, the Lord thinketh upon" (literally "for") "me." Their calling upon their own gods had failed them. Perhaps the shipmaster had seen something special about Jonah, his manner, or his prophet's garb. He does not only call Jonah's God, "thy" God, as Darius says to Daniel "thy God" Dan 6:20, but also "the God," acknowledging the God whom Jonah worshiped, to be "the God." It is not any pagan prayer which he asks Jonah to offer. It is the prayer of the creature in its need to God who can help; but knowing its own ill-desert, and the separation between itself and God, it knows not whether He will help it. So David says Psa 25:7, "Remember not the sins of my youth nor my transgressions; according to Thy mercy remember Thou me for Thy goodness' sake, O Lord."
"The shipmaster knew from experience, that it was no common storm, that the surges were an infliction borne down from God, and above human skill, and that there was no good in the master's skill. For the state of things needed another Master who ordereth the heavens, and craved the guidance from on high. So then they too left oars, sails, cables, gave their hands rest from rowing, and stretched them to heaven and called on God."
Come, and let us cast lots - Jonah too had probably prayed, and his prayers too were not heard. Probably, too, the storm had some unusual character about it, the suddenness with which it burst upon them, its violence, the quarter from where it came, its whirlwind force . "They knew the nature of the sea, and, as experienced sailors, were acquainted with the character of wind and storm, and had these waves been such as they had known before, they would never have sought by lot for the author of the threatened wreck, or, by a thing uncertain, sought to escape certain peril." God, who sent the storm to arrest Jonah and to cause him to be cast into the sea, provided that its character should set the mariners on divining, why it came. Even when working great miracles, God brings about, through man, all the forerunning events, all but the last act, in which He puts forth His might. As, in His people, he directed the lot to fall upon Achan or upon Jonathan, so here He overruled the lots of the pagan sailors to accomplish His end. " We must not, on this precedent, immediately trust in lots, or unite with this testimony that from the Acts of the Apostles, when Matthias was by lot elected to the apostolate, since the privileges of individuals cannot form a common law." "Lots," according to the ends for which they were cast, were for:
i) The lot for dividing is not wrong if not used,
1) "without any necessity, for this would be to tempt God:"
2) "if in case of necessity, not without reverence of God, as if Holy Scripture were used for an earthly end," as in determining any secular matter by opening the Bible:
3) for objects which ought to be decided otherwise, (as, an office ought to be given to the fittest:)
4) in dependence upon any other than God Pro 16:33. "The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing of it is the Lord's." So then they are lawful "in secular things which cannot otherwise be conveniently distributed," or when there is no apparent reason why, in any advantage or disadvantage, one should be preferred to another." Augustine even allows that, in a time of plague or persecution, the lot might be cast to decide who should remain to administer the sacraments to the people, lest, on the one side, all should be taken away, or, on the other, the Church be deserted.
ii.) The lot for consulting, i. e., to decide what one should do, is wrong, unless in a matter of mere indifference, or under inspiration of God, or in some extreme necessity where all human means fail.
iii.) The lot for divining, i. e., to learn truth, whether of things present or future, of which we can have no human knowledge, is wrong, except by direct inspiration of God. For it is either to tempt God who has not promised so to reveal things, or, against God, to seek superhuman knowledge by ways unsanctioned by Him. Satan may readily mix himself unknown in such inquiries, as in mesmerism. Forbidden ground is his own province.
God overruled the lot in the case of Jonah, as He did the sign which the Philistines sought . "He made the heifers take the way to Bethshemesh, that the Philistines might know that the plague came to them, not by chance, but from Hilmself" . "The fugitive (Jonah) was taken by lot, not by any virtue of the lots, especially the lots of pagan, but by the will of Him who guided the uncertain lots" "The lot betrayed the culprit. Yet not even thus did they cast him over; but, even while such a tumult and storm lay on them, they held, as it were, a court in the vessel, as though in entire peace, and allowed him a hearing and defense, and sifted everything accurately, as men who were to give account of their judgment. Hear them sifting all as in a court - The roaring sea accused him; the lot convicted and witnessed against him, yet not even thus did they pronounce against him - until the accused should be the accuser of his own sin. The sailors, uneducated, untaught, imitated the good order of courts. When the sea scarcely allowed them to breathe, whence such forethought about the prophet? By the disposal of God. For God by all this instructed the prophet to be humane and mild, all but saying aloud to him; 'Imitate these uninstructed sailors. They think not lightly of one soul, nor are unsparing as to one body, thine own. But thou, for thy part, gavest up a whole city with so many myriads. They, discovering thee to be the cause of the evils which befell them, did not even thus hurry to condemn thee. Thou, having nothing whereof to accuse the Ninevites, didst sink and destroy them. Thou, when I bade thee go and by thy preaching call them to repentance, obeyedst not; these, untaught, do all, compass all, in order to recover thee, already condemned, from punishment.'"
Tell us, for whose cause - Literally "for what to whom." It may be that they thought that Jonah had been guilty toward some other. The lot had pointed him out. The mariners, still fearing to do wrong, ask him thronged questions, to know why the anger of God followed him; "what" hast thou done "to whom?" "what thine occupation?" i. e., either his ordinary occupation, whether it was displeasing to God? or this particular business in which he was engaged, and for which he had come on board. Questions so thronged have been admired in human poetry, Jerome says. For it is true to nature. They think that some one of them will draw forth the answer which they wish. It may be that they thought that his country, or people, or parents, were under the displeasure of God. But perhaps, more naturally, they wished to "know all about him," as people say. These questions must have gone home to Jonah's conscience. "What is thy business?" The office of prophet which he had left. "Whence comest thou?" From standing before God, as His minister. "What thy country? of what people art thou?" The people of God, whom he had quitted for pagan; not to win them to God, as He commanded; but, not knowing what they did, to abet him in his flight.
What is thine occupation? - They should ask themselves, who have Jonah's office to speak in the name of God, and preach repentance . "What should be thy business, who hast consecrated thyself wholly to God, whom God has loaded with daily benefits? who approachest to Him as to a Friend? "What is thy business?" To live for God, to despise the things of earth, to behold the things of heaven," to lead others heavenward.
Jonah answers simply the central point to which all these questions tended:
I am an Hebrew - This was the name by which Israel was known to foreigners. It is used in the Old Testament, only when they are spoken of by foreigners, or speak of themselves to foreigners, or when the sacred writers mention them in contrast with foreigners . So Joseph spoke of his land Gen 40:15, and the Hebrew midwives Exo 1:19, and Moses' sister Exo 2:7, and God in His commission to Moses Exo 3:18; Exo 7:16; Exo 9:1 as to Pharaoh, and Moses in fulfilling it Exo 5:3. They had the name, as having passed the River Euphrates, "emigrants." The title might serve to remind themselves, that they were "strangers" and "pilgrims," Heb 11:13. whose fathers had left their home at God's command and for God , "passers by, through this world to death, and through death to immortality."
And I fear the Lord - , i. e., I am a worshiper of Him, most commonly, one who habitually stands in awe of Him, and so one who stands in awe of sin too. For none really fear God, none fear Him as sons, who do not fear Him in act. To be afraid of God is not to fear Him. To be afraid of God keeps men away from God; to fear God draws them to Him. Here, however, Jonah probably meant to tell them, that the Object of his fear and worship was the One Self-existing God, He who alone is, who made all things, in whose hands are all things. He had told them before, that he had fled "from being before Yahweh." They had not thought anything of this, for they thought of Yahweh, only as the God of the Jews. Now he adds, that He, Whose service he had thus forsaken, was "the God of heaven, Who made the sea and dry land," that sea, whose raging terrified them and threatened their lives. The title, "the God of heaven," asserts the doctrine of the creation of the heavens by God, and His supremacy.
Hence, Abraham uses it to his servant Gen 24:7, and Jonah to the pagan mariners, and Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar Dan 2:37, Dan 2:44; and Cyrus in acknowledging God in his proclamation Ch2 36:23; Ezr 1:2. After his example, it is used in the decrees of Darius Ezr 6:9-10 and Artaxerxes Ezr 7:12, Ezr 7:21, Ezr 7:23, and the returned exiles use it in giving account of their building the temple to the Governor Ezr 5:11-12. Perhaps, from the habit of contact with the pagan, it is used once by Daniel Dan 2:18 and by Nehemiah Neh 1:4-5; Neh 2:4, Neh 2:20. Melchizedek, not perhaps being acquainted with the special name, Yahweh, blessed Abraham in the name of "God, the Possessor" or "Creator of heaven and earth" Gen 14:19, i. e., of all that is. Jonah, by using it, at once taught the sailors that there is One Lord of all, and why this evil had fallen on them, because they had himself with them, the renegade servant of God. "When Jonah said this, he indeed feared God and repented of his sin. If he lost filial fear by fleeing and disobeying, he recovered it by repentance."
Then were the men exceedingly afraid - Before, they had feared the tempest and the loss of their lives. Now they feared God. They feared, not the creature but the Creator. They knew that what they had feared was the doing of His Almightiness. They felt how awesome a thing it was to be in His Hands. Such fear is the beginning of conversion, when people turn from dwelling on the distresses which surround them, to God who sent them.
Why hast thou done this? - They are words of amazement and wonder. Why hast thou not obeyed so great a God, and how thoughtest thou to escape the hand of the Creator ? "What is the mystery of thy flight? Why did one, who feared God and had revelations from God, flee, sooner than go to fulfill them? Why did the worshiper of the One true God depart from his God?" "A servant flee from his Lord, a son from his father, man from his God!" The inconsistency of believers is the marvel of the young Christian, the repulsion of those without, the hardening of the unbeliever. If people really believed in eternity, how could they be thus immersed in things of time? If they believed in hell, how could they so hurry there? If they believed that God died for them, how could they so requite Him? Faith without love, knowledge without obedience, conscious dependence and rebellion, to be favored by God yet to despise His favor, are the strangest marvels of this mysterious world.
All nature seems to cry out to and against the unfaithful Christian, "why hast thou done this?" And what a why it is! A scoffer has recently said so truthfully : "Avowed scepticism cannot do a tenth part of the injury to practical faith, that the constant spectacle of the huge mass of worldly unreal belief does." It is nothing strange, that the world or unsanctified intellect should reject the Gospel. It is a thing of course, unless it be converted. But, to know, to believe, and to DISOBEY! To disobey God, in the name of God. To propose to halve the living Gospel, as the woman who had killed her child Kg1 3:26, and to think that the poor quivering remnants would be the living Gospel anymore! As though the will of God might, like those lower forms of His animal creation, be divided endlessly, and, keep what fragments we will, it would still be a living whole, a vessel of His Spirit! Such unrealities and inconsistencies would be a sore trial of faith, had not Jesus, who (cf. Joh 2:25), "knew what is in man," forewarned us that it should be so. The scandals against the Gospel, so contrary to all human opinion, are only all the more a testimony to the divine knowledge of the Redeemer.
What shall we do unto thee? - They knew him to be a prophet; they ask him the mind of his God. The lots had marked out Jonah as the cause of the storm; Jonah had himself admitted it, and that the storm was for "his" cause, and came from "his" God . "Great was he who fled, greater He who required him. They dare not give him up; they cannot conceal him. They blame the fault; they confess their fear; they ask "him" the remedy, who was the author of the sin. If it was faulty to receive thee, what can we do, that God should not be angered? It is thine to direct; ours, to obey."
The sea wrought and was tempestuous - , literally "was going and whirling." It was not only increasingly tempestuous, but, like a thing alive and obeying its Master's will, it was holding on its course, its wild waves tossing themselves, and marching on like battalions, marshalled, arrayed for the end for which they were sent, pursuing and demanding the runaway slave of God . "It was going, as it was bidden; it was going to avenge its Lord; it was going, pursuing the fugitive prophet. It was swelling every moment, and, as though the sailors were too tardy, was rising in yet greater surges, shewing that the vengeance of the Creator admitted not of delay."
Take me up, and cast me into the sea - Neither might Jonah have said this, nor might the sailors have obeyed it, without the command of God. Jonah might will alone to perish, who had alone offended; but, without the command of God, the Giver of life, neither Jonah nor the sailors might dispose of the life of Jonah. But God willed that Jonah should be cast into the sea - where he had gone for refuge - that (Wisdom 11:16) wherewithal he had "sinned, by the same also he might be punished" as a man; and, as a prophet, that he might, in his three days' burial, prefigure Him who, after His Resurrection, should convert, not Nineveh, but the world, the cry of whose wickedness went up to God.
For I know that for my sake - o "In that he says, "I know," he marks that he had a revelation; in that he says, "this great storm," he marks the need which lay on those who cast him into the sea."
The men rowed hard - , literally "dug." The word, like our "plowed the main," describes the great efforts which they made. Amid the violence of the storm, they had furled their sails. These were worse than useless. The wind was off shore, since by rowing alpine they hoped to get back to it. They put their oars well and firmly in the sea, and turned up the water, as men turn up earth by digging. But in vain! God willed it not. The sea went on its way, as before. In the description of the deluge, it is repeated Gen 7:17-18, "the waters increased and bare up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth; the waters increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters." The waters raged and swelled, drowned the whole world, yet only bore up the ark, as a steed bears its rider: man was still, the waters obeyed. In this tempest, on the contrary, man strove, but, instead of the peace of the ark, the burden is, the violence of the tempest; "the sea wrought and was tempestuous against them" . "The prophet had pronounced sentence against himself, but they would not lay hands upon him, striving hard to get back to land, and escape the risk of bloodshed, willing to lose life rather than cause its loss. O what a change was there. The people who had served God, said, Crucify Him, Crucify Him! These are bidden to put to death; the sea rageth; the tempest commandeth; and they are careless its to their own safety, while anxious about another's."
Wherefore (And) they cried unto the Lord - "They cried" no more "each man to his god," but to the one God, whom Jonah had made known to them; and to Him they cried with an earnest submissive, cry, repeating the words of beseeching, as men, do in great earnestness; "we beseech Thee, O Lord, let us not, we beseech Thee, perish for the life of this man" (i. e., as a penalty for taking it, as it is said, Sa2 14:7. "we will slay him for the life of his brother," and, Deu 19:21. "life for life.") They seem to have known what is said, Gen 9:5-6. "your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man. Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made He man" , "Do not these words of the sailors seem to us to be the confession of Pilate, who washed his hands, and said, 'I am clean from the blood of this Man?' The Gentiles would not that Christ should perish; they protest that His Blood is innocent."
And lay not upon us innocent blood - innocent as to them, although, as to this thing, guilty before God, and yet, as to God also, more innocent, they would think, than they. For, strange as this was, one disobedience, their whole life, they now knew, was disobedience to God; His life was but one act in a life of obedience. If God so punishes one sin of the holy Pe1 4:18, "where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?" Terrible to the awakened conscience are God's chastenings on some (as it seems) single offence of those whom He loves.
For Thou, Lord, (Who knowest the hearts of all men,) hast done, as it pleased Thee - Wonderful, concise, confession of faith in these new converts! Psalmists said it, Psa 135:6; Psa 115:3. "Whatsoever God willeth, that doeth He in heaven and in earth, in the sea and in all deep places." But these had but just known God, and they resolve the whole mystery of man's agency and God's Providence into the three simple words , as (Thou) "willedst" (Thou) "didst." "That we took him aboard, that the storm ariseth, that the winds rage, that the billows lift themselves, that the fugitive is betrayed by the lot, that he points out what is to be done, it is of Thy will, O Lord" . "The tempest itself speaketh, that 'Thou, Lord, hast done as Thou willedst.' Thy will is fulfilled by our hands." "Observe the counsel of God, that, of his own will, not by violence or by necessity, should he be cast into the sea. For the casting of Jonah into the sea signified the entrance of Christ into the bitterness of the Passion, which He took upon Himself of His own will, not of necessity. Isa 53:7. "He was offered up, and He willingly submitted Himself." And as those who sailed with Jonah were delivered, so the faithful in the Passion of Christ. Joh 18:8-9. "If ye seek Me, let these go their way, that the saying might be fulfilled which" Jesus spake, 'Of them which Thou gavest Me, I have lost none. '"
They took up Jonah - o "He does not say, 'laid hold on him', nor 'came upon him' but 'lifted' him; as it were, bearing him with respect and honor, they cast him into the sea, not resisting, but yielding himself to their will."
The sea ceased (literally "stood") from his raging - Ordinarily, the waves still swell, when the wind has ceased. The sea, when it had received Jonah, was hushed at once, to show that God alone raised and quelled it. It "stood" still, like a servant, when it had accomplished its mission. God, who at all times saith to it Job 38:11, "Hitherto shalt thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed," now unseen, as afterward in the flesh Mat 8:26, "rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm" . "If we consider the errors of the world before the Passion of Christ, and the conflicting blasts of diverse doctrines, and the vessel, and the whole race of man, i. e., the creature of the Lord, imperiled, and, after His Passion, the tranquility of faith and the peace of the world and the security of all things and the conversion to God, we shall see how, after Jonah was cast in, the sea stood from its raging" . "Jonah, in the sea, a fugitive, shipwrecked, dead, sayeth the tempest-tossed vessel; he sayeth the pagan, aforetime tossed to and fro by the error of the world into divers opinions. And Hosea, Amos, Isaiah, Joel, who prophesied at the same time, could not amend the people in Judaea; whence it appeared that the breakers could not be calmed, save by the death of (Him typified by) the fugitive."
And the men feared the Lord with a great fear - because, from the tranquility of the sea and the ceasing of the tempest, they saw that the prophet's words were true. This great miracle completed the conversion of the mariners. God had removed all human cause of fear; and yet, in the same words as before, he says, "they feared a great fear;" but he adds, "the Lord." It was the great fear, with which even the disciples of Jesus feared, when they saw the miracles which He did, which made even Peter say, Luk 5:8. "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord." Events full of wonder had thronged upon them; things beyond nature, and contrary to nature; tidings which betokened His presence, Who had all things in His hands. They had seen "wind and storm fulfilling His word" Psa 148:8, and, forerunners of the fishermen of Galilee, knowing full well from their own experience that this was above nature, they felt a great awe of God. So He commanded His people, "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God Deu 6:13, for thy good always" Deu 6:24.
And offered a sacrifice - Doubtless, as it was a large decked vessel and bound on a long voyage, they had live creatures on board, which they could offer in sacrifice. But this was not enough for their thankfulness; "they vowed vows." They promised that they would do thereafter what they could not do then ; "that they would never depart from Him whom they had begun to worship." This was true love, not to be content with aught which they could do, but to stretch forward in thought to an abiding and enlarged obedience, as God should enable them. And so they were doubtless enrolled among the people of God, firstfruits from among the pagan, won to God Who overrules all things, through the disobedience and repentance of His prophet. Perhaps, they were the first preachers among the pagan, and their account of their own wonderful deliverance prepared the way for Jonah's mission to Nineveh.
Now the Lord had (literally "And the Lord") prepared - Jonah (as appears from his thanksgiving) was not swallowed at once, but sank to the bottom of the sea, God preserving him in life there by miracle, as he did in the fish's belly. Then, when the seaweed was twined around his head, and he seemed to be already buried until the sea should give up her dead, "God prepared the fish to swallow Jonah" . "God could as easily have kept Jonah alive in the sea as in the fish's belly, but, in order to prefigure the burial of the Lord, He willed him to be within the fish whose belly was as a grave." Jonah, does not say what fish it was; and our Lord too used a name, signifying only one of the very largest fish. Yet it was no greater miracle to create a fish which should swallow Jonah, than to preserve him alive when swallowed . "The infant is buried, as it were, in the womb of its mother; it cannot breathe, and yet, thus too, it liveth and is preserved, wonderfully nurtured by the will of God." He who preserves the embryo in its living grave can maintain the life of man as easily without the outward air as with it.
The same Divine Will preserves in being the whole creation, or creates it. The same will of God keeps us in life by breathing this outward air, which preserved Jonah without it. How long will men think of God, as if He were man, of the Creator as if He were a creature, as though creation were but one intricate piece of machinery, which is to go on, ringing its regular changes until it shall be worn out, and God were shut up, as a sort of mainspring within it, who might be allowed to be a primal Force, to set it in motion, but must not be allowed to vary what He has once made? "We must admit of the agency of God," say these men when they would not in name be atheists, "once in the beginning of things, but must allow of His interference as sparingly as may be." Most wise arrangement of the creature, if it were indeed the god of its God! Most considerate provision for the non-interference of its Maker, if it could but secure that He would not interfere with it for ever! Acute physical philosophy, which, by its omnipotent word, would undo the acts of God! Heartless, senseless, sightless world, which exists in God, is upheld by God, whose every breath is an effluence of God's love, and which yet sees Him not, thanks Him not, thinks it a greater thing to hold its own frail existence from some imagined law, than to be the object of the tender personal care of the Infinite God who is Love! Poor hoodwinked souls, which would extinguish for themselves the Light of the world, in order that it may not eclipse the rushlight of their own theory!
And Jonah was in the belly of the fish - The time that Jonah was in the fish's belly was a hidden prophecy. Jonah does not explain nor point it. He tells the fact, as Scripture is accustomed to do so. Then he singles out one, the turning point in it. Doubtless in those three days and nights of darkness, Jonah (like him who after his conversion became Paul), meditated much, repented much, sorrowed much, for the love of God, that he had ever offended God, purposed future obedience, adored God with wondering awe for His judgment and mercy. It was a narrow home, in which Jonah, by miracle, was not consumed; by miracle, breathed; by miracle, retained his senses in that fetid place. Jonah doubtless, repented, marveled, adored, loved God. But, of all, God has singled out this one point, how, out of such a place, Jonah thanked God. As He delivered Paul and Silas from the prison, when they prayed with a loud voice to Him, so when Jonah, by inspiration of His Spirit, thanked Him, He delivered him.
To thank God, only in order to obtain fresh gifts from Him, would be but a refined, hypocritical form of selfishness. Such a formal act would not be thanks at all. We thank God, because we love Him, because He is so infinitely good, and so good to us, unworthy. Thanklessness shuts the door to His personal mercies to us, because it makes them the occasion of fresh sins of our's. Thankfulness sets God's essential goodness free (so to speak) to be good to us. He can do what He delights in doing, be good to us, without our making His Goodness a source of harm to us. Thanking Him through His grace, we become fit vessels for larger graces . "Blessed he who, at every gift of grace, returns to Him in whom is all fullness of graces; to whom when we show ourselves not ungrateful for gifts received, we make room in ourselves for grace, and become meet for receiving yet more." But Jonah's was that special character of thankfulness, which thanks God in the midst of calamities from which there was no human exit; and God set His seal on this sort of thankfulness, by annexing this deliverance, which has consecrated Jonah as an image of our Lord, to his wonderful act of thanksgiving.

(Water on the Brain)
|Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, Inc.|
- An excess of CSF is produced (rare)
- A blockage that doesn't allow CSF to drain properly (more commonly)
- Brain tumors
- Cancer in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
- Swelling in the CSF (such as sarcoidosis)
- Cysts in the brain
- Malformations of the brain, such as:
- Brain injuries
- Infections of the brain or the meninges can be caused by a number of agents including bacteria, mycobacteria, fungus, viruses, and parasites, such as:
- Problems with the blood vessel in the brain
- Bleeding into the brain or CSF space
- Headache (often worse when lying down or upon first awakening in the morning or with straining)
- Nausea / Vomiting
- Problems with balance
- Difficulty walking
- Poor coordination
- Personality changes
- Memory problems
- Dementia in the elderly
- Coma and death
- Slow development
- Loss of developmental milestones—no longer able to do activities they once could do
- Bulging fontanelle (soft spot on the head)
- Large head circumference
- Shunt placement (ventriculoperitoneal shunt)—a shunt (a tube placed into the brain) allows excess CSF to drain into another area, usually the abdomen. Sometimes a temporary extraventricular drain (EVD) is placed.
- Third ventriculostomy—a hole is created in an area of the brain. It allows the CSF to flow out of the area where it is building up.
- Removal of the obstruction of CSF flow. For example: removal of tumor or cyst
- Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)—This involves the insertion of a needle between the back bones in the back to remove excess CSF.
- Medicines—In some cases, medicines, such as acetazolamide (Diamox) and furosemide (Lasix), may decrease the production of CSF.
- Other medicines such as steroids or mannitol may decrease swelling around lesions that are causing obstruction of CSF flow.
- Get regular prenatal care.
- Keep your child’s vaccines up to date.
- Protect yourself or your child from head injuries.
Toxoplasmosis—foodborne illness that may be prevented by:
- Carefully cook meat and vegetables.
- Correctly clean contaminated knives and cutting surfaces.
- Avoid handling cat litter, or wear gloves when cleaning the litter box.
- Cytomegalovirus (CMV)—talk to your doctor about identifying CMV in pregnancy
- Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCV) from pet rodents (mice, rats, hamsters)—avoid rodent contact during pregnancy
- Viruses that cause chickenpox or mumps—can be prevented with vaccinations
American Neurological Association http://www.aneuroa.org/
Hydrocephalus Foundation, Inc. http://www.hydrocephalus.org/
National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke http://www.ninds.nih.gov/
Health Canada http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus Association of Canada http://www.sbhac.ca/
Goetz CG. Textbook of Clinical Neurology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Company; 2007.
Hydrocephalus in adults. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: http://www.ebscohost.com/dynamed/what.php . Updated May 25, 2012. Accessed September 20, 2012.
Hydrocephalus in children. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: http://www.ebscohost.com/dynamed/what.php . Updated May 21, 2012. Accessed September 20, 2012.
Hydrocephalus fact sheet. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke website. Available at: http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/hydrocephalus/detail%5Fhydrocephalus.htm . Updated December 16, 2011. Accessed September 20, 2012.
Kliegman R, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 18th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Company; 2007.
- Reviewer: Rimas Lukas, MD
- Review Date: 09/2012 -
- Update Date: 00/93/2012 -
This content is reviewed regularly and is updated when new and relevant evidence is made available. This information is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with questions regarding a medical condition.
Copyright © EBSCO Publishing
All rights reserved.

Malheur Cave, 13 miles east of Princeton, is 3,000 feet long, and the height varies from 8 feet near the entrance to a maximum of 20 feet far back in the cave. An underground lake fills the lower end of the cave, and fluctuation can cause the water to raise within 1,000 feet of the entrance.
The Masons, Robert Burns Masonic Lodge No. 97, used this cave extensively for ceremonies and other functions. The curious come on a year-round basic, the kids for fun, the scientists for answers to long-time questions, and the cavers, just to meet or visit an old friend. The Masons own the cave, but have left it open to whoever wishes to cool off on a hot summer day, explore its many wonders and paddle its waters, just as it was done decades ago
After passing under the low, arching entrance, the passage opens to a wide expanse of level dirt floor. The walking passage eventually reaches two rows of wooden beachers used by the Masons. After passing the cement platform, the passage begins to get more muddy and filled with boulders of breakdown from the ceiling. The point where the passage turns to water depends on the time of year and the level of the adjacent reservoir. Beneath the waters is a submerged boat and soon the waters reach to the ceiling of the passage. Divers have plumbed to the end of the cave.

Using Command Line using Visual C++ 2008
- Select Start >> All Programs >> Microsoft Visual C++ 2008 Express Edition >> Visual Studio Tools >> Visual Studio 2008 Command Prompt (Run with administrator privileges)
- Once you are in the command line, you can use any editor such as edit to write a C program.
C:> edit myprogram.c
- After written the program, to compile it, issue the command cl
C:> cl myprogram.c
- During the compilation and linking, myprogram.obj and myprogram.exe will be created.
- To run the program:
Using Visual C++ 2008 IDE
- Create an empty project by select File >> New >> Project. Select General >> Empty Project and type in the project name.
- Under folder Source, right-click Select Add >> New Item.
- Under Code, Select C++ File (.cpp), however, when you type in the name use a program name with extension .c, such as myprog.c and click Add
- You can program to type your C program. Click Save icon to save your file.
- To compile the program select Build >> Compile (Ctrl+F7).
- Please note that you cannot run the program until you have build solution.
- To build solution select Build >> Build Solution (F7)
- Running the program:
- Select Debug >> Start without debugging (Ctrl+F5)
- For any runtime error, you can debug the program as follows:
- Select Debug >> Start debugging (F5)
- Please note that during debugging, the program will show and close the console display immediately.
- To see the console display, you must run without debugging.
- The problem using Visual Studio is that many files will be created even for a simple program. All files are created inside the project folder.
- Under the project name of your program, the source code and object file is located at sub folder similar to your project name, the executable file is under sub folder debug.
Using Borland C++ Compiler Command Line Tools
- Installing and running the Command Line Tools
- Run freecommandlinetools.exe; choose the drive and folder into which you want to install the free C++Builder 5 command line tool development system.
- From the bin directory of your installation: Add “c:\Borland\Bcc55\bin” to the existing path
- Create a bcc32.cfg file which will set the compiler options for the Include and Lib paths (-I and –L switches to compiler) by adding these lines:
- Create an ilink32.cfg file which will set the linker option for the Lib path by adding this line:
- Compiling the program:

On September 19, the Cary Institute hosted a one-day conference on the impacts of tropical storms Irene and Lee on the Hudson River. Organized by the Hudson River Environmental Society, with leadership from Cary's Stuart Findlay, the forum examined how the river and estuary responded to the storms, which dropped an estimated 12-18 inches of rainfall throughout the Hudson Valley and Catskill regions. Topics included dredging, sediment transport, water quality, impacts to fish, and future management practices.
In late October, Gary Lovett will present his assessment of the health of the Catskill Forest at the second Catskill Environmental Research & Monitoring Conference (CERM). The forum brings together research on the region, to better understand the effects of extreme weather, air pollution, invasive species, biodiversity loss, and habitat fragmentation. The Catskills provide the majority of New York City's drinking water supply; CERM forums help coordinate research and identify research agendas to protect these resources.
In November, Cary Institute will hold a two-day conference examining the effects of climate change on plant, animal, and microbial species. The invitation-only event is being organized by Richard Ostfeld, Shannon LaDeau, and Amy Angert (University of British Columbia). With more than 50 invited experts, the conference's goal is to identify tools that will help lessen the negative effects of climate change on biodiversity, disease risk, extinction, and ecosystem function.

In our Torah portion this week, it is written that Jacob "came to a certain place and stayed there that night" (Gen. 28:11). The Hebrew text, however, indicates that Jacob did not just happen upon a random place, but rather that "he came to the place" -- vayifga bamakom (וַיִּפְגַּע בַּמָּקוֹם). The sages therefore wondered why the Torah states bamakom, "the place," rather than b'makom, "a place"? Moreover, the verb translated "he came" is yifga (from paga': פָּגַע), which means to encounter or to meet, suggesting that Jacob's stop was a divine appointment.
The Hebrew word makom ("place") comes from the verb kum (קוּם), meaning "to arise," and in Jewish tradition, ha-makom became a Name for God. The early sages therefore interpreted the verse to mean that Jacob actually had his dream while in Jerusalem rather than in Bethel... Indeed, the Talmud identifies "the place" Jacob encountered as Mount Moriah - the location of the Akedah - based on the language used in Genesis 22:4: "On the third day, Abraham raised his eyes and saw the place (הַמָּקוֹם) in the distance" (Sanhedrin 95b, Chulin 91b). If that is the case (i.e., if Jacob had been miraculously transported south from the mountains of Bet El to what would later be called Jerusalem), then Jacob's dream of the ladder would have functioned as a revelation of the coming glory of the resurrected Messiah - the Promised Seed whom Isaac foreshadowed and through whom all the families of the earth would be blessed. It was Yeshua, the Angel of the LORD, who came to "descend" (as the Son of Man) and to "rise" (as the resurrected LORD) to be our mediator before God (see John 1:47-51). Perhaps the Talmud makes the claim that Jacob's vision occurred in Jerusalem because Bethel later became the site for one of two idolatrous shrines (i.e., the golden calves at Bethel and Dan) established by King Jeroboam of the Northern Kingdom which he set up to discourage worship at Solomon's Temple in the City of Jerusalem (see 1 Kings 12:28-29).
At any rate, the Hebrew word for "intercessor" (i.e., mafgia: מַפְגִּיעַ) comes from the same verb (paga') mentioned in our verse. Yeshua is our Intercessor who makes "contact" with God on our behalf. Through His sacrifice for our redemption upon the cross (i.e., his greater Akedah), Yeshua created a meeting place (paga') between God and man. Therefore we see the later use of paga' in Isaiah 53:6, "...the Lord laid on him (i.e., hifgia bo: הִפְגִּיעַ בּוֹ) the iniquity of us all," indicating that our sins "fell" on Yeshua as He made intercession for us (i.e., yafgia: יַפְגִּיעַ) for us (Isa. 53:12). Because of Yeshua, God touches us and we are able to touch God... And today, our resurrected LORD "ever lives to make intercession (paga') for us" (Heb. 7:25). He is still touched by our need and sinful condition (Heb. 4:15).
כֻּלָּנוּ כַּצּאן תָּעִינוּ אִישׁ לְדַרְכּוֹ פָּנִינוּ
וַיהוָה הִפְגִּיעַ בּוֹ אֵת עֲוֹן כֻּלָּנוּ
kul·la·nu katz·on ta·i·nu, ish le·dar·ko pa·ni·nu
vadonai hif·gi·a bo, et a·von kul·la·nu
"All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned each to his own way;
but the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all."
Paga' is also a term for warfare or violent meetings, and this alludes to the collision between the powers of hell and the powers of heaven in the outworking of God's plan of redemption: "... he (i.e., the Savior/Messiah) will crush your head (ראשׁ), and you (i.e., the serpent/Satan) will crush his heel (עָקֵב)." This was the original prophecy of redemption, an encounter with evil that would provide atonement and retribution (see the "Gospel in the Garden"). Rabbi Yechezkel Levenstein, the mashgiach of Ponevezh, points out that the entire future of the Jewish people hinged on the vision given to Jacob - and in Jacob's response to it. Had he been prevented to return (i.e., through Laban's schemes to keep him in Charan), the Jewish people would have become enslaved and assimilated into the people of Aram, and ultimately the Messiah Himself would not have been born. Laban, then, embodied the desire of Satan to thwart the coming of the Promised Seed, and therefore he may be compared to Pharaoh, who likewise tried to enslave Israel in Egypt...
As I mentioned in my additional commentary on parashat Balak, Laban's worship of the serpent (nachash) led him to become one of the first enemies of the Jewish people (see "The Curses of Laban"). He tried to make Jacob a slave from the beginning, later claiming that all his descendants and possessions belonged to him (Gen. 31:43). After Jacob escaped from his clutches, Laban had a son named Beor (בְּעוֹר) who became the father of the wicked prophet Balaam (בִּלְעָם). In other words, the "cursing prophet" Balaam was none other than the grandson of diabolical Laban. Here is a diagram to help you see the relationships:
In Jewish tradition, Laban (the patriarch of Balaam) is regarded as even more wicked than the Pharaoh who enslaved the Jews in Egypt. This enmity is enshrined during the Passover Seder when we recall Laban's treachery as the one who "sought to destroy our father, Jacob." Spiritually understood, Laban's hatred of Jacob (i.e., Israel) was intended to eradicate the Jewish nation at the very beginning. Had Laban succeeded, Israel would have been assimilated and disappeared from history, and more radically, God's plan for the redemption of humanity through the Promised Seed would have been overturned....
Thankfully, Jacob was enabled by God's grace to overcome Laban and to return to the Promised Land, and even more thankfully, the Messiah was able to crush the rule of Satan through His atoning sacrifice and resurrection at Moriah. Yeshua, our ascended LORD, is ha-makom - the place where we encounter the Living God....
The authority and reign of Satan has been gloriously vanquished by Yeshua our Savior, blessed be He, though there is coming a time of judgment for all who dwell upon the earth. The time immediately preceding the appearance of the Messiah will be a time of testing in which the world will undergo various forms of tribulation, called chevlei Mashiach (חֶבְלֵי הַמָּשִׁיחַ) - the "birth pangs of the Messiah" (Sanhedrin 98a; Ketubot, Bereshit Rabbah 42:4, Matt. 24:8). Some say the birth pangs are to last for 70 years, with the last 7 years being the most intense period of tribulation -- called the "Time of Jacob's Trouble" / עֵת־צָרָה הִיא לְיַעֲקב (Jer. 30:7). The climax of the "Great Tribulation" (צָרָה גְדוֹלָה) is called the great "Day of the LORD" (יוֹם־יהוה הַגָּדוֹל) which represents God's wrath poured out upon a rebellious world system. On this fateful day, the LORD will terribly shake the entire earth (Isa. 2:19) and worldwide catastrophes will occur. "For the great day of their wrath has come, and who can stand?" (Rev. 6:17). The prophet Malachi likewise says: "'Surely the day is coming; it will burn like a furnace. All the arrogant and every evildoer will be stubble, and that day that is coming will set them on fire,' says the LORD Almighty. 'Not a root or a branch will be left to them'" (Mal. 4:1). Only after the nations of the world have been judged will the Messianic kingdom (מַלְכוּת הָאֱלהִים) be established upon the earth. Yeshua will return to Jerusalem to establish His glorious kingdom (as foretold by the prophets) and then "all Israel will be saved." The Jewish people will finally understand that Mashiach ben Yosef (the Suffering Servant) and Mashiach ben David (the anointed King of Israel) are one and the same... The 1,000 year reign of King Messiah will then commence (Rev. 20:4).
Presently our responsibility is to come to "the place" (ha-makom) where God's work of redemption was completed - that is, to the Cross of Yeshua. There we turn to God in repentance (teshuvah) and consign our sins to the judgment borne for us through Yeshua's sacrifice as our kapporah (atonement). By faith we understand that the resurrected Savior is forever ha-makom, "the place" where God meets with us, and we learn to abide in His gracious Presence by means of the Holy Spirit. We cease striving to justify ourselves (i.e., by virtue of works), but instead receive God's love and Spirit into our hearts. This means that we will study the Scriptures (truth), obey the Torah of Yeshua and His emissaries, and share the good message of God's redemption with a lost and dying world...
We are fast approaching, however, the prophesied "End of Days" (acharit hayamim), when the LORD will return to earth to "settle accounts" with its inhabitants (including those who profess to obey Him). We do not have much more time, chaverim. We must encourage people to call upon the LORD for salvation before it is too late...
כִּי־כֵן אהֵב אֱלהִים אֶת־הָעוֹלָם
עַד־אֲשֶׁר נָתַן בַּעֲדוֹ אֶת־בְּנוֹ אֶת־יְחִידוֹ
וְכָל־הַמַּאֲמִין בּוֹ לא־יאבַד
כִּי בוֹ יִמְצָא חַיֵּי עוֹלָם׃
ki-khen o·hev E·lo·him et-ha·o·lam,
ad-a·sher na·tan ba·a·do et-be·no et-ye·chi·do,
ve·khol-ha·ma·a·min bo, lo-yo·vad
ki vo yim·tza cha·yei o·lam
"For God so loved the world that he gave his only and unique Son,
so that whoever trusts in Him should not be destroyed, but have eternal life"
Hebrew Study Card

The Appalachian Mountain range is nearly 1,500 miles long stretching from the southeast corner of Canada to Alabama. The Cumberland Gap, a natural break in the range near the eastern borders of Kentucky and Tennessee, is now a paved highway known as US 25E. A section of US 25E that now passes through a tunnel underneath the mountain is called the Cumberland Gap Tunnel.
Cars and trucks have replaced Conestoga wagons, but the route, now a paved highway, still offered challenges to travelers. The steep grade and sharp turns of US 25E were the cause of many traffic accidents. So many, in fact, that the 2.3-mile stretch of highway earned the unfortunate nickname, “Massacre Mountain.”
To make the route safer, a section of US 25E was relocated under the mountain by constructing a tunnel. This also helped restore the appearance of the mountain to the way it looked in the late 1700s, in the days of Daniel Boone.
The Cumberland Gap Tunnel passes through a large limestone formation within the Cumberland Mountain. Limestone, made of the mineral calcite, is slightly soluble in water. When rainwater seeps through cracks and between layers of limestone, it dissolves some of the calcite it contacts. Bit by bit, the flowing water removes calcite and the cracks grow larger, eventually forming caves. The resulting cave system is a natural conduit for underground water flow.
Where the tunnel passed through a cavern, concrete was poured to form an artificial ceiling structure. This, of course, blocked the water flow. The cavern, which runs almost perpendicular to the tunnel, was kept in a nearly natural state by allowing the water flow to continue its normal course through a conduit five feet in diameter built under the roadway. There is also a passageway constructed above the tunnel to allow for air and water movement. Thus, the cave system continues to function as a natural drainage system.
Engineers designed an additional drainage system to collect percolating groundwater that hits the impervious tunnel walls. This system includes a manmade streambed parallel to the tunnel, running beneath the roadbed from end to end.
The streambed is made of limestone gravel, and water flows between and around these gravel particles. When groundwater percolates through limestone rock layers before reaching the gravel bed, that drainage water is already saturated with calcium carbonate (the chemical name for calcite) and does not dissolve calcite from the gravel. Without loss from dissolving, loss of gravel caused by abrasion and erosion occurs at a slow and predictable rate.
However, most of Cumberland Mountain is made of rock other than limestone, such as sandstone, shale, and siltstone. This means that much of the water entering the tunnel’s drainage system is not already saturated with calcium carbonate and does dissolve gravel material. Similar to the way the cave system developed long ago in the limestone formation within Cumberland Mountain, the artificial streambed is gradually washing away. During the first ten years of the tunnel’s existence, enough gravel matter was removed to cause the roadway above to sag and need repair. As of 2009, a long-term solution had not yet been determined.
To learn about the construction of a different kind of tunnel, one that went underwater, check out Building the Channel Tunnel.
For more information about the movement of plates in Earth's crust, check out Mountain Maker, Earth Shaker.

Wondering what to do with that dead cow in your backyard or those dead batteries in your flashlight?
The Center for the Development of Recycling—a partnership between San Jose State University’s Environmental Studies Department and Santa Clara County—has an online tool to guide you on how and where to recycle anything from the dead cow and batteries to painted or stained wood waste and everything in between.
Nov. 15 is America Recycles Day so take part in it and use the tool if you find one of the few materials the City of Milpitas does not accept. The tool is easy to use: Scroll the list of materials to find the one you wish to recycle, click on it and it will move to a box on the right. When you have your list complete fill in your ZIP code and click on the “find results” button.
It will return a list of companies that accept the specific material, the company's location and/or phone number, website links, whether the material can be picked up or dropped off, and other useful information.
Batteries, for example, are accepted at several places in and around Milpitas. That dead cow is a little trickier. Four places accept dead cows and two of them have restrictions on the cow’s age.
Recycling is something that can be embraced as a lifetime commitment. Think the three Rs—reduce, reuse and recycle.
One way to reduce is to stop junk mail from being delivered to your home. The Bay Area Outreach Coalition offers a stop junk mail kit (see the attached PDF for more detail or visit www.stopjunkmail.org) to get rid of those annoying catalogs, ads, promotional materials and other unwanted mail that winds up in your recycle bin.
America Recycle Day includes events such as the one at GreenMouse Recycling in San Jose that is hosting a three-day recycle-athon between Nov. 15 and 17 with a goal of recycling 25,000 pounds of electronic waste. Recycle something with a screen, such as a laptop, monitor, television or cell phone, and recieve a Starbucks gift card. Then take that Starbucks gift card and a friend to the nearest store and take advantage of the 2-for-1 offer going on. It's a win-win!

Sign up for our newsletter
Gardening in the Rainy Zone.
Pronounced: AL-lee-um ka-ra-tah-vee-EN-see
Sunset zones 1-24.
USDA zones: 5-9.
Heat zones: 9-5.
Height: 4-10 inches (10-25 cm).
Two to three-inch diameter spherical umbel of 50 or more, flowers on a 6-inch stem.
Just above ground level the thick, leathery, pleated, 6-inch long leaves. 'Ivory White' has a pale, pewter tone.
Full sun to partial shade.
Dry, well-drained, ordinary garden soil.
Remove offsets in autumn and plant.
Pests and Diseases:
Bulb rot can occur during our damp conditions of fall through spring. Onion fly and thrips may be a problem.
Rainy Side Notes
Allium karataviense is a spunky plant with a large flower globe. It is a dwarf ornamental onion compared to the giant species in the Melanocrommyum group of alliums, in which it belongs. It grows exceptionally well in our Mediterranean climate, as the plants go dormant by the time our annual drought comes around. Some gardeners grow the species and its cultivars because it has the most attractive foliage in the entire genus. Its horizontal, long, leathery, pleated foliage is green with a striking purple cast. As the blossom first opens, it is nestled on top of the attractive foliage; the flowering stems continue to grow. It pushes the large, spherical umbels up and away from the leaves as they begin to look shabby. When you plant bulbs en masse in a garden bed or container, use companion perennials that are late in filling out, or annuals to fill in any bare soil the bulb's dormant state leaves behind.
Sensitive to excess moisture, these alliums are prone to rot, so grow them in well-drained soil in the ground or in deep containers with excellent drainage. Some A. karataviense cultivars available are 'Ivory Queen', 'Lucky' and 'Red Globe'.
Photographed in author's garden.

Imprint training pioneer Dr. Robert Miller debunks some of the common misconceptions about this useful foal handling technique.
The technique of imprinting has been used to help train foals for more than 50 years, but common misconceptions about what it means to imprint young horses still exist. While recent years have seen more and more owners and trainers fully commit to properly using this valuable foal handling procedure, a few basic misunderstandings still remain that prevent those who attempt to apply imprint training techniques from achieving the results that they desire.
Photo by Megan Parks
Dr. Robert Miller, one of the pioneering practitioners of equine imprint training, believes that proper implementation of imprint training principles make a horse more trainable and easier to handle, but only if it is done correctly and completely—and only if the person performing the technique is realistic about exactly what the process is meant to achieve.
“You’re not going to change [a foal’s] personality,” Miller says. “Energetic will be energetic. Lazy will be lazy. Highly reactive will be highly reactive. Indifferent will be indifferent. Intelligent will be intelligent. But what [imprinting] does is, if you do it right after they are born, before any other learning goes in—you build a foundation.”
Understanding what that foundation is meant to support is the key to getting the long-term results that proper imprint training can provide.
“You’re not imprint training the body,” Miller says. “You’re imprint training the mind.”
In the wild, horse have always been prey animals and, therefore, a foal must be able to get to its feet within an hour after birth and run with its herd as a means of self defense. This history means that even domesticated horses are born with a healthy paranoia of just about everything. Fear is the natural first response a horse feels to new stimuli. They have to learn not to fear people, objects and even other animals.
It is almost impossible to teach a horse anything if his focus is on self preservation.
“It applies to us, too,” Miller says. “If we are preparing to take a test, and we’re really scared, our learning ability isn’t nearly as great as if we are laid back and relaxed and can think things out.”
Fear and anxiety interfere with the learning procedure because, in any animal, it increases the primary defensive behavior.
“In some species, [the defensive behavior] is to fight, so fear will precipitate an attack,” Miller explains. “But in the horse, fear usually precipitates flight or the desire for flight.
“In the horse—and this is only true in the horse and not dogs, cattle or people—control of the feet controls the mind. When you control the animal’s primary defense, you control the mind. In wolves, it’s control of the muzzle. In the human being, it’s control of the hands. In horses, it’s control of the feet. Every school of horsemanship has relied upon [this concept] even if they didn’t understand why it worked.”
The main goal of all imprint training is to minimize the fear responses that can keep a horse from learning.
“If we don’t have the fear, the horse isn’t thinking about running away,” Miller says. “Instead, the horse is paying attention and subject to quick learning.”
It is important to Miller that people understand that imprinting and training are two different things—a fact that he believes sometimes gets overlooked.
“Imprinting is a visual memorization of what the foal sees moving around it, and it triggers an instinct to trust and to follow,” Miller says. “Training is learning by reinforcement. The only reason I called the process Imprint Training is because it’s training during the imprint period.”
In nature, a foal imprints on its mother and the other members of its herd, serving to protect the foal against predators in the wild. However, foals can also imprint on a variety of other creatures, too.
“In domestication, it can be a human, or a dog or a piece of machinery,” Miller says. “Anything that moves, the foal will be imprinted upon it and tend to want to go to it and be near it and trust it.”
It is this inherent trust that Miller uses to teach the newborn foal that the world isn’t nearly as scary as it would otherwise believe it to be.
“In an hour to hour and a half, I can get so much done with a foal,” he says. “It’s a great time saver.”
Doing It Right
Miller often regrets calling the process Imprint Training because people confuse the meaning of term.
“I often have people come up to me and say, ‘I imprinted my horse when he was 6 months of age,’ or it was an 18 month old,” he says. “They don’t understand that imprinting only occurs in the horse [immediately after birth].
“It’s not that way with all species. Dogs, for example, imprint between 6 and 7 weeks of age. But that is a different species. They are not precocial. They are helpless as babies, just like humans. Whereas in the precocial species like horses, the ones who must be able to run from danger by the time they are one hour of age, the imprinting begins in the hour after birth.”
To Miller, the advantages of imprint training are that it happens very quickly, you don’t have to rely on or undo any previous negative learning, and since the foal is already down and has yet to stand, you can prepare a foal for most of what it needs to know for the rest of its life in about an hour.
During that time, Miller touches literally every part of the foal—from nose to tail and from ears to hooves—with the goal of habituating [making it comfortable with and unafraid of] common loud or frightening sounds or movements that can spook a horse, being touched in the areas that will be handled during farriery and during veterinary examinations of every body opening, as well as pressure in the saddle area. Teaching foals not to fear pressure in the girth area is usually saved for the second session when they are already on their feet.
“You remove the anxiety, the fear,” Miller says, “and they are quicker to learn other things.”
The mistake most people make when imprint training is that they don’t do enough at the right times, either during the first session when the foal has yet to stand, or during subsequent training sessions when the foal is on its feet.
“I poll every audience that I speak to,” Miller says, “and what I’ve learned from doing this over the last four decades is the two most common mistakes are rushing the training and failing to follow up after the first session.”
Miller says it is almost always men who make the mistake of rushing the first session of imprint training.
“They are usually working for a ranch or farm,” he says, “and they show them my video and tell them they want them to do this with their foals, and they rush it.”
For example, when Miller is habituating a foal to having his feet touched, he taps the bottom of each hoof with his hand 100 times to ensure that he’s tapping long enough for the foal’s initial fear response to the touch to wear off and he learns that having his foot touched isn’t something to be afraid of.
“Men will often tap the hoof 5-10 times and quit,” Miller says, “and what they’ve taught the foal to do is to fear that touch. They have failed to habituate by stopping during the fear and flight period in the foal’s mind.”
By doing this, they have actually sensitized the foal to fear of having its feet touched, and the next day, the person can’t get anywhere near them to continue the second phase of the training.
“Whereas the foals I do, you can touch them anywhere on their body the next day,” Miller says. “Women just love this part of the training because of the intimacy of it.”
Conversely, Miller states it is almost always women who fail to complete imprint training after the first session.
“They do the birth session, but they don’t do sessions two through seven when the foal is on its feet, which is where you get their respect,” he says of the sessions where the foal is habituated to a variety of body pressure and movement cues, as well as leading and tying.
“I ask them ‘Why didn’t you do it?’ and the answer is always the same. ‘He didn’t like it, so I didn’t do it.’ They often admit that they got bad results, but claim to know what they did wrong.”
The Lessons Transfer
While one of the major complaints about imprint training is that the foal will only respond to the person he imprinted upon, Miller doesn’t believe this to be the case. The foal may be slightly more responsive to that individual, but if that person imprint trains the foal properly, anyone who handles that horse in the future will have an easier time than if the horse had never received imprint training.
Miller admits that the trust an imprinted animal gains in its imprinter doesn’t transfer directly to all other humans. However, it does prepare them for what other people may do with them and makes the horse’s transition to the new handler’s style easier and faster.
“Say you have an individual sacking out a colt who has never been ridden with a blanket, and he stands perfectly happy while everything happens,” Miller says. “If a stranger comes along with a blanket, he’s going to react with fear to the stranger, but once he’s past that and the blanket begins, the attitude is, ‘Oh, I remember,’ and the horse relaxes.
“As far as their future talent on the racetrack, as a jumping horse, as a roping horse or a barrel horse, imprint training doesn’t interfere. It actually enhances it because you remove most of the fear factors [that can interfere with learning]. If a foal has learned to be unafraid of a human presence and being touched on any part of its body, and now you want to make a rope horse out of it, it’s not going to get all boogered when the rope drags on the ground beside it or you throw it out in front of him. I wouldn’t say it improves performance, but it enhances learning.”
The same basic principle applies to imprint training a young horse to be relaxed in a stall area around other horses, in your training pen and especially when approaching what some horses consider to be a scary object—a barrel. Once a horse is hauled to a show, the environment may be different and cause anxiety temporarily, but the similarity of the situation to what they’ve experienced before will help the horse relax and perform to the best of its ability faster.
Although imprint training doesn’t affect a horse’s personality, it will help more reactive horses become more handlable. A highly reactive individual will still remain flighty, but if you’ve de-sensitized him to the everyday things he might spook at—which interferes with what you’re trying to teach them at any point—it helps him learn what you’re teaching faster.
Respect, Not Fear
Imprint training has gained wide acceptance over the last 25 years, but there are still some trainers who object to the technique. Many object for a one primary reason—they believe that since imprinting lessens a horse’s fears, it makes the horse much harder for anyone who didn’t imprint that horse to control.
“The objective in training horses should be 100 percent respect and zero percent fear,” Miller states. “Some people think you’ve got to show them who’s boss. You’ve got to show a horse who’s the leader, but you don’t have to show them who’s boss, which infers fear of the boss. It’s not necessary to be able to control the horse.”
The idea that fear of humans is necessary to maintain control of a horse and to get it to do what you want it to do ignores a fact that practitioners of natural horsemanship have known for decades—if you really want your horse to want to work for you, fear can’t be part of the equation.
For Miller, the goal of imprint training is to get the horse to see the human as a herd leader and be submissive to his or her requests as a result. You don’t want a horse to fear you, but depend on you for leadership and guidance. When done correctly, imprint training enhances a horse’s relationship with all humans. All it takes is putting in the effort to achieve the results you want instead of looking for a quick, fear-based fix.
According to Miller, in wild mustang herds, the leader is most often the oldest mare, which indicates that physical strength has nothing to do with gaining the respect of the horse or achieving leadership. The stallion, who many would perceive as the natural choice to be the leader, runs in back and chases the stragglers to get them to keep up with the leading mare, serving as more of a guardian for the herd than a leader of it.
“There are still some trainers that object to [imprint training], and there are still trainers who do it improperly and criticize the technique,” Miller says. “Any training technique ever devised, if you don’t do them correctly, you can’t expect good results.
“I hear people say, ‘I did my colt Parelli style,’ or, ‘I did my colt Kurt Pate style, and it didn’t do any good.’ Well, they didn’t do it correctly because they are very good training techniques. They blame the technique rather than themselves.”
But as with any training program, in the end, you and your horse will get out of it what you put into it. After 50 years of teaching and practicing the techniques of imprint training, Miller believes that if it is done properly, it will absolutely make a difference in the teachability and overall confidence and happiness of the horse.
“Simply put, imprint training works,” Miller says emphatically. “It works consistently and very, very effectively.
“The foal respects the mare, but is also bonded to her and trusts her. We can get exactly the same thing, trust combined with respect.”
Dr. Robert Miller graduated from Colorado State University and settled in Thousand Oaks, Calif., where he founded the Conejo Valley Veterinary Clinic. He retired in 1987 after 31 years as a renowned veterinarian and expert in ethology (the study of animal behavior) in order to devote his full time to the teaching of equine behavior and to support the revolution in horsemanship that began in the Western United States in the late 20th Century and is now a worldwide phenomenon.
He is best known for his scientifically based system of training newborn foals, called imprint training, which is now in use all over the world. He has authored several books, including Imprint Training of the Newborn Foal, and has been on the editorial staff of several veterinary practice and horse industry magazines.

This article published by Yongyut Trisurat, Anak Pattanavibool, George A. Gale and David H. Reed in CSIRO Publishing. Wildlife Research. 2010, 37, 401-412, demonstrates how the CAP principles helped assess wildlife population viability for multiple species in the Western Forest Complex in Thailand. If you wish to request a copy of the article, please contact Yongyut Trisurat (email@example.com).
Context. Assessing the viability of animal populations in the wild is difficult or impossible, primarily because of limited data. However, there is an urgent need to develop methods for estimating population sizes and improving the viability of target species.
Aims. To define suitable habitat for sambar (Cervus unicolor), banteng (Bos javanicus), gaur (Bos gaurus), Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) and tiger (Panthera tigris) in the Western Forest Complex, Thailand, and to assess their current status as well as estimate how the landscape needs to be managed to maintain viable populations.
Methods. The present paper demonstrates a method for combining a rapid ecological assessment, landscape indices, GIS-based wildlife-habitat models, and knowledge of minimum viable population sizes to guide landscape-management decisions and improve conservation outcomes through habitat restoration.
Key results. The current viabilities for gaur and elephant are fair, whereas they are poor for tiger and banteng. However, landscape quality outside the current distributions was relatively intact for all species, ranging from moderate to high levels of connectivity. In addition, the population viability for sambar is very good under the current and desired conditions.
Conclusions. If managers in this complex wish to upgrade the viabilities of gaur, elephant, tiger and banteng within the next 10 years, park rangers and stakeholders should aim to increase the amount of usable habitat by ~2170 km2 or 17% of existing suitable habitats. The key strategies are to reduce human pressures, enhance ungulate habitats and increase connectivity of suitable habitats outside the current distributions.
Implications. The present paper provides a particularly useful method for managers and forest-policy planners for assessing and managing habitat suitability for target wildlife and their population viability in protected-area networks where knowledge of the demographic attributes (e.g. birth and death rates) of wildlife populations are too limited to perform population viability analysis.

Mon 20 Jul 2009
As far as scary-looking fish go, the adult sea lamprey is right up there with the sharks. It’s about 3 feet long, with concentric rings of teeth inside a jawless, suction-cup mouth. After trapping its prey by sucking, the lamprey scrapes off the skin using a tooth at the end of its tongue, and then sucks out the blood. Since the lamprey has good taste in fish – preferring trout, salmon, bass –it’s the target of a federal lampricide program in the Great Lakes region, where it has nearly devoured some of these stocks.
But no creature is all bad. “The lamprey has a really beautiful spinal cord,” says Ona Bloom, an MBL Research Fellow from The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research. Together with Jennifer Morgan (Univ. of Texas at Austin) and David Parker (Univ. of Cambridge), who are recipients of an MBL sponsored Albert and Ellen Grass Faculty Research Grant, Bloom and her colleagues are studying the lamprey’s remarkable ability to recover from severe spinal cord injury. “We have been talking for years about collaborating on these studies,” says Bloom. “ The MBL gives us a wonderful opportunity to do that.”
One of the most primitive of living vertebrates, the sea lamprey is a good animal in which to analyze the acute response to spinal cord injury, which is Bloom’s focus, and how the nervous system functions are restored, which interests Morgan and Parker. “We want to understand the differences between the robust recovery in lampreys and how that contrasts with what happens in humans with spinal cord injury,” says Morgan. “If we can understand processes in the lamprey that contribute to recovery, then we can see if those processes can promote better recovery in higher vertebrates.”

- Types of home dialysis
- Daily HHD
- Nocturnal HHD
- Standard HHD
- News & events
- Message boards
- For professionals
- About us
...everything you need to know about doing dialysis at home.
Here we present a chronological tour of dialysis from the beginning.
All photos by Jim Curtis; descriptions courtesy of Baxter.
The first practical artificial kidney was developed during World War II by the Dutch physician Willem Kolff. The Kolff kidney used a 20-meter long tube of cellophane sausage casing as a dialyzing membrane. The tube was wrapped around a slatted wooden drum. Powered by an electric motor, the drum revolved in a tank filled with dialyzing solution. The patient’s blood was drawn through the cellophane tubing by gravity as the drum revolved. Toxic molecules in the blood diffused through the tubing into the dialyzing solution. Complete dialysis took about six hours. The Kolff kidney effectively removed toxins from the blood, but because it operated at low pressure, it was unable to remove excess fluid from the patient’s blood. Modern dialysis machines are designed to filter out excess fluid while cleansing the blood of wastes.
Blood was drained from the patient into a sterile container. Anticlotting drugs were added, and the filled container was hung on a post above the artificial kidney and connected to the cellulose acetate tubing that was wound around the wooden drum. A motor turned the drum, pulling the blood through the tubing by gravity.
The tank underneath the drum was filled with dialyzing fluid. As the blood-filled tubing passed through this fluid, waste products from the blood diffused through the tubing into the dialyzing fluid. The cleansed blood collected in a second sterile container at the other end of the machine. When all of the blood had passed through the machine, this second container was raised to drain the blood back into the patient.
George Thorn, MD, of the Peter Bent Hospital in Boston, MA, invited Willem Kolff, MD, to meet with Carl Walters, MD, and John Merrill, MD, to redesign and modify the original Kolff Rotating Drum Kidney. The artificial kidney was to be used to support the first proposed transplant program in the United States. This device was built by Edward Olson, an engineer, who would produce over forty of these devices, which were shipped all over the world.
Cellulose acetate tubular membrane, the same type of membrane that is used as sausage casing, was wrapped around the drum and connected to latex tubing that would be attached to the patient’s bloodstream. The drum would be rotating in the dialyzing fluid bath that is located under the drum.
The patient’s blood was propelled through the device by the “Archimedes screw principle” and a pulsatile pump. A split coupling was developed to connect the tubing to the membrane, a component necessary to prevent the tubing and membrane from twisting. This connection is at the inlet and outlet of the rotating drum.
The membrane surface area could be adjusted by increasing or decreasing the number of wraps of tubing. The Plexiglas™ hood was designed to control the temperature of the blood. The cost of this device was $5,600 in 1950.
Murphy WP Jr., Swan RC Jr., Walter CW, Weller JM, Merrill JP. Use of an artificial kidney. III. Current procedures in clinical hemodialysis. J Lab Clin Med. 1952 Sep; 40(3): 436-44.
Leonard Skeggs, PhD, and Jack Leonards, MD, developed the first parallel flow artificial kidney at Case Western Reserve in Cleveland, OH. The artificial kidney was designed to have a low resistance to blood flow and to have an adjustable surface area.
Two sheets of membrane are sandwiched between two rubber pads in order to reduce the blood volume and to ensure uniform distribution of blood across the membrane to maximize efficiency. Multiple layers were utilized. The device required a great deal of time to construct and it often leaked. This was corrected by the use of bone wax to stop the leak.
The device had a very low resistance to blood flow and it could be used without a blood pump. If more than one of these units were used at a time, a blood pump was required. Skeggs was able to remove water from the blood in the artificial kidney by creating a siphon on the effluent of the dialyzing fluid. This appears to be the first reference to negative pressure dialysis.
This technology was later adapted by Leonard Skeggs to do blood chemistries. It was called the SMA 12-60 Autoanalyzer.
This artificial kidney was developed to reduce the amount of blood outside of the body and to eliminate the need for pumping the blood through the device.
Guarino used cellulose acetate tubing. The dialyzing fluid was directed inside the tubing and the blood, entering the device from the top, cascading down the membrane. The metal tubing inside the membrane gave support to the membrane.
The artificial kidney ahd a very low blood volume, but it had limited use because there was concern regarding the possibility of the dialyzing fluid leaking into the blood.
Von Garrelts had constructed a dialyzer in 1948 by wrapping a cellulose acetate membrane around a core. The layers of membrane were separated by rods. It was very bulky and weighed over 100 pounds.
William Inouye, MD, took this concept and miniaturized it by wrapping the cellulose acetate tubing around a beaker and separating the layers with fiberglass screening. He placed this “coil” in a Presto Pressure Cooker in order to enclose it and control the temperature. In addition, he made openings in the pot for the dialyzing fluid. With the use of a vacuum on the dialysate leaving the pot, he was able to draw the excess water out of the patient’s blood. A blood pump was required to overcome resistance within the device.
This device was used clinically and when it was used in a closed circuit, the exact amount of fluid removed could be determined.
Inouye WY, Engelberg J. A simplified artificial dialyzer and ultrafilter. Surg Forum. Proceedings of the Forum Sessions, Thirty-ninth Clinical Congress of the American College of Surgeons, Chicago, Illinois, October, 1953; 4: 438-42.
Home Dialysis Central is made possible through the generous annual contributions of our Corporate Sponsors. Learn more about becoming a Corporate Sponsor.

- Historic Sites
History As A Cure
December 1956 | Volume 8, Issue 1
Not long ago two teen-age boys in New York City got into trouble with the law. The police laid hands on them as juvenile delinquents, and in due course the boys appeared in court. Judge J. Randall Creel, of Magistrates’ Court, faced the tough problem that confronts jurists in such cases: should he send the boys off to jail forthwith, or should he see whether they might not be able to straighten themselves out? He decided on the latter course, and in looking for a means of rehabilitation he selected an unusual instrument: American history.
He gave these high school youngsters a historical research job to do.
They should forthwith (he told them) make a study of the Battle of Long Island—an important struggle in the Revolutionary War, in which General Washington’s army narrowly escaped destruction when the British commander, General Howe, landed an overpowering force on Long Island late in August of 1776. They would find, he suggested, that utter disaster for the American cause was averted because of a valiant rear-guard action fought by a regiment of the Maryland line. Let them, therefore, go to the sources and find out all they could about this action; having done this, each boy must submit a paper, describing what had happened, citing his sources, and bringing out what the gallant stand of the embattled Marylanders meant to future generations of Americans. By the jobs they did he would determine whether or not they had reinstated themselves as reliable junior members of their community.
The boys went to work, and eventually they presented their papers. They had done a good deal of hard work. They had traced the movements of the different troops engaged. They had run down the historic markers which (largely ignored by present-day citizens) show where the actions took place. They had found out all they could about the gallant old Maryland battalion, and they had gone to the trouble of listing the names and ranks of all the Marylanders who were killed or captured in the fight. And it seems that this excursion into American history had been a powerful medicine for good. These boys learned something—about their own home city (for they live in Brooklyn, and the battle they investigated had been fought along what are now the familiar streets and squares and parks of their own neighborhood), about the price a former generation had to pay for American freedom and happiness, and about the way in which boys of their own age, long ago, met a profound challenge.
Specifically: in their research into the history of the Battle of Long Island, these boys learned that a spirited rear-guard action by a regiment of Maryland soldiers—the 5th Maryland Infantry, under Colonel William Smallwood—had kept the American defeat from becoming a complete, irremediable disaster. The Marylanders fought a delaying action which enabled the bulk of Washington’s army to get away. Four or five hundred of them charged a British strong point, losing more than half of their numbers and going down at last to bloody defeat, but gaining the important fragments of time that enabled the beaten Continental army to get away clean and live to fight another day.
They found out that the Maryland soldiers who saved the day were simply boys like themselves. They dug out the old muster rolls, which gave each man’s name and age. Down the long columns, in faded archaic script, were the scanty records of boys who dared everything and gave everything more than a century and a half ago—and most of them turned out to be lads of eighteen or nineteen. This probably meant that they were even younger than that; boys usually add a year or two to their ages when they enlist in wartime. The Marylanders, in other words, were early teen-agers, who faced up to something big before they had got out of adolescence simply because youth wants nothing in all the world so much as the chance to respond to a real challenge. Life was good to them; it gave them the challenge, they met it—and today, as a direct result, we have an American nation.
One of the two boys, writing about the battle, expressed himself like this:
“If the youth of today is not conscious of the historical background of Long Island, the battle I will now unfold will make him so. I will, therefore, endeavor to show you what today’s youth could and should be capable of as compared to those who fought to preserve their rights as individuals. … It was merely lads of seventeen and eighteen who fought and died making this supreme sacrifice in defense of the preservation of the American Army and their fight for independence.”
The other boy, carried away by the story of the fight, found himself writing in the best vein of the military historian:
”…Thrice again these brave young Marylanders charged upon the house, once driving the gunners from their pieces within its shadow; but numbers overwhelmed them, and for twenty minutes the fight was terrible. Washington, Putnam and other General Officers who witnessed it … saw the overwhelming force with which their brave compatriots were contending, and held their breath in suspense and fear.… Washington wrung his hands, in the intensity of his emotion, and exclaimed: ‘Good God, what brave fellows I must this day lose!’”

A POTENTIALLY deadly and virulent bug that attacks the gut may soon be treated with the most stomach-churning of remedies.
A study published on Thursday in The New England Journal of Medicine has found transplanting human faeces into people with the superbug Clostridium difficile provided an almost universal cure for the condition - far outperforming traditional antibiotic treatment.
Faecal microbiota transplantation is thought to work by replacing the healthy bacteria in the gut that have been wiped out by antibiotics. For the past 20 years an Australian, Thomas Borody, has pioneered the treatment, although its use has been traced back thousands of years.
''This study is monumental,'' Professor Borody said.
The research found nearly 94 per cent of patients given the transplantation one or two times recovered, compared to only 30 per cent of the group given the antibiotic vancomycin.
The study was then stopped early by an ethics committee on the ground that it would be unethical not to offer all patients the transplants.
Professor Borody said C. difficile, which has ravaged the US, killing 30,000 people each year, was spreading to Australia, although no one could be sure how common it was as health departments did not routinely test for it.
''In Sydney we have had about 15 deaths that we know of … in the past year and a half,'' he said.
Just as people now donate blood, in future donors may be called on to give stools.
At present the faeces is inserted into the recipient using colonoscopy or nasal tube but researchers are developing a less off-putting method.
''The future of this FMT is filtered bacteria, washed, frozen and put in a capsule, which we lovingly call a 'crapsule','' said Professor Borody, from the Centre for Digestive Diseases and the University of Technology, Sydney.
The clinical associate dean at the St George Hospital clinical school at the University of NSW, Michael Grimm, said trying to find appropriate donors could be difficult.
''We are just starting now to grapple with the bacteria in the gut; it's an impossible soup to analyse,'' Professor Grimm said.
''What potential pathogens are in there that might not have been pathogenic to the host but could become pathogenic to the recipient, are really unknown.''

2. Physical Activity
Twenty-four RCT articles were reviewed for the effect of physical activity on weight loss, abdominal fat (measured by waist circumference), and changes in cardiorespiratory fitness (VO2 max). Thirteen articles were deemed acceptable (346, 363, 365, 369, 375, 401, 404, 406, 432, 434, 445-447). Only one of these RCTs compared different intensities and format with a control group, although the goal was to increase physical activity and not specifically to produce weight loss (401). Results from this trial were subsequently reported after 2 years, but these no longer included the control group (447). One additional study did not have a no-treatment control group but compared three active treatment groups with each other: diet only, exercise only, and combination exercise plus diet (448).
Most RCTs described the type of physical activity as cardiovascular endurance activities in the form of aerobic exercise such as aerobic dancing, brisk walking, jogging, running, riding a stationary bicycle, swimming, and skiing, preceded and followed by a short session of warmup and cool-down exercises. Some physical activity programs also included unspecified dynamic calisthenic exercises (363, 369, 406, 446).
The intensity of the physical activity was adapted to each individual and varied from 60 to 85 percent of the individual's estimated maximum heart rate, or was adjusted to correspond to approximately 70 percent of maximum aerobic capacity (VO2 max). The measure of physical fitness included VO2 max. The frequency of physical activity varied from three to seven sessions a week and the length of the physical activity session ranged from 30 to 60 minutes. Some physical activity programs were supervised, and some were home-based. Adherence to the prescribed physical activity program was recorded and reported in some studies and not mentioned in others. Most studies did not estimate the caloric expenditure from the physical activity or report calorie intake. The duration of the intervention varied from 16 weeks to 1 year; six articles reported on trials that lasted at least 1 year (346, 363, 375, 401, 406, 432).
Rationale: Twelve RCT articles examined the effects of physical activity, consisting primarily of aerobic exercise, on weight loss compared to controls (346, 363, 365, 369, 375, 401, 404, 406, 432, 434, 445, 446). Ten of the 12 RCT articles reported a mean weight loss of 2.4 kg (5.3 lb) (or 2.4 percent of weight) (363, 369, 375, 406, 419, 432, 434) or a mean reduction in BMI of 0.7 kg/m2 (2.7 percent reduction) (346, 365, 401) in the exercise group compared to the control group. In three of these ten studies, the weight loss was < 2 percent of body weight (< 2 kg) (4.4 lb) (369, 375, 434). In contrast, two RCTs showed no benefit on weight from exercise, reporting weight gain in the exercise group compared to the control group (445, 446). In one of these studies, the control group received only diet advice but nevertheless lost 9 kg (19.8 lb), whereas the exercise group lost only 7 kg (15.4 lb) (445). In the second study, there was a total of only 10 participants, all having noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and the control group lost 3 kg (6.6 lb) whereas the exercise group lost only 2 kg (4.4 lb) (446). A meta-analysis of 28 publications of the effect on weight loss of exercise compared to diet or control groups showed that aerobic exercise alone produces a modest weight loss of 3 kg (6.6 lb) in men and 1.4 kg (3.1 lb) in women compared to controls (449).
Ten articles reported on RCTs that had a diet-only group in addition to an exercise-only group (346, 363, 365, 369, 375, 406, 432, 434, 445, 448). In every case except one (365),the exercise-only group did not experience as much weight loss as the diet-only group. The diet-only group produced approximately 3 percent, or 3 kg (6.6 lb), greater weight loss than the exercise-only group.
No single study examined the length of the intervention in relation to the weight loss outcome. Only one study compared the effect on maximum oxygen uptake of different intensities and formats of physical activity over a 1-year follow-up (401) and 2-year follow-up period (447). Better adherence over 1 year was found if the exercise was performed at home rather than in a group setting, regardless of the intensity level. Subsequently, the different exercise groups were compared with each other over the longer term (2 years), and better long-term adherence was found in the higher intensity home-based exercise group compared to the lower intensity home-based or higher intensity group-based exercise groups (447).
The question of whether physical activity enhances long-term maintenance of weight loss has not been formally examined in RCTs. Examination of long-term weight loss maintenance produced by physical activity interventions compared with diet-only interventions cannot easily be compared between RCTs because of numerous differences between studies with respect to design, sample size, intervention content and delivery, and characteristics of the study population samples. However, a number of analyses of observational and post hoc analyses of intervention studies have examined whether physical activity has a beneficial effect on weight. Cross-sectional studies have generally shown that physical activity is inversely related to body weight (450-454) and rate of weight gain with age (455). Longitudinal studies with 2 to 10 years of follow-up results have observed that physical activity is related to less weight gain over time (456-459), less weight gain after smoking cessation in women (460), and weight loss over 2 years (461). In addition, post hoc analyses of several weight loss intervention studies reported that physical activity was a predictor of successful weight loss (454, 462, 463). The results of these RCTs showed that physical activity produces only modest weight loss and observational analyses from other studies suggest that physical activity may play a role in long-term weight control and/or maintenance of weight loss.
Rationale: Only three RCTs testing the effect of physical activity on weight loss also had measures of abdominal fat as assessed by waist circumference (365, 369, 375). One study demonstrated that physical activity reduced waist circumference compared with the control group (365), and another study showed a small effect on waist circumference (0.9 cm) in men but not women (375). One study in men showed a small increase in waist circumference (369). Weight loss was modest in all of these studies. These studies were not designed to test the effects of physical activity on abdominal fat independent of weight loss.
However, large studies in Europe (464), Canada (453), and the United States (465-468) reported that physical activity has a favorable effect on body fat distribution. These studies showed an inverse association between energy expenditure through physical activity and several indicators of abdominal obesity, such as waist circumference and waist-to-hip and waist-to-thigh circumference ratios.
Rationale: Eleven RCT articles testing the effect of physical activity alone on weight loss in men and women also included measures of cardiorespiratory fitness, as measured by maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max) (346, 363, 369, 375, 401, 404, 406, 432, 434, 445, 446). All 11 showed that physical activity increased maximum oxygen uptake in men and women in the exercise groups by an average of 14 percent (ml/kg body weight) to 18 percent (L/min). Even in studies with modest weight loss (< 2 percent), physical activity increased VO2 max by an average of 12 percent (L/min) to 16 percent (ml/kg) (369, 375, 434).
One study that compared different formats and intensities of physical activity on VO2 max reported that improvement in VO2 max was related to adherence to the physical activity regime. In that study, the lower intensity program was equally effective on VO2 max as a higher intensity program, largely as a result of different levels of adherence (401).
The results of the RCTs strongly demonstrate that physical activity increases cardiorespiratory fitness in overweight and obese individuals.

Source: The Pennsylvania Center for the Book
Date: Summer 2010
Byline: Jim Byrne
The Philadelphia Lazaretto: A Most Unloved Institution
In mid-July 1800, the U.S.S. Ganges, on the U.S. Navy’s earliest warships, encountered two American schooners, the Phebe and the Prudent, while navigating the Straits of Florida. These schooners held neither sugar cane nor corn but rather human cargo, 134 chained captives from West Africa to be exact, doomed for delivery to a notorious slave trader in Havana, Cuba. Commissioned with enforcing the newly-passed Federal Slave Trade Act that prohibited the transport of slaves by U.S. ships, Ganges Captain John Mullowny seized the Phebe and the Prudent, assigned prize crews to man both ships, and commanded them to sail north for Philadelphia. After a 1,500 mile, month long trip up the eastern coast of the United States, the crews arrived at the confluence of the Schuylkill and Delaware rivers with their recently confiscated cargo. Emaciated, exposed, and, surely disoriented, the scores of African survivors disembarked on Province Island, home to the Marine Hospital, a.k.a. the Philadelphia Lazaretto.
“The Ganges Africans” — the name bestowed upon them after many were given the surname Ganges — were part of one of the first slave trade violation cases confronted by the newly-established Federal judicial system. Their story exemplifies the ideological clashes that were occurring in the young nation and that would eventually boil over into the Civil War. Interestingly enough, at least two of the Ganges Africans would have extended stays in the Philadelphia area. One of them would become an indentured servant to Thomas Egger, the last quarantine master of the “old” Lazaretto on Province Island and the first one of the “new” Lazaretto in Tinicum Township, Delaware County. A second of the slaves was indentured to farmer Thomas Smith who had sold the property for the new facility to the Philadelphia Board of Health.
Moreover, their story reflects in miniature the history of the Philadelphia Lazaretto itself: integral to our nation’s demographic and political landscape and yet often overlooked. Stories like those of the Ganges Africans and the thousands of others who remain little-known or whose tales are untold are the reasons University of Pennsylvania historian David Barnes calls the Philadelphia Lazaretto a place “even rarer and more precious than New York’s [Ellis Island].”
Lazaretto seems an unusual name for a hospital in the American colonies. As it turns out, however, the word would become a common English term for isolation facilities and quarantine hospitals, ceasing to be a proper noun at all. As one might think, the term derives from the Italian, but its exact provenance is not completely clear. One theory holds that in 16th century Venice, the name of a local hospital, the Nazaretto, was combined with the name of Lazarus the Beggar from the New Testament. Professor Barnes notes that this theory is less plausible than the simpler, and generally accepted, thought isolation wards and quarantines came to be named for Lazarus the Beggar, patron saint of lepers. Regardless of its origin, it started to be applied to the “old” facility on Province Island built in 1743, though it was still referred to the Marine Hospital. The “new” Lazaretto, however, would never be called anything else.
At the end of the 18th century, politicians and doctors throughout the United States were passionately debating public health and quarantine issues, much as members of those same two professions debate health care policy today.
Thousands were falling victim to the effects of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and yellow fever. The issue came to a head in 1793 after futile attempts to quarantine all ships arriving at the port of Philadelphia failed. A yellow fever epidemic of calamitous proportions broke out throughout the city. Within two months, the nation’s largest city and political and economic capital, lost more than a quarter of its population. Approximately 10% perished from yellow fever and another 17% fled the city.
After the 1793 epidemic, the city created a Board of Health to oversee conditions in the city. It found, among other things, that the old quarantine facility had failed terribly in preventing the propagation of yellow fever and other infectious diseases. Many authorities blamed this failure on its location only a few miles from the most densely populated parts of the city and thu, facilitating the interaction between infected patients and residents. Determined to prevent another calamity, The Board of Health constructed a new lazaretto ten miles south of Philadelphia in the isolated, uninhabited marshlands of Tinicum Township, Delaware County.
Construction of the Philadelphia Lazaretto finished in 1801, almost a century before the building of New York’s Ellis Island and San Francisco’s Angel Island. Upon completion, the Lazaretto was the first of its kind. It was a complex — both stately and state of the art — that, as The Philadelphia Public Ledger said in 1879, “might be mistaken for [the grounds of a] wealthy country gentleman....were it not for the yellow Quarantine flag.”
The central figure of the ten acre campus was the main hospital, an august Georgian, double-brick building that could house upwards of 200 patients at a given time. The campus also included the following: the Dutch hospital which was added in 1805 and was primarily used to house German immigrants afflicted with smallpox; the dead-house which was used for incinerating infected patients’ belongings; the barge houses which served as the waiting and sleeping quarters of the bargemen on duty during quarantine season; the residences of the chief physician and the quarantine master; and the government warehouse which stored the goods and merchandise of the quarantined vessels. These facilities and the sheer size of the campus made the Philadelphia Lazaretto a state-of-the-art hospital in comparison to its contemporaries. Remarkably, more than two centuries after their construction, the main hospital building and several other buildings remain intact and are rather well preserved.
During its years of operation from 1801 to 1893, the Philadelphia Lazaretto was certainly neither revered nor loved. As a matter of fact, sailors, merchants, and newly arriving immigrants dreaded and abhorred the sight of its flag — a yellow banner. It was, as University of Pennsylvania professor and the Philadelphia Lazaretto’s de facto historian David Barnes calls it, a most unloved institution. During the hospital’s near century of operation, the Philadelphia Lazaretto’s staff inspected and quarantined hundreds of thousands of merchant ships, much to the chagrin of businessmen and sailors. The hours, days, or even months at the Lazaretto meant the spoiling or confiscation of cargo and, in turn, the loss of significant capital. In addition to the loss of the merchants’ cargo, the Philadelphia Lazaretto was also the site at which sailors and immigrants perished. Many immigrants, much like the “Ganges Africans,” took their first steps on American soil. According to various estimates, a thirst of all Americans have an ancestor whose first contact with the New World was at the Lazaretto.
After closing its doors as a quarantine station in 1893, the site and the buildings went through several transformations. The Philadelphia Athletic Club purchased the site and renamed it the Orchard Club. The Orchard Club was a summer get-away for wealthy Philadelphians who used its prime waterfront location for leisure and recreation. There were several athletic clubs whos sponsored baseball teams during this era, and some even played their games on the grounds of the Lazaretto. These were not, however, the forerunners of the American League’s Philadelphia Athletics. After the closing of the Orchard Club, Colonel Robert Edward Glendinning — a substantial contributor to wartime aviation in the First World War — and George C. Thomas opened the Essington School of Flying in 1913. It was the state’s first water flying school and one of the first in the world.
Sadly, today the Philadelphia Lazaretto lies, mostly forgotten, in the same marshlands of Tinicum Township, Delaware County. Were it not for the tireless lobbying of a group of hard-working activists, the site may well have been destroyed. Though a township firestation was recently build on the northern half of the Lazaretto site, there is still much worthy of preservation. Similar projects, like New York’s restored Ellis Island and San Francisco’s Angel Island (in process), have given voice to the thousands and hundreds of thousands who came to these shores. The Friends of the Lazaretto and others are working hard to ensure that the rest of the site will stand as testament to the immigrants who landed in Philadelphia.

Mount Desert Rock
About 20 miles southeast of Mount Desert Island, this is one of the most remote and lonely lights. Even mild storms scour the island, denuding it of anything not firmly secured, and frequently submerge it entirely. Yet each spring keepers transported soil from the mainland, tucking it into crevices on this otherwise barren rock in hopes of cultivating flowers and vegetables. For a few months in summer and early fall, the rock became a colorful garden in the middle of the sea. But late fall and winter storms always washed it all away. It's a challenge to see this lighthouse, even from a boat, but whale-watching cruises from Bar Harbor sometimes pass by.
Mount Desert Rock Lighthouse was built in 1830.

CNY - 中國元，人民幣
最常用 CNY 交叉匯率
為什麼您對 CNY 感興趣？
Early Currency in China
With a history of over 3000 years, Chinese currency existed in both Ancient and Imperial China. In 1914, the Silver Dollar was established as the official currency of the Republic of China, with copper, fen, and nickel coins being added in the 1930s. During this time silver appreciated in value, and China could no longer retain the silver standard. In 1935, a new currency known as Fǎbì, was issued.
Introduction of the Gold Yuan and Chinese Yuan Renminbi
The Gold Yuan replaced the Fǎbì in 1948 at a rate of 1 Gold Yuan to 3 million Yuan Fǎbì. That same year, the Yuan Renminbi (often called RMB) was introduced as a way to help stabilize the Communist held areas of mainland China. In 1955, a re-evaluation took place and a new Yuan Renminbi was introduced at a rate of 1 new Yuan to 10,000 old Yuan.
The Renminbi in Foreign Exchange
During the command economy, the Chinese Yuan Renminbi was set to unrealistic exchange values and as a result, severe currency guidelines were put in place. When China's economy opened in 1978, the Yuan Renminbi was only used domestically and foreigners used exchange certificates; this led to a powerful black market. From 1997 to 2005, the Chinese government pegged the Chinese Yuan Renminbi to the US Dollar at approximately 8.3 CNY to 1 USD. In 2005, a flexible mechanism of exchange rates was phased in, with the RMB being re-evaluated to 8.1 Renminbi per US dollar. The Chinese government launched a pilot program in 2009, allowing some businesses in Guangdong and Shanghai to execute business and trade transactions with counterparties in Hong Kong, Macau, and select nations. The program has since expanded to all areas of China and all international counterparties. China has also made agreements with Australia, Japan, Thailand, Russia, and Vietnam to allow for direct currency trade, instead of converting to the US Dollar. As a managed float, the Renminbi's value is determined by a basket of foreign currencies.
- AP chief says phone probe makes news sources reluctant to talk
- UPDATE 2-UAE economy grows at fastest rate since 2006
- UK lawmakers consider probe into transparency of mining firms
- Corporate debt abuse claims prompt Israeli review
- Glance-REFILE-PRESS DIGEST - Sunday British business - May 19
- German minister calls EU move on China solar 'grave mistake'

Protractors - Innovation
While only one patent model for a protractor survives in the Smithsonian collections—from an inventor with a colorful personal history—several of the other objects also provide examples of technical innovation. For instance, some are manufactured versions of patented inventions. Others were named for the person with whom they were associated, even if that engineer or craftsman laid no claim to designing that protractor.
"Protractors - Innovation" showing 1 items.
- This brass semicircular protractor is divided by single degrees and marked by tens from 10° to 90° to 10°. It is attached with metal screws to a set of brass parallel rules. Brass S-shaped hinges connect the rules to each other. The bottom left screw on the parallel rules does not attach to the bottom piece. A rectangular brass arm is screwed to the center of the protractor. A thin brass piece screwed to the arm is marked with a small arrow for pointing to the angle markings. The protractor is stored in a wooden case, which also contains a pair of metal dividers (5-1/4" long).
- The base of the protractor is signed: L. Dod, Newark. Lebbeus Dod (1739–1816) manufactured mathematical instruments in New Jersey and is credited with inventing the "parallel rule protractor." He served as a captain of artillery during the Revolutionary War, mainly by making muskets. His three sons, Stephen (1770–1855), Abner (1772–1847), and Daniel (1778–1823), were also noted instrument and clock makers. The family was most associated with Mendham, N.J. (where a historic marker on N.J. Route 24 indicates Dod's house), but Dod is known to have also lived at various times in Newark.
- ID number MA*310890 is a similar protractor and parallel rule.
- References: Bethuel Lewis Dodd and John Robertson Burnet, "Biographical Sketch of Lebbeus Dod," in Genealogies of the Male Descendants of Daniel Dod . . . 1646–1863 (Newark, N.J., 1864), 144–147; Alexander Farnham, "More Information About New Jersey Toolmakers," The Tool Shed, no. 120 (February 2002), http://www.craftsofnj.org/Newjerseytools/Alex%20Farnham%20more%20Jeraey%20Tools/Alex%20Farnham.htm; Deborah J. Warner, “Surveyor's Compass,” National Museum of American History Physical Sciences Collection: Surveying and Geodesy, http://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/surveying/object.cfm?recordnumber=747113; Peggy A. Kidwell, "American Parallel Rules: Invention on the Fringes of Industry," Rittenhouse 10, no. 39 (1996): 90–96.
- date made
- late 1700s
- Dod, Lebbeus
- ID Number
- accession number
- catalog number
- Data Source
- National Museum of American History, Kenneth E. Behring Center

Philippa Ryan, Scientist, British Museum
Archaeobotany is the study of ancient plant remains, and I joined the field team at Amara West in Sudan earlier this year to collect samples for archaeobotanical analysis. Charred plant materials were retrieved on-site from sediments through dry-sieving and flotation. These samples were subsequently brought back to the British Museum for further sorting and identification.
At the moment I am analysing the charred seeds and fruits with Caroline Cartwright, who is also analysing the wood charcoal. The macroscopic plant remains are analysed using both a stereo microscope and a SEM (scanning electron microscope). Charred remains found so far include cereal grains (wheat and barley) and crop-processing waste, fruits such as figs and a wide range of wild plants.
I am also processing sediment samples to extract phytoliths (microscopic plant remains), which are formed when soluble silica taken up in groundwater by plants is deposited within and between certain plant cells. These silicified cells are found within many different plant families such as grasses (which include cereals), sedges and palms.
Phytoliths are difficult to identify, but have the advantage of surviving in both charred and non-charred contexts, so we can learn about the presence and use of plants in areas where seeds and grains don’t survive.
At the moment, I am processing sediments to extract phytoliths, which includes the removal of carbonates, clays, organics, other remaining non-siliceous material through heavy liquid flotation, and finally mounting dried phytoliths onto slides. Phytoliths are then identified and counted using an optical (light) microscope.
Analysis of these different types of plant remains helps us learn about the past uses of plants at Amara West in day-to-day life, such as for food, fuel and animal fodder. I am also looking at the distributions of seeds and phytoliths across the site to examine locations of plant based activities such as food processing, as well as whether there are any differences in diet between poorer and richer households, or across the history of the site.
Plant remains can also help to provide information about the nearby vegetation, for instance the types of grasses, wetland plants and trees that grew near the ancient town.

Many of us are inclined not to talk about things that upset us. We try to put a lid on our feelings and hope that saying nothing will be for the best. But not talking about something doesnt mean we arent communicating. Children are great observers. They read messages on our faces and in the way we walk or hold our hands. We express ourselves by what we do, by what we say, and by what we do not say.
When we avoid talking about something that is obviously upsetting, children often hesitate to bring up the subject or ask questions about it. To a child, avoidance can be a message - If Mummy and Daddy cant talk about it, it really must be bad, so I better not talk about it either. In effect, instead of protecting our children by avoiding talk, we sometimes cause them more worry and also keep them from telling us how they feel.
On the other hand, it also isnt wise to confront children with information that they may not yet understand or want to know. As with any sensitive subject, we must seek a delicate balance that encourages children to communicate - a balance that lies somewhere between avoidance and confrontation, a balance that isnt easy to achieve. It involves:
- trying to be sensitive to their desire to communicate when theyre ready
- trying not to put up barriers that may inhibit their attempts to communicate
- offering them honest explanations when we are obviously upset
- listening to and accepting their feelings
- not putting off their questions by telling them they are too young
- trying to find brief and simple answers that are appropriate to their questions; answers that they can understand and that do not overwhelm them with too many words.
Perhaps most difficult of all, it involves examining our own feelings and beliefs so that we can talk to them as naturally as possible when the opportunities arise.
Not Having All the Answers
When talking with children, many of us feel uncomfortable if we dont have all the answers. Young children, in particular, seem to expect parents to be all knowing - even about death. But death, the one certainty in all life, if lifes greatest uncertainty. Coming to terms with death can be a lifelong process. We may find different answers at different stages of our lives, or we may always feel a sense of uncertainty and fear. If we have unresolved fears and questions, we may wonder how to provide comforting answers for our children.
While not all our answers may be comforting, we can share what we truly believe. Where we have doubts, an honest, I just dont know the answer to that one, may be more comforting than an explanation which we dont quite believe. Children usually sense our doubts. White lies, no matter how well intended, can create uneasiness and distrust. Besides, sooner, or later, our children will learn that we are not all knowing, and maybe we can make that discovery easier for them if we calmly and matter-of-factly tell them we dont have all the answers. Our non-defensive and accepting attitude may help them feel better about not knowing everything also.
It may help to tell our children that different people believe different things and that not everyone believes as we do, e.g., some people believe in an afterlife; some do not. By indicating our acceptance and respect for others beliefs, we may make it easier for our children to choose beliefs different from our own but more comforting to them.
Last reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 26 Aug 2010
Published on PsychCentral.com. All rights reserved.
Nobody can make you feel inferior without your consent.
-- Eleanor Roosevelt

WebMD Medical News
Brenda Goodman, MA
Laura J. Martin, MD
Oct. 3, 2011 -- Children who are overweight compared to their peers are nearly three times more likely to have high blood pressure, a new study shows.
The study, published in the journal Hypertension, followed 1,111 school-aged children in Indiana for an average of four years.
Twice each year, researchers visited schools to take blood pressure measurements and record the kids’ heights and weights.
About 40% of the children in the study were above the 85th percentile on growth charts for their height and weight. When children are above the 85th percentile, doctors consider them to be overweight.
Among the overweight kids, 14% had blood pressure that was higher than normal, while only 5% of normal-weight kids had elevated blood pressure.
The study also found that extra pounds are especially dangerous for kids who are already big.
"For an overweight and obese child, if you increase your BMI [body mass index] percentile a little bit, that would increase your blood pressure strongly,"says researcher Wanzhu Tu, PhD. Tu is a research scientist at Regenstrief Institute and professor of biostatistics at Indiana University School of Medicine, both in Indianapolis.
"In the same way," Tu says, for just a little bit of weight loss "you could benefit greatly in terms of blood pressure."
The risks of overweight were the same, regardless of the child’s sex or race. About 42% of the kids in the study were black.
Pediatricians say the study is wake-up call.
"We’ve tended to look at the overweight category as a lower-risk category," says Stephen R. Daniels, MD, PhD, chairman of the department of pediatrics at the University of Colorado School of Medicine in Denver. He was not involved in the research.
"This suggests to me that we really need to worry about kids who are in that overweight category," says Daniels, who is also pediatrician-in-chief at Colorado Children’s Hospital.
Other experts say the findings are concerning because having high blood pressure has been shown to set kids up for health complications.
Not only are children with high blood pressure much more likely to turn into adults who have high blood pressure, but newer studies have shown that kids can get the same kinds of organ damage -- to the heart, blood vessels, and kidneys -- that doctors once thought was only a problem for adults with the condition.
One study even found that kids with high blood pressure have subtle changes in the brain area that controls attention, problem solving, and working memory.
"For physicians, we have to take much more seriously this concept of the childhood origins of adult diseases and look beyond the weight and beyond the blood pressure level because we’re finding more evidence, subtle evidence, of injury," says Bonita Falkner, MD, professor of medicine and pediatrics at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.
"So it’s not going to be a risk that’s going to be in the future. It’s a risk that’s now," says Falkner, who wrote an editorial on the study, but was not involved in the research.
"It jacks up the concern about preventing childhood obesity and also not waiting until they are obese," she tells WebMD. "Even overweight can be problematic for children."
SOURCES:Tu, W. Hypertension, November 2011.Falkner, B. Hypertension, November 2011.Wanzhu Tu, PhD, research scientist, Regenstrief Institute; professor of biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.Stephen R. Daniels, MD, PhD, chairman, department of pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine; pediatrician-in-chief, Colorado Children’s Hospital, Denver.Bonita Falkner, MD, professor of medicine and pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia.
Here are the most recent story comments.View All
The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of abc24 News
The Health News section does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.

Viator,Vol. 37 (2006)
In 772, shortly after annexing his brother’s share of the Frankish kingdom, Charlemagne launched his first campaign against the Saxons. “No war taken up by the Frankish people was ever longer, harder or more dreadful,” wrote Einhard almost half a century later. For more than three decades (from 772 until 804) Charlemagne and his army were occupied with a bloody and protracted attempt to pacify and subdue the Saxons.
A standard textbook narrative of the Saxon wars would go roughly like this: Charlemagne’s successful raid into Saxony in 772 opened the first phase of the Saxon wars. The reasons behind it are not at all clear. The so-called Annales regni Francorum, that is, the supposedly official court-based Frankish history, simply state that from Worms, where Charlemagne had held an assembly, he marched into Saxony. No Saxon rebellion or any other Saxon aggression are mentioned in connection with the Frankish attack, and it seems that once Charlemagne had managed to pacify Aquitaine, he decided to finish the job his father had already started in Saxony. Following the capture of Eresburg, Charlemagne and his army continued northwards, destroying on their way the enigmatic Irminsul. Charlemagne would have liked to continue his campaign in Saxony, but a desperate call for help from the pope forced him to leave Saxony and head southwards. The Saxon reaction was not late in coming. When Charlemagne and the Frankish army were busy in Italy, the Saxons invaded Hesse, plundering and destroying everything on their way.

Table of Contents Image Captions
1. "Minnehaha Falls"|
Floral home; or, First years of Minnesota. Early sketches, later settlements, and further developments, by Harriet E. Bishop (New York, 1857).
Bibliographic Information | Page Image Viewer (Viewer linked to image 152)
2. "Chief Little Crow"
3. "Henry Belland, Voyageur"
4. "Fort Mackinac in 1905: Photograph from pasture southwest of the fort, between
the village and the Grand Hotel"
5. "Jefferson's Plan, 1784"|
Collections of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Volume 11 (1888): 452-61.
Bibliographic Information | Page Image Viewer (Viewer linked to image 470)
6. "This drawing by John T. McCutcheon appeared when Battle Creek was booming wheat flakes and cereal stocks. W. K. Kellogg liked the cartoon so much that he reproduced it later in a cornflake advertisement. The building in the background was the Sanitas food factory."
7. "Men of the Red Underground"
8. "The morning milk lunch for under-nourished school children, in an elementary school kitchen. Movement started in 1916"
The History of the Upper Midwest: An Overview

Fracking is short for ‘hydraulic fracturing,’ a term used to describe the process of pumping millions of gallons of pressurized water, sand and chemicals down a newly drilled well to blast out the surrounding shale rock and gas.
It’s a relatively new technique that‘s made shale gas more popular in recent years. For a long time, shale gas — a natural gas that’s embedded in ancient rocks known as shale — was deemed as being not worth the trouble by drilling companies because it was so difficult to recover. The gas is embedded in rocks and the best way to get it out is to drill in sideways, which only became possible in the 1980s and 1990s as the gas industry improved its directional drilling technology. Later, technological advances that let drillers use more water pressure made fracking into an economically viable option for obtaining shale gas from the rocks.
Read more about 'fracking'
Shale is scattered throughout the United States. The two hottest shale sites in America right now are the Barnett Shale in Texas and the Marcellus shale, which is buried beneath seven states and part of Lake Erie. Other large shale deposits are located in Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Wyoming.
Despite its potential, though, a movement has welled up lately to block the shale gas boom. Some critics say embracing natural gas so heartily will slow the rise of renewable energy, but the biggest beef with shale isn't as much about its gas — it's about how we get it out of the ground. Shale gas would likely still be a novelty fuel without modern advances in hydraulic fracturing, yet the need for fracking is also starting to seem like it could be shale's fatal flaw. The practice has sparked major environmental and public heath concerns near U.S. gas fields, from diesel fuel and unidentified chemicals in groundwater to methane seeping out of sink faucets and even blowing up houses.

The Lancet Infectious Diseases, Volume 9, Issue 7
, Page 401, July 2009
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(09)70162-8Cite or Link Using DOI
Swine-origin influenza A H1N1 update
As swine-origin influenza A H1N1 continues to spread through the world, with cases in Asia and Africa, WHO is now debating whether to declare a pandemic.
Since the start of May, the number of H1N1 cases has risen from fewer than 3000 to over 20 000. As of June 8, 25 288 people had been infected, of whom 139 have died.
A key concern was the spread of the virus to developing countries, which will struggle to contain the virus. Africa's first infection was in a young girl travelling back to Egypt fro ...
This article is made available free of charge, as a service to our users.
Please login to access the full article, or register if you do not yet have a username and password.
Already Registered? Please Login
New to TheLancet.com?
TheLancet.com is the online home of:
- The Lancet
- The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology
- The Lancet Infectious Diseases
- The Lancet Neurology
- The Lancet Oncology
- The Lancet Respiratory Medicine
Please register to access selected articles for free, personalize and interact with this site. Registration is free, takes no more than two minutes, and offers you many benefits.

I am trying to understand what is the difference between TCP Half Open Connection and TCP Half closed connection can any one tell what exactly are they?
When TCP establishes a connection, it is considered guaranteed since there is a handshake that takes place:
At that point the connection is established, and data begins to flow. In contrast, a UDP packet is not guaranteed, and is just sent in the hopes it gets there.
Officially, according to the RFC's, a half-open TCP connection is when one side of the established connection has crashed, and did not send notification that the connection was ending. This is not the common usage today.
Unofficially, if can refer to an embryonic connection, which is a connection in the process of being established.
Half-closed is the opposite of that unofficial definition. It is a state somewhere in the middle where the computers are tearing down the established connection.

|A tamarin rock star |
(photographed by Ltshears at Wikimedia)
Our moods change when we hear music, but not all music affects us the same way. Slow, soft, higher-pitched, melodic songs soothe us; upbeat classical music makes us more alert and active; and fast, harsh, lower-pitched, dissonant music can rev us up and stress us out. Why would certain sounds affect us in specific emotional ways? One possibility is because of an overlap between how we perceive music and how we perceive human voice. Across human languages, people talk to their babies in slower, softer, higher-pitched voices than they speak to adults. And when we’re angry, we belt out low-pitched growly tones. The specific vocal attributes that we use in different emotional contexts are specific to our species… So what makes us so egocentric to think that other species might respond to our music in the same ways that we do?
|A serene tamarin ponders where he placed |
his smoking jacket (photographed by
Michael Gäbler at Wikimedia)
Cotton-top tamarins are squirrel-sized monkeys from northern Colombia that are highly social and vocal. As in humans (and pretty much every other vocalizing species studied), they tend to make higher-pitched tonal sounds when in friendly states and lower-pitched growly sounds when in aggressive states. But tamarin vocalizations have different tempos and pitch ranges than our tempos and pitch ranges.
Chuck and David musically analyzed recorded tamarin calls to determine the common attributes of the sounds they make when they are feeling friendly or when they are aggressive or fearful. Then they composed music based on these attributes, essentially creating tamarin happy-music and tamarin death metal. They also composed original music based on human vocal attributes. They played 30-second clips of these different music types to pairs of tamarins and measured their behavior while the song was being played and for the first 5 minutes after it had finished. They compared these behavioral measures to the tamarins’ behavior during baseline periods (time periods not associated with the music sessions).
An example of happy tamarin music (Copyright by David Teie and available through Biology Letters) can be found here.
An example of aggressive tamarin music (Copyright by David Teie and available through Biology Letters) can be found here.As the researchers had predicted, tamarins were much more affected by tamarin music than by human music. Happy tamarin music seemed to calm them, causing the tamarins to move less and eat and drink more in the 5 minutes after the music stopped. Compared to the happy tamarin music, the aggressive tamarin music seemed to stress them out, causing the tamarins to move more and show more anxious behaviors (like bristling their fur and peeing) after the music stopped.
The tamarins also showed lesser reactions to the human music. They showed less anxious behavior after the happy human music played and moved less after the aggressive human music played. So, human voice-based music also affected the tamarins to some degree, but not as strongly. This may be because there are some aspects of how we communicate emotions with our voice that are the same in tamarins. (How did the tamarin music make you feel?)
Can you imagine what we could do with this idea of species-specific music? Well, David and Chuck did! They have since developed music for cats using similar techniques. Although they're still working on the paper, they have said that the cats prefered and were more calmed by cat music compared to human music. You can find samples and get your own copies here.
We often think of vocal signals conveying messages in particular sounds, like words and sentences. But calls seem to do much more than that, making the emotions and behaviors of those listening resemble the emotions of those calling.
Want to know more? Check this out:
Snowdon, C., & Teie, D. (2009). Affective responses in tamarins elicited by species-specific music Biology Letters, 6 (1), 30-32 DOI: 10.1098/rsbl.2009.0593

The Edupunks' Guide: How to Do Research Online
It’s the best of times and the worst of times to be a learner. College tuition has doubled in the past decade, while the options for learning online and independently keep expanding. Anya Kamenetz's new free ebook The Edupunks’ Guide is all about the many paths that learners are taking in this new world, and we're running excerpts from the book all week. We're also asking GOOD readers to doodle your learning journey and submit the result by Sunday, September 11.
There’s been a revolution in the way people spread knowledge. Sharing information openly over the Internet is way cheaper than purchasing it commercially in dead-tree format, and often the learning that happens this way is faster, more up-to-date, and more relevant to our immediate needs. A simple example is learning to make pizza. A few years ago, you may have had to take a class or at least buy a cookbook. Today you can put “how to make a pizza” into YouTube and within minutes, you’re watching a video that shows you how to fling the dough!
More and more people around the world are building on this knowledge revolution to explore new modes of learning and to transform what we mean by “education.”
For many, the first step in an online learning journey is a simple Google search.
- Start with Google, the most-used search engine on the web. Put your phrase in quotes to return pages with the exact words, like this: “African-American history”
- Search on Wikipedia to get an overview of the topic. Follow the links to an article’s sources at the bottom of the page.
- Google Scholar will give you scholarly journal articles and other verified sources of information.
- An online archive like The Internet Archive may offer original source material.
- YouTube is good for videos—a quick entry into a topic. Or just Google your phrase and the word “video.”
- For news stories, try Google News
- For links on news, trends, and up-to-the-minute happenings, you can search Twitter with a hashtag, like this: #americanidol.
- Try posting your question to a site like OpenStudy or WikiAnswers.
- Put in your search terms plus the word “forum” or “blog” to see what ideas other people have discussed on message boards or on blogs.
A successful online research session will leave you with 20 open tabs or windows at the top of your screen. Follow your curiosity, but keep track of the links you’re following in an email draft, Word document, or an application like Evernote or Diigo so you can consult them later.
Top Free Learning Resources Online
Europeana: A digital library with 4.6 million items from libraries, archives, museums and other institutions across Europe. Read Charles Darwin’s letters or listen to Pavarotti singing Verdi.
The Internet Archive: A vast nonprofit digital library of Internet sites and other cultural artifacts—video, audio, texts, and live music.
Khan Academy: The Khan Academy has over 2000 videos covering basic math through calculus and trigonometry, physics, biology, chemistry, banking, finance, and statistics. The videos are short—5 to 15 minutes long—simple, and entertaining. They’re all made by Sal Khan, a 33-year-old former hedge fund analyst who started making them to help tutor his young cousins.
LearnFree: 750 free lessons on basic computer skills, reading and math.
Library.nu: Half a million free books. May not be exactly legal. Browse at your own risk.
MIT Open Courseware: The oldest open courseware site, with 1,900 courses on everything from history to physics. A favorite for science and math.
OpenCulture: A well-edited blog and site chronicling “the best” cultural and educational media on the web. They have lists of free online courses from top universities and free language lessons.
Open Learning Initiative: The Open Learning Initiative at Carnegie Mellon has 13 free complete courses in topics ranging from physics to logic to French. The courses are highly interactive, using video, animations, and lots of embedded quizzes and assessments so you know how you’re doing. The site requires a signup and sometimes you may have to download some software.
Open Textbooks: A catalog of open textbooks that are free to read online.
Quia: On Quia, you can create your own games and quizzes to test yourself, or take thousands of quizzes—flashcards, matching games, word searches—that other students and teachers have created for the ultimate study guide.
Saylor Foundation: Saylor lists 241 original courses on the site, for which the material comes from around the web.
Scribd: Scribd is a place to find free books and presentations on almost any topic, uploaded and shared by the authors.
Slideshare: Slideshare is a collection of free PowerPoint presentations, sometimes with audio. It’s a good place to learn about up-to-date topics like design, technology, and music.
TED: TED (for Technology, Entertainment, Design) has an excellent collection of 300-plus short video lectures by scientists, authors, artists, political figures, and more. Browsing the site is sure to be enlightening and can give you clues about fields you might want to study, like behavioral economics or biophysics.
Textbook Revolution: A student-run site with links and reviews to textbooks and other educational resources. Many are available free as PDFs, viewable online as ebooks, or websites containing course materials. You can also use the site to find descriptions of books that aren’t free, and find where they may be cheaper.
Wikiversity: Wikiversity has a wide variety of multimedia course materials. Courses are run through the site, meaning students at universities create and publish course modules for other students’ use. Like Wikipedia, you can participate in the community by editing course material (a great way to test and expand your own knowledge) or by joining discussions in the “Colloquium” section.
YouTube and YouTube EDU: Don’t forget to search YouTube for lectures and presentations on any topic you find interesting. YouTube EDU contains content that’s been tagged “education,” which may include quirky things like Tina Fey’s 2011 book talk at Google.

Simple technique appears to be safe and effective, review suggests
By Robert Preidt
MONDAY, Oct. 15 (HealthDay News) -- A technique called the "mother's kiss" is a safe and effective way to remove foreign objects from the nostrils of young children, according to British researchers.
In the mother's kiss, a child's mother or other trusted adult covers the child's mouth with their mouth to form a seal, blocks the clear nostril with their finger, and then blows into the child's mouth. The pressure from the breath may expel the object in the blocked nostril.
Before using it, the adult should explain the technique to the child so that he or she is not frightened. If the first attempt is unsuccessful, the technique can be tried several times, according to a review published in the current issue of the CMAJ (Canadian Medical Association Journal).
For their report, researchers in Australia and the United Kingdom examined eight case studies in which the mother's kiss was used on children aged 1 to 8 years.
"The mother's kiss appears to be a safe and effective technique for first-line treatment in the removal of a foreign body from the nasal cavity," Dr. Stephanie Cook, of the Buxted Medical Centre in England, and colleagues concluded. "In addition, it may prevent the need for general anesthesia in some cases."
Further research is needed to compare various positive-pressure techniques and test how effective they are in different situations where objects are in various locations and have spent different lengths of time in the nasal passages, the researchers noted in a journal news release.
The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about foreign objects in the nose.
SOURCE: CMAJ (Canadian Medical Association Journal), news release, Oct. 15, 2012
Copyright © 2012 HealthDay. All rights reserved. URL:http://www.healthscout.com/template.asp?id=669525

Some unknown terrible person shot a defenseless pilot whale last month, leaving it to swim the Atlantic in agony for weeks before it finally beached itself on the New Jersey shore and died. Authorities are still looking for the shooter. The bullet wound caused a fulminant infection in the whale’s jaw that prevented it from eating, so it basically starved to death. This was determined during a necropsy, an autopsy for animals.
Along with sympathy for the poor creature, this debacle aroused an interesting question: How does one autopsy a whale? With four-ton meat hooks, whaling knives and bone saws, actually. Michael Moore, a veterinarian and whale biologist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, does it all the time.
Moore spends much of his time studying North Atlantic right whales, an endangered species whose name derives from whalers’ adage that these were the “right whales” to hunt, because they’re easy to spot and float when they die. They’re no longer hunted for their oil, but they are entangled in fishing lines and injured in ship collisions, often suffering for a great while and also succumbing to starvation. “It’s the most egregious animal welfare issue globally at this time,” in Moore’s words. But protecting them requires understanding how they died, and to do this Moore must take them apart, studying their broken bones and lobster net-tangled flukes to determine their exact causes of death.In partnership with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Moore deploys on-call, toting a case full of knives to examine right whales that have beached or are floating in the open ocean. Right whales are baleen whales and at least two orders of magnitude bigger than the toothed pilot whale that was shot, so in most cases, they must be examined right where they‘re found — that means on the beach. They either beach themselves and die there, or they’re towed to shore once they have been located at sea.
Moore and other rubber-suited biologists work amid 120,000 pounds of slick black-and-red whale flesh, clambering over and through the carcass to find out what went wrong. Time is of the essence, because the longer they wait, the more the animal’s internal organs break down, making it difficult to determine how it died.
Moore uses a Japanese whaling hook, which is useful for pulling back sheets of blubber to get at the animal’s internal organs. He carries a bone saw — formerly his mother’s — to get through jaws and vertebrae to find the location of a fatal injury. He’s even visited indigenous Alaskan tribes to study their ancestral whale processing techniques.
The pilot whale that died was small, so it was trucked to a necropsy facility at the the Marine Mammal Stranding Center in Brigantine, N.J., down the shore north of Atlantic City. It weighed about 740 pounds when it beached, quite gaunt for an animal that should normally weigh more than a ton. Researchers knew something was seriously wrong, but they had to perform a necropsy to determine what it was.
The creatures are brought in on trucks and hoisted into the facility on chains rigged to the ceiling, attached to four-ton-rated meat hooks. They lay on negative-pressure steel tables, the same types used in human autopsy procedures, which suck out odors and pathogens as the biologists get to work. The lab also contains deep freezers for stringing up deceased animals; it harbors an overwhelming odor of chemical and organic substances. (It’s somewhat legendary at WHOI that Moore lost his sense of smell while in veterinary school, which he says enables him to get literally inside a rotting animal carcass without losing his lunch or his cool.)
The 11-foot-long pilot whale died shortly after authorities reached its side on the beach on Sept. 24. But it wasn’t until a necropsy a couple weeks later that they knew what happened. The bullet entered near its blow hole, but the wound had closed and faded a bit, suggesting it had been shot about a month prior. The .30-caliber round lodged in its jaw, causing the infection.
“This poor animal literally starved to death,” said Bob Schoelkopf, co-director of the Marine Mammal Stranding Center, in an interview with the AP. “It was wandering around and slowly starving to death because of the infection. Who would do that to an innocent animal?”
That question is now in the hands of the authorities. For biologists like Moore and Schoelkopf, necropsies can at least answer the question of how. Why, of course, is something else entirely.
Five amazing, clean technologies that will set us free, in this month's energy-focused issue. Also: how to build a better bomb detector, the robotic toys that are raising your children, a human catapult, the world's smallest arcade, and much more.

Narrator: This is Science Today. A new air sampler, which can effectively trap and evaluate fine particle pollutants in both their solid and gas phases has been developed by scientist Lara Gundel of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. This sampler can greatly impact future EPA air quality standards and lead to a definitive understanding of how pollutants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and pesticides, affect our health.
Gundel: I guess the innovations we made were a way to separate the gases and particles accurately and then to be able to collective measure particles and the gases separately and accurately.
Narrator: Gundel achieved this by coating an inner tube of roughened glass inside the filter with sticky resin beads, which were finely ground up until their pores were small enough to trap gas particles.
Gundel: We quickly decided that this new technology that we had, these new kinds of sampler designs, could be used in outdoor air, in general atmospheric questions.
Narrator: Gundel is currently collaborating with other scientists and the EPA to test this sampler at various sites across the country. For Science Today, I'm Larissa Branin.

The atlas of climate change: mapping the world's greatest challenge
University of California Press
, 2007 - Science
- 112 pages
Today's headlines and recent events reflect the gravity of climate change. Heat waves, droughts, and floods are bringing death to vulnerable populations, destroying livelihoods, and driving people from their homes.
Rigorous in its science and insightful in its message, this atlas examines the causes of climate change and considers its possible impact on subsistence, water resources, ecosystems, biodiversity, health, coastal megacities, and cultural treasures. It reviews historical contributions to greenhouse gas levels, progress in meeting international commitments, and local efforts to meet the challenge of climate change.
With more than 50 full-color maps and graphics, this is an essential resource for policy makers, environmentalists, students, and everyone concerned with this pressing subject.
The Atlas covers a wide range of topics, including:
* Warning signs
* Future scenarios
* Vulnerable populations
* Renewable energy
* Emissions reduction
* Personal and public action
Copub: Myriad Editions

Classroom Strategies for Students with Disabilities
This information is intended as a guide to assist students with disabilities in understanding and coping with their particular disability and its characteristics. Because every person and disability is unique, it is important to keep individual qualities and characteristics in mind when evaluating the usefulness of this information for a particular person in a particular circumstance. For additional information regarding these topics, please contact the Counselor/Coordinator of Student Accommodations.
Difficulty paying attention or concentrating on one task for an extended period of time
Difficulty hearing or processing/understanding what is heard.
Total loss of sight
Total loss of hearing
Difficulty expressing oneself in spoken or written form
Difficulty controlling hand, eye or other muscles that aid in the perception and expression of information
Difficulty understanding/interpreting what one hears or reads
Difficulty remembering information
Difficulty seeing or processing/understanding what is seen
For additional information please contact the Counselor/Coordinator of Student Accommodations at 217/234-5259 or email Jordan Hicks at email@example.com

Sustainability and Renewable Merino
Wool runs on grass
The primary inputs for wool production are water, sunshine and fertile soils to grow grass – the primary diet of sheep.
As such merino production inherently has the potential of being fully sustainable providing it is operated within the carrying capacity of the ecosystem.
They must operate, or be in the process of implementing, a grazing management strategy based on long term sustainability.
The management system must embrace holistic farming principals with the goal of developing a resilient ecosystem that can regenerate, withstand stress and rebuild itself when necessary.
This goal should be to aim for 100% ground cover all year, with a focus on perennial grasses to regenerate the ecology and increase biodiversity.
Holistic farming principles include:
- Clear goals for the people involved
– Clear goals for the land in use
– Clear goals for the business
- Clear goals for the management of livestock
The management process should involve:
- Reviewing these strategies regularly
– Making decision with these goals in mind
– Monitoring the health of your land, your business and the people involved

ingredients & lore
blended with decaf ceylon tea, natural peach flavor, marigold flowers, apple pieces and apricots
Cultivation of peaches began in China as early as 2000BC. The winds of trade brought peaches to Greece and Persia, where they were instantly accepted. The juicy fruit was also a big hit with the Romans, who cultivated it throughout the empire. From Italy, peaches made the leap across the Atlantic, where early settlers planted them throughout the East Coast. Soon they were so plentiful, local botanists thought of them as native fruits.

OFF THE CHARTS
Oil supply rising, but demand may more than keep pace
Published: Saturday, November 24, 2012 at 4:36 p.m.
Last Modified: Saturday, November 24, 2012 at 4:36 p.m.
It used to be taken for granted that as economies grew, they would use more oil. That was a major reason cited in warnings that the world would run out of oil, particularly if standards of living rose in developing countries.
Well, standards of living are improving in developing countries, but the dire forecasts now appear to be wrong. In part that is because new discoveries and improving technologies have increased the amount of oil that can be produced. It also reflects conservation, in part, as cars become more efficient and as other steps are taken to reduce oil use.
The International Energy Agency, in its 2012 World Energy Outlook, released last week, forecast that U.S. oil production, which began to rise in 2009 after decades of decline, would continue rising through at least 2020, when it could be about as high as it was in 1970, the year of peak production.
At the same time it forecast that by 2035, U.S. oil consumption, which peaked in 2005, could decline to levels not seen since the 1960s, depending on how much conservation is encouraged.
The IEA report also forecast that by around 2020, the United States could surpass Saudi Arabia as the world's largest oil producer, and that while the country was not likely to become a net exporter of oil, the North American continent as a whole could be by around 2030.
But despite declining demand in some countries that historically were heavy users of oil, the world demand for oil seems likely to continue to rise. The IEA forecast that global energy demand – including demand for energy produced by other sources – is likely to rise by 35 percent by 2035, with a large part of the increase coming from China and India.
In 1969, the United States consumed a third of the oil used in the world, while China used less than 1 percent. Last year the U.S. share was less than 22 percent, while the Chinese accounted for 11 percent. The IEA forecasts that by 2030, the U.S. share could be less than the Chinese one.
By 2035, U.S. consumption of oil is expected to be as much as one-third less than it was last year. In China, oil consumption is expected to be up as much as two-thirds from the 2011 level, and India's is predicted to more than double.
Reader comments posted to this article may be published in our print edition. All rights reserved. This copyrighted material may not be re-published without permission. Links are encouraged.

Aswan High Dam on the Nile River
Aswan-- On 15 January 1971, Egypt celebrated the completion of the High Dam, whose funding was the center of a Cold War dispute that led to the 1956 Suez War. Located on the Upper Nile, around 1000km downstream from Cairo, the gigantic mountain of concrete and steel is among the 20th century's most elaborate engineering work. Aswan High Dam on the Nile River is located at the north end of Lake Nasser.
The construction of the High Dam began in 1960, and it was officially inaugurated ten years later, at a cost of US$1 billion, much of which was provided by the former Soviet Union. The dam stores 160 billion cubic meters of water, and the reservoir behind it, named Lake Nasser, stretches some 350km into Egypt and 150km into Sudan. It is a symbol for Egyptians patience and challenge.
The Suez Crisis began on 26 July 1956 when Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalised the Suez Canal. The move was in response to a decision by the United States and Britain to withdraw finance for the Aswan High Dam - a massive project to bring water to the Nile valley and electricity to develop Egypt's industry - because of Egypt's political and military ties to the Soviet Union.
The world-famous High Dam was an engineering miracle when it was built in the 1960s. Today it provides irrigation and electricity for the whole of Egypt and, together with the old Aswan Dam, 6km downriver, wonderful views for visitors. From the top of the two mile-long High Dam you can gaze across Lake Nasser, the huge reservoir created when it was built to Kalabsha temple in the south and the huge power station to the north.
The story of the High Dam was a tale of a nation, hikayit sha‘b, as Abdel Halim Hafiz chanted in an iconic song from the Nasserist period.
This nation lived under the yoke of British colonialism for over 70 years. After gaining independence, Egypt's revolutionary president, Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser, approached the World Bank to finance the construction of a dam on the Nile, a vital step towards economic development. The World Bank refused. In an audacious challenge to old and new imperialism, Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal in 1956 to acquire funding for the project. The struggling nation heroically endured subsequent military assaults and a trade embargo. The dam was eventually built.
The story of the High Dam at Aswan is indeed the tale of this nation. The stages of its history chronicle critical transformations in Egyptian history at large. During the last half century, the dam moved from being a celebrated monument to Egyptian independence to a forgotten barrage deep in the country's south. It was a state-engineered tool of anti-imperialist propaganda, whose splendor faded away with the downfall and fundamental reversion of the anti-imperial project.
In other words Egypt had monopoly of the waters. On behalf of its colonial possessions - Sudan, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda - Britain, which was primarily concerned with the Suez Canal and the passage to India, signed away their most precious resource.
Egypt had the right to veto any project along the Nile and full rights of inspection.
In 1959, this deal was overtaken by a new agreement between Egypt and Sudan splitting the waters 75 per cent to 25 per cent and guaranteeing Cairo "full control of the river".
The results of this control are nowhere more clearly seen than at Lake Nasser, a man-made reservoir 550km-long, created when Egypt completed the Aswan high dam. The country's largest engineering project took six years to build and another five years to fill.
Some 55.5 billion cu m of water gush from the Aswan dam into Egypt annually. It has enabled Cairo to regulate the life-giving annual flood, to irrigate its otherwise parched landscape, and at the point it was finished supplied half the country's electricity needs.
Nasser was in need of a success, a success to rival that of the Suez Canal, which is a 190 km-long man-made waterway linking the Mediterranean with the Red Sea. The French dug the Suez Canal 97 years before Nasser took the decision to nationalize it. Nasser took the decision to nationalize the Suez Canal just two years before it was supposed to revert back to Egyptian control. This was used as justification by three countries [Britain, France and Israel] to launch a tripartite strike against Egypt. The President's decision to cancel the contract just two years before its expiry date made it seem like Nasser was seeking a popular confrontation.
The difference is that the Aswan High Dam is a success story, whereas the Suez Canal was a story of conflict. The High Dam is a witness of the history of Egypt's relationship with the Soviet Union, which continued throughout Nasser's rule. The Aswan High Dam is considered to be the most important construction of the Nasser regime.
Abu Simbel, Egypt — In the 1960s, rising waters from a new dam threatened to submerge the temples and monuments of Nubia, the ancient home of black pharaohs in Egypt's far south. To preserve them, the antiquities were dismantled, moved and reconstructed. Today, most of the surviving monuments can be seen only from the lake created by the waters that nearly destroyed them.
A short flight from Aswan is Abu Simbel and the Great Temple of Ramses II, and the gods of creation and light, Ptah, Amen and Heru-khuti is the most iconic Ancient Egyptian sight after the Pyramids. The temple has four massive statues of Ramses II and the gods Ra-Horakhty, Amun and Ptah at its entrance. Beyond lie two pillared halls and the sacred sanctuary. Every wall and ceiling is a storybook art gallery of this extraordinary pharaoh's life. (He lived to 90 and is said to have fathered more than 200 children).
Know more details about Visiting Temples of Ramses II at Abu Simbel, Aswan
Construction of the high dam was an enormous national project that every Egyptian contributed to. Nubians in particular sacrificed their possessions, including 45 Nubian villages lying on 300 square kilometers of land and one million palm trees. They were moved from a paradise on the banks of the Nile. These treasures are all submerged under water now. Along with the loss of the land, there was also the loss of heritage, values, memories and lifestyle, and, above all proximity to the water, the primary source of life.
For More Information Visit: Aswan Tourism and Tourist Information
Cruise ships on Egypt's Lake Nasser visit the ancient temples of Nubia's black pharaohs:
The Aswan High Dam: A Political Witness: http://aawsat.com/english/news.asp?section=2&id=19640
Memories of a high dam: http://www.almasryalyoum.com/en/news/memories-dam-high-dam%E2%80%A6
Suez Crisis: Key players: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/5195582.stm
Nile deal brings countries to boiling point over water: http://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10648772

|Met proto-oncogene (hepatocyte growth factor receptor)|
Crystallographic structure of MET. PDB rendering based on 1r0p.
|External IDs||ChEMBL: GeneCards:|
|RNA expression pattern|
c-Met (MET or MNNG HOS Transforming gene) is a proto-oncogene that encodes a protein known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor (HGFR). The hepatocyte growth factor receptor protein possesses tyrosine-kinase activity. The primary single chain precursor protein is post-translationally cleaved to produce the alpha and beta subunits, which are disulfide linked to form the mature receptor.
MET is a membrane receptor that is essential for embryonic development and wound healing. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is the only known ligand of the MET receptor. MET is normally expressed by cells of epithelial origin, while expression of HGF is restricted to cells of mesenchymal origin. Upon HGF stimulation, MET induces several biological responses that collectively give rise to a program known as invasive growth.
Abnormal MET activation in cancer correlates with poor prognosis, where aberrantly active MET triggers tumor growth, formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) that supply the tumor with nutrients, and cancer spread to other organs (metastasis). MET is deregulated in many types of human malignancies, including cancers of kidney, liver, stomach, breast, and brain. Normally, only stem cells and progenitor cells express MET, which allows these cells to grow invasively in order to generate new tissues in an embryo or regenerate damaged tissues in an adult. However, cancer stem cells are thought to hijack the ability of normal stem cells to express MET, and thus become the cause of cancer persistence and spread to other sites in the body.
MET proto-oncogene (GeneID: 4233) has a total length of 125,982 bp, and it is located in the 7q31 locus of chromosome 7. MET is transcribed into a 6,641 bp mature mRNA, which is then translated into a 1,390 amino-acid MET protein.
MET is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that is produced as a single-chain precursor. The precursor is proteolytically cleaved at a furin site to yield a highly glycosylated extracellular α-subunit and a transmembrane β-subunit, which are linked together by a disulfide bridge.
- Region of homology to semaphorins (Sema domain), which includes the full α-chain and the N-terminal part of the β-chain
- Cysteine-rich MET-related sequence (MRS domain)
- Glycine-proline-rich repeats (G-P repeats)
- Four immunoglobulin-like structures (Ig domains), a typical protein-protein interaction region.
A Juxtamembrane segment that contains:
- a serine residue (Ser 985), which inhibits the receptor kinase activity upon phosphorylation
- a tyrosine (Tyr 1003), which is responsible for MET polyubiquitination, endocytosis, and degradation upon interaction with the ubiquitin ligase CBL
- Tyrosine kinase domain, which mediates MET biological activity. Following MET activation, transphosphorylation occurs on Tyr 1234 and Tyr 1235
- C-terminal region contains two crucial tyrosines (Tyr 1349 and Tyr 1356), which are inserted into the multisubstrate docking site, capable of recruiting downstream adapter proteins with Src homology-2 (SH2) domains. The two tyrosines of the docking site have been reported to be necessary and sufficient for the signal transduction both in vitro.
MET signaling pathway 
MET activation by its ligand HGF induces MET kinase catalytic activity, which triggers transphosphorylation of the tyrosines Tyr 1234 and Tyr 1235. These two tyrosines engage various signal transducers, thus initiating a whole spectrum of biological activities driven by MET, collectively known as the invasive growth program. The transducers interact with the intracellular multisubstrate docking site of MET either directly, such as GRB2, SHC, SRC, and the p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K), or indirectly through the scaffolding protein Gab1
Tyr 1349 and Tyr 1356 of the multisubstrate docking site are both involved in the interaction with GAB1, SRC, and SHC, while only Tyr 1356 is involved in the recruitment of GRB2, phospholipase C γ (PLC-γ), p85, and SHP2.
GAB1 is a key coordinator of the cellular responses to MET and binds the MET intracellular region with high avidity, but low affinity. Upon interaction with MET, GAB1 becomes phosphorylated on several tyrosine residues which, in turn, recruit a number of signalling effectors, including PI3K, SHP2, and PLC-γ. GAB1 phosphorylation by MET results in a sustained signal that mediates most of the downstream signaling pathways.
Activation of signal transduction 
MET engagement activates multiple signal transduction pathways:
- The RAS pathway mediates HGF-induced scattering and proliferation signals, which lead to branching morphogenesis. Of note, HGF, differently from most mitogens, induces sustained RAS activation, and thus prolonged MAPK activity.
- The PI3K pathway is activated in two ways: PI3K can be either downstream of RAS, or it can be recruited directly through the multifunctional docking site. Activation of the PI3K pathway is currently associated with cell motility through remodeling of adhesion to the extracellular matrix as well as localized recruitment of transducers involved in cytoskeletal reorganization, such as RAC1 and PAK. PI3K activation also triggers a survival signal due to activation of the AKT pathway.
- The STAT pathway, together with the sustained MAPK activation, is necessary for the HGF-induced branching morphogenesis. MET activates the STAT3 transcription factor directly, through an SH2 domain.
- The beta-catenin pathway, a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway, translocates into the nucleus following MET activation and participates in transcriptional regulation of numerous genes.
Role in development 
During embryonic development, transformation of the flat, two-layer germinal disc into a three-dimensional body depends on transition of some cells from an epithelial phenotype to spindle-shaped cells with motile behaviour, a mesenchymal phenotype. This process is referred to as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Later in embryonic development, MET is crucial for gastrulation, angiogenesis, myoblast migration, bone remodeling, and nerve sprouting among others. MET is essential for embryogenesis, because MET -/- mice die in utero due to severe defects in placental development. Furthermore, MET is required for such critical processes as liver regeneration and wound healing during adulthood.
Tissue distribution 
MET is normally expressed by epithelial cells. However, MET is also found on endothelial cells, neurons, hepatocytes, hematopoietic cells, and melanocytes. HGF expression is restricted to cells of mesenchymal origin.
Transcriptional control 
MET transcription is activated by HGF and several growth factors. MET promoter has four putative binding sites for Ets, a family of transcription factors that control several invasive growth genes. ETS1 activates MET transcription in vitro. MET transcription is activated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1), which is activated by low concentration of intracellular oxygen. HIF1 can bind to one of the several hypoxia response elements (HREs) in the MET promoter. Hypoxia also activates transcription factor AP-1, which is involved in MET transcription.
Role in cancer 
MET pathway plays an important role in the development of cancer through:
- angiogenesis (sprouting of new blood vessels from pre-existing ones to supply a tumor with nutrients);
- scatter (cells dissociation due to metalloprotease production), which often leads to metastasis.
Coordinated down-regulation of both MET and its downstream effector extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) by miR-199a* may be effective in inhibiting not only cell proliferation but also motility and invasive capabilities of tumor cells.
Interaction with tumour suppressor genes 
PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a protein PTEN, which possesses lipid and protein phosphatase-dependent as well as phosphatase-independent activities. PTEN protein phosphatase is able to interfere with MET signaling by dephosphorylating either PIP3 generated by PI3K, or the p52 isoform of SHC. SHC dephosphorylation inhibits recruitment of the GRB2 adapter to activated MET.
Cancer therapies targeting HGF/MET 
Since tumor invasion and metastasis are the main cause of death in cancer patients, interfering with MET signaling appears to be a promising therapeutic approach. A comprehensive list of HGF and MET targeted experimental therapeutics for oncology now in human clinical trials can be found here.
MET kinase inhibitors 
Kinase inhibitors are low molecular weight molecules that prevent ATP binding to MET, thus inhibiting receptor transphosphorylation and recruitment of the downstream effectors. The limitations of kinase inhibitors include the facts that they only inhibit kinase-dependent MET activation, and that none of them is fully specific for MET.
- K252a (Fermentek Biotechnology) is a staurosporine analogue isolated from Nocardiopsis sp. soil fungi, and it is a potent inhibitor of all receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). At nanomolar concentrations, K252a inhibits both the wild type and the mutant (M1268T) MET function.
- SU11274 (SUGEN) specifically inhibits MET kinase activity and its subsequent signaling. SU11274 is also an effective inhibitor of the M1268T and H1112Y MET mutants, but not the L1213V and Y1248H mutants. SU11274 has been demonstrated to inhibit HGF-induced motility and invasion of epithelial and carcinoma cells.
- PHA-665752 (Pfizer) specifically inhibits MET kinase activity, and it has been demonstrated to represses both HGF-dependent and constitutive MET phosphorylation. Furthermore, some tumors harboring MET amplifications are highly sensitive to treatment with PHA-665752.
- ARQ197 (ArQule) is a promising selective inhibitor of MET, which entered a phase 2 clinical trial in 2008.
- Foretinib (XL880, Exelixis) targets multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) with growth-promoting and angiogenic properties. The primary targets of foretinib are MET, VEGFR2, and KDR. Foretinib has completed a phase 2 clinical trials with indications for papillary renal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer, and head and neck cancer.
- SGX523 (SGX Pharmaceuticals) specifically inhibits MET at low nanomolar concentrations.
- MP470 (SuperGen) is a novel inhibitor of c-KIT, MET, PDGFR, Flt3, and AXL. Phase I clinical trial of MP470 had been announced in 2007.
HGF inhibitors 
Since HGF is the only known ligand of MET, formation of a HGF:MET complex blocks MET biological activity. For this purpose, truncated HGF, anti-HGF neutralizing antibodies, and an uncleavable form of HGF have been utilized so far. The major limitation of HGF inhibitors is that they block only HGF-dependent MET activation.
- NK4 competes with HGF as it binds MET without inducing receptor activation, thus behaving as a full antagonist. NK4 is a molecule bearing the N-terminal hairpin and the four kringle domains of HGF. Moreover, NK4 is structurally similar to angiostatins, which is why it possesses anti-angiogenic activity.
- Neutralizing anti-HGF antibodies were initially tested in combination, and it was shown that at least three antibodies, acting on different HGF epitopes, are necessary to prevent MET tyrosine kinase activation. More recently, it has been demonstrated that fully human monoclonal antibodies can individually bind and neutralize human HGF, leading to regression of tumors in mouse models. Two anti-HGF antibodies are currently available: the humanized AV299 (AVEO), and the fully human AMG102 (Amgen).
- Uncleavable HGF is an engineered form of pro-HGF carrying a single amino-acid substitution, which prevents the maturation of the molecule. Uncleavable HGF is capable of blocking MET-induced biological responses by binding MET with high affinity and displacing mature HGF. Moreover, uncleavable HGF competes with the wild-type endogenous pro-HGF for the catalytic domain of proteases that cleave HGF precursors. Local and systemic expression of uncleavable HGF inhibits tumor growth and, more importantly, prevents metastasis.
Decoy MET 
Decoy MET refers to a soluble truncated MET receptor. Decoys are able to inhibit MET activation mediated by both HGF-dependent and independent mechanisms, as decoys prevent both the ligand binding and the MET receptor homodimerization. CGEN241 (Compugen) is a decoy MET that is highly efficient in inhibiting tumor growth and preventing metastasis in animal models.
Immunotherapy targeting MET 
Drugs used for immunotherapy can act either passively by enhancing the immunologic response to MET-expressing tumor cells, or actively by stimulating immune cells and altering differentiation/growth of tumor cells.
Passive immunotherapy 
Administering monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is a form of passive immunotherapy. MAbs facilitate destruction of tumor cells by complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). In CDC, mAbs bind to specific antigen, leading to activation of the complement cascade, which in turn leads to formation of pores in tumor cells. In ADCC, the Fab domain of a mAb binds to a tumor antigen, and Fc domain binds to Fc receptors present on effector cells (phagocytes and NK cells), thus forming a bridge between an effector and a target cells. This induces the effector cell activation, leading to phagocytosis of the tumor cell by neutrophils and macrophages. Furthermore, NK cells release cytotoxic molecules, which lyse tumor cells.
- DN30 is monoclonal anti-MET antibody that recognizes the extracellular portion of MET. DN30 induces both shedding of the MET ectodomain as well as cleavage of the intracellular domain, which is successively degraded by proteasome machinery. As a consequence, on one side MET is inactivated, and on the other side the shed portion of extracellular MET hampers activation of other MET receptors, acting as a decoy. DN30 inhibits tumour growth and prevents metastasis in animal models.
- OA-5D5 is one-armed monoclonal anti-MET antibody that was demonstrated to inhibit orthotopic pancreatic and glioblastoma tumor growth and to improve survival in tumor xenograft models. OA-5D5 is produced as a recombinant protein in Escherichia coli. It is composed of murine variable domains for the heavy and light chains with human IgG1 constant domains. The antibody blocks HGF binding to MET in a competitive fashion.
Active immunotherapy 
Active immunotherapy to MET-expressing tumors can be achieved by administering cytokines, such as interferons (IFNs) and interleukins (IL-2), which triggers non-specific stimulation of numerous immune cells. IFNs have been tested as therapies for many types of cancers and have demonstrated therapeutic benefits. IL-2 has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma and metastatic melanoma, which often have deregulated MET activity.
See also 
- Bottaro DP, Rubin JS, Faletto DL, Chan AM, Kmiecik TE, Vande Woude GF, Aaronson SA (February 1991). "Identification of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor as the met proto-oncogene product". Science 251 (4995): 802–4. doi:10.1126/science.1846706. PMID 1846706.
- Galland F, Stefanova M, Lafage M, Birnbaum D (1992). "Localization of the 5' end of the MCF2 oncogene to human chromosome 15q15----q23". Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 60 (2): 114–6. doi:10.1159/000133316. PMID 1611909.
- Cooper CS (January 1992). "The met oncogene: from detection by transfection to transmembrane receptor for hepatocyte growth factor". Oncogene 7 (1): 3–7. PMID 1531516.
- "Entrez Gene: MET met proto-oncogene (hepatocyte growth factor receptor)".
- Gentile A, Trusolino L, Comoglio PM (March 2008). "The Met tyrosine kinase receptor in development and cancer". Cancer Metastasis Rev. 27 (1): 85–94. doi:10.1007/s10555-007-9107-6. PMID 18175071.
- Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Gherardi E, Vande Woude GF (December 2003). "Met, metastasis, motility and more". Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4 (12): 915–25. doi:10.1038/nrm1261. PMID 14685170.
- Gandino L, Longati P, Medico E, Prat M, Comoglio PM (January 1994). "Phosphorylation of serine 985 negatively regulates the hepatocyte growth factor receptor kinase". J. Biol. Chem. 269 (3): 1815–20. PMID 8294430.
- Peschard P, Fournier TM, Lamorte L, Naujokas MA, Band H, Langdon WY, Park M (November 2001). "Mutation of the c-Cbl TKB domain binding site on the Met receptor tyrosine kinase converts it into a transforming protein". Mol. Cell 8 (5): 995–1004. doi:10.1016/S1097-2765(01)00378-1. PMID 11741535.
- Ponzetto C, Bardelli A, Zhen Z, Maina F, dalla Zonca P, Giordano S, Graziani A, Panayotou G, Comoglio PM (April 1994). "A multifunctional docking site mediates signaling and transformation by the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor family". Cell 77 (2): 261–71. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(94)90318-2. PMID 7513258.
- Maina F, Casagranda F, Audero E, Simeone A, Comoglio PM, Klein R, Ponzetto C (November 1996). "Uncoupling of Grb2 from the Met receptor in vivo reveals complex roles in muscle development". Cell 87 (3): 531–42. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81372-0. PMID 8898205.
- Abounader R, Reznik T, Colantuoni C, Martinez-Murillo F, Rosen EM, Laterra J (December 2004). "Regulation of c-Met-dependent gene expression by PTEN". Oncogene 23 (57): 9173–82. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1208146. PMID 15516982.
- Pelicci G, Giordano S, Zhen Z, Salcini AE, Lanfrancone L, Bardelli A, Panayotou G, Waterfield MD, Ponzetto C, Pelicci PG (April 1995). "The motogenic and mitogenic responses to HGF are amplified by the Shc adaptor protein". Oncogene 10 (8): 1631–8. PMID 7731718.
- Weidner KM, Di Cesare S, Sachs M, Brinkmann V, Behrens J, Birchmeier W (November 1996). "Interaction between Gab1 and the c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase is responsible for epithelial morphogenesis". Nature 384 (6605): 173–6. doi:10.1038/384173a0. PMID 8906793.
- Furge KA, Zhang YW, Vande Woude GF (November 2000). "Met receptor tyrosine kinase: enhanced signaling through adapter proteins". Oncogene 19 (49): 5582–9. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1203859. PMID 11114738.
- Gual P, Giordano S, Anguissola S, Parker PJ, Comoglio PM (January 2001). "Gab1 phosphorylation: a novel mechanism for negative regulation of HGF receptor signaling". Oncogene 20 (2): 156–66. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1204047. PMID 11313945.
- Gual P, Giordano S, Williams TA, Rocchi S, Van Obberghen E, Comoglio PM (March 2000). "Sustained recruitment of phospholipase C-gamma to Gab1 is required for HGF-induced branching tubulogenesis". Oncogene 19 (12): 1509–18. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1203514. PMID 10734310.
- O'Brien LE, Tang K, Kats ES, Schutz-Geschwender A, Lipschutz JH, Mostov KE (July 2004). "ERK and MMPs sequentially regulate distinct stages of epithelial tubule development". Dev. Cell 7 (1): 21–32. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2004.06.001. PMID 15239951.
- Marshall CJ (January 1995). "Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling: transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation". Cell 80 (2): 179–85. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(95)90401-8. PMID 7834738.
- Graziani A, Gramaglia D, Cantley LC, Comoglio PM (November 1991). "The tyrosine-phosphorylated hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor associates with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase". J. Biol. Chem. 266 (33): 22087–90. PMID 1718989.
- Boccaccio C, Andò M, Tamagnone L, Bardelli A, Michieli P, Battistini C, Comoglio PM (January 1998). "Induction of epithelial tubules by growth factor HGF depends on the STAT pathway". Nature 391 (6664): 285–8. doi:10.1038/34657. PMID 9440692.
- Monga SP, Mars WM, Pediaditakis P, Bell A, Mulé K, Bowen WC, Wang X, Zarnegar R, Michalopoulos GK (April 2002). "Hepatocyte growth factor induces Wnt-independent nuclear translocation of beta-catenin after Met-beta-catenin dissociation in hepatocytes". Cancer Res 7 (62): 2064–71. ISSN 0008-5472. PMID 11929826.
- Gude NA, Emmanuel G, Wu W, Cottage CT, Fischer K, Quijada P, Muraski JA, Alvarez R, Rubio M, Schaefer E, Sussman MA (May 2008). "Activation of Notch-mediated protective signaling in the myocardium". Circ. Res. 102 (9): 1025–35. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.164749. PMID 18369158.
- "he fields of HGF/c-Met involvement". HealthValue. Retrieved 2009-06-13.
- Boccaccio C, Comoglio PM (August 2006). "Invasive growth: a MET-driven genetic programme for cancer and stem cells". Nat. Rev. Cancer 6 (8): 637–45. doi:10.1038/nrc1912. PMID 16862193.
- Birchmeier C, Gherardi E (October 1998). "Developmental roles of HGF/SF and its receptor, the c-Met tyrosine kinase". Trends Cell Biol. 8 (10): 404–10. doi:10.1016/S0962-8924(98)01359-2. PMID 9789329.
- Uehara Y, Minowa O, Mori C, Shiota K, Kuno J, Noda T, Kitamura N (February 1995). "Placental defect and embryonic lethality in mice lacking hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor". Nature 373 (6516): 702–5. doi:10.1038/373702a0. PMID 7854453.
- Shirasaki F, Makhluf HA, LeRoy C, Watson DK, Trojanowska M (December 1999). "Ets transcription factors cooperate with Sp1 to activate the human tenascin-C promoter". Oncogene 18 (54): 7755–64. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1203360. PMID 10618716.
- Gambarotta G, Boccaccio C, Giordano S, Andŏ M, Stella MC, Comoglio PM (November 1996). "Ets up-regulates MET transcription". Oncogene 13 (9): 1911–7. PMID 8934537.
- Pennacchietti S, Michieli P, Galluzzo M, Mazzone M, Giordano S, Comoglio PM (April 2003). "Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene". Cancer Cell 3 (4): 347–61. doi:10.1016/S1535-6108(03)00085-0. PMID 12726861.
- "HGF/c-Met and cancer". HealthValue. Retrieved 2009-06-13.
- Kim S, Lee UJ, Kim MN, et al. (June 2008). "MicroRNA miR-199a* regulates the MET proto-oncogene and the downstream extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2)". J. Biol. Chem. 283 (26): 18158–66. doi:10.1074/jbc.M800186200. PMID 18456660.
- Maehama T, Dixon JE (May 1998). "The tumor suppressor, PTEN/MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate". J. Biol. Chem. 273 (22): 13375–8. doi:10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375. PMID 9593664.
- Morris MR, Gentle D, Abdulrahman M, Maina EN, Gupta K, Banks RE, Wiesener MS, Kishida T, Yao M, Teh B, Latif F, Maher ER (June 2005). "Tumor suppressor activity and epigenetic inactivation of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor type 2/SPINT2 in papillary and clear cell renal cell carcinoma". Cancer Res. 65 (11): 4598–606. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3371. PMID 15930277.
- Morotti A, Mila S, Accornero P, Tagliabue E, Ponzetto C (July 2002). "K252a inhibits the oncogenic properties of Met, the HGF receptor". Oncogene 21 (32): 4885–93. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1205622. PMID 12118367.
- Berthou S, Aebersold DM, Schmidt LS, Stroka D, Heigl C, Streit B, Stalder D, Gruber G, Liang C, Howlett AR, Candinas D, Greiner RH, Lipson KE, Zimmer Y (July 2004). "The Met kinase inhibitor SU11274 exhibits a selective inhibition pattern toward different receptor mutated variants". Oncogene 23 (31): 5387–93. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1207691. PMID 15064724.
- Wang X, Le P, Liang C, Chan J, Kiewlich D, Miller T, Harris D, Sun L, Rice A, Vasile S, Blake RA, Howlett AR, Patel N, McMahon G, Lipson KE (November 2003). "Potent and selective inhibitors of the Met [hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) receptor] tyrosine kinase block HGF/SF-induced tumor cell growth and invasion". Mol. Cancer Ther. 2 (11): 1085–92. PMID 14617781.
- Christensen JG, Schreck R, Burrows J, Kuruganti P, Chan E, Le P, Chen J, Wang X, Ruslim L, Blake R, Lipson KE, Ramphal J, Do S, Cui JJ, Cherrington JM, Mendel DB (November 2003). "A selective small molecule inhibitor of c-Met kinase inhibits c-Met-dependent phenotypes in vitro and exhibits cytoreductive antitumor activity in vivo". Cancer Res. 63 (21): 7345–55. PMID 14612533.
- Smolen GA, Sordella R, Muir B, Mohapatra G, Barmettler A, Archibald H, Kim WJ, Okimoto RA, Bell DW, Sgroi DC, Christensen JG, Settleman J, Haber DA (February 2006). "Amplification of MET may identify a subset of cancers with extreme sensitivity to the selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor PHA-665752". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (7): 2316–21. doi:10.1073/pnas.0508776103. PMC 1413705. PMID 16461907.
- Matsumoto K, Nakamura T (April 2003). "NK4 (HGF-antagonist/angiogenesis inhibitor) in cancer biology and therapeutics". Cancer Sci. 94 (4): 321–7. doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01440.x. PMID 12824898.
- Cao B, Su Y, Oskarsson M, Zhao P, Kort EJ, Fisher RJ, Wang LM, Vande Woude GF (June 2001). "Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) display antitumor activity in animal models". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98 (13): 7443–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.131200498. PMC 34688. PMID 11416216.
- Burgess T, Coxon A, Meyer S, Sun J, Rex K, Tsuruda T, Chen Q, Ho SY, Li L, Kaufman S, McDorman K, Cattley RC, Sun J, Elliott G, Zhang K, Feng X, Jia XC, Green L, Radinsky R, Kendall R (February 2006). "Fully human monoclonal antibodies to hepatocyte growth factor with therapeutic potential against hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met-dependent human tumors". Cancer Res. 66 (3): 1721–9. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-3329. PMID 16452232.
- Mazzone M, Basilico C, Cavassa S, Pennacchietti S, Risio M, Naldini L, Comoglio PM, Michieli P (November 2004). "An uncleavable form of pro–scatter factor suppresses tumor growth and dissemination in mice". J. Clin. Invest. 114 (10): 1418–32. doi:10.1172/JCI22235. PMC 525743. PMID 15545993.
- Michieli P, Mazzone M, Basilico C, Cavassa S, Sottile A, Naldini L, Comoglio PM (July 2004). "Targeting the tumor and its microenvironment by a dual-function decoy Met receptor". Cancer Cell 6 (1): 61–73. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2004.05.032. PMID 15261142.
- Reang P, Gupta M, Kohli K (2006). "Biological Response Modifiers in Cancer". MedGenMed 8 (4): 33. PMC 1868326. PMID 17415315.
- Petrelli A, Circosta P, Granziero L, Mazzone M, Pisacane A, Fenoglio S, Comoglio PM, Giordano S (March 2006). "Ab-induced ectodomain shedding mediates hepatocyte growth factor receptor down-regulation and hampers biological activity". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (13): 5090–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.0508156103. PMC 1458799. PMID 16547140.
- Jin H, Yang R, Zheng Z, Romero M, Ross J, Bou-Reslan H, Carano RA, Kasman I, Mai E, Young J, Zha J, Zhang Z, Ross S, Schwall R, Colbern G, Merchant M (June 2008). "MetMAb, the one-armed 5D5 anti-c-Met antibody, inhibits orthotopic pancreatic tumor growth and improves survival". Cancer Res. 68 (11): 4360–8. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5960. PMID 18519697.
- Martens T, Schmidt NO, Eckerich C, Fillbrandt R, Merchant M, Schwall R, Westphal M, Lamszus K (October 2006). "A novel one-armed anti-c-Met antibody inhibits glioblastoma growth in vivo". Clin. Cancer Res. 12 (20 Pt 1): 6144–52. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-05-1418. PMID 17062691.
- Comoglio, P M (1993). "Structure, biosynthesis and biochemical properties of the HGF receptor in normal and malignant cells". EXS (SWITZERLAND) 65: 131–65. ISSN 1023-294X. PMID 8380735.
- Naldini, L; Weidner K M, Vigna E, Gaudino G, Bardelli A, Ponzetto C, Narsimhan R P, Hartmann G, Zarnegar R, Michalopoulos G K (Oct. 1991). "Scatter factor and hepatocyte growth factor are indistinguishable ligands for the MET receptor". EMBO J. (ENGLAND) 10 (10): 2867–78. ISSN 0261-4189. PMC 452997. PMID 1655405.
- Petrelli, Annalisa; Gilestro Giorgio F, Lanzardo Stefania, Comoglio Paolo M, Migone Nicola, Giordano Silvia (Mar. 2002). "The endophilin-CIN85-Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of c-Met". Nature (England) 416 (6877): 187–90. doi:10.1038/416187a. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 11894096.
- Ng, Cherlyn; Jackson Rebecca A, Buschdorf Jan P, Sun Qingxiang, Guy Graeme R, Sivaraman J (Mar. 2008). "Structural basis for a novel intrapeptidyl H-bond and reverse binding of c-Cbl-TKB domain substrates". EMBO J. (England) 27 (5): 804–16. doi:10.1038/emboj.2008.18. PMC 2265755. PMID 18273061.
- Grisendi, S; Chambraud B, Gout I, Comoglio P M, Crepaldi T (Dec. 2001). "Ligand-regulated binding of FAP68 to the hepatocyte growth factor receptor". J. Biol. Chem. (United States) 276 (49): 46632–8. doi:10.1074/jbc.M104323200. ISSN 0021-9258. PMID 11571281.
- Davies, G; Jiang W G, Mason M D (Apr. 2001). "HGF/SF modifies the interaction between its receptor c-Met, and the E-cadherin/catenin complex in prostate cancer cells". Int. J. Mol. Med. (Greece) 7 (4): 385–8. ISSN 1107-3756. PMID 11254878.
- Ponzetto, C; Zhen Z, Audero E, Maina F, Bardelli A, Basile M L, Giordano S, Narsimhan R, Comoglio P (Jun. 1996). "Specific uncoupling of GRB2 from the Met receptor. Differential effects on transformation and motility". J. Biol. Chem. (UNITED STATES) 271 (24): 14119–23. doi:10.1074/jbc.271.24.14119. ISSN 0021-9258. PMID 8662889.
- Liang, Q; Mohan R R, Chen L, Wilson S E (Jul. 1998). "Signaling by HGF and KGF in corneal epithelial cells: Ras/MAP kinase and Jak-STAT pathways". Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. (UNITED STATES) 39 (8): 1329–38. ISSN 0146-0404. PMID 9660480.
- Wang, Dakun; Li Zaibo, Messing Edward M, Wu Guan (Sep. 2002). "Activation of Ras/Erk pathway by a novel MET-interacting protein RanBPM". J. Biol. Chem. (United States) 277 (39): 36216–22. doi:10.1074/jbc.M205111200. ISSN 0021-9258. PMID 12147692.
- Hiscox S, Jiang WG (1999). "Association of the HGF/SF receptor, c-met, with the cell-surface adhesion molecule, E-cadherin, and catenins in human tumor cells.". Biochem Biophys Res Commun 261 (2): 406–11. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1999.1002. PMID 10425198.
Further reading 
- Peruzzi B, Bottaro DP (2006). "Targeting the c-Met signaling pathway in cancer". Clin. Cancer Res. 12 (12): 3657–60. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0818. PMID 16778093.
- Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Gherardi E, Vande Woude GF (December 2003). "Met, metastasis, motility and more". Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4 (12): 915–25. doi:10.1038/nrm1261. PMID 14685170.
- Zhang YW, Vande Woude GF (February 2003). "HGF/SF-met signaling in the control of branching morphogenesis and invasion". J. Cell. Biochem. 88 (2): 408–17. doi:10.1002/jcb.10358. PMID 12520544.
- Paumelle R, Tulasne D, Kherrouche Z, Plaza S, Leroy C, Reveneau S, Vandenbunder B, Fafeur V, Tulashe D, Reveneau S (April 2002). "Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor activates the ETS1 transcription factor by a RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway". Oncogene 21 (15): 2309–19. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1205297. PMID 11948414.
- Comoglio PM (1993). "Structure, biosynthesis and biochemical properties of the HGF receptor in normal and malignant cells". EXS 65: 131–65. PMID 8380735.
- Maulik G, Shrikhande A, Kijima T, et al. (2002). "Role of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor, c-Met, in oncogenesis and potential for therapeutic inhibition". Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 13 (1): 41–59. doi:10.1016/S1359-6101(01)00029-6. PMID 11750879.
- Ma PC, Maulik G, Christensen J, Salgia R (2004). "c-Met: structure, functions and potential for therapeutic inhibition". Cancer Metastasis Rev. 22 (4): 309–25. doi:10.1023/A:1023768811842. PMID 12884908.
- Knudsen BS, Edlund M (2004). "Prostate cancer and the met hepatocyte growth factor receptor". Adv. Cancer Res. Advances in Cancer Research 91: 31–67. doi:10.1016/S0065-230X(04)91002-0. ISBN 978-0-12-006691-9. PMID 15327888.
- Dharmawardana PG, Giubellino A, Bottaro DP (2005). "Hereditary papillary renal carcinoma type I". Curr. Mol. Med. 4 (8): 855–68. doi:10.2174/1566524043359674. PMID 15579033.
- Kemp LE, Mulloy B, Gherardi E (2006). "Signalling by HGF/SF and Met: the role of heparan sulphate co-receptors". Biochem. Soc. Trans. 34 (Pt 3): 414–7. doi:10.1042/BST0340414. PMID 16709175.
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-met at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
- UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entry P08581: MET_HUMAN, ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) proteomics server of the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
- A table with references to significant roles of MET in cancer

A transportation study by engineering researchers reveals that different speed limits for cars and large trucks on rural, interstate highways can compromise safety.
“We found that speed variation and vehicle interactions have a direct impact on highway safety,” said Steven Johnson, professor of industrial engineering with the Mack Blackwell Transportation Center. “Data from previous studies and simple logic say that a higher number of interactions among vehicles increases the chances that accidents will occur.”
Johnson reported this finding in Cost-Benefit Evaluation of Heavy Truck-Automobile Speed Differentials on Rural Interstate Highways, a study of speed limits and car-versus-large-truck speed differentials on rural, interstate highways. Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Transportation, commercial trucking companies and private fleets, the study will help regulatory agencies and trucking-company decision-makers establish policies regarding speed limits and differentials for both heavy trucks and automobiles.
After examining existing literature on speed limits, Johnson and graduate student Naveen Pawar measured the speeds of heavy trucks and automobiles in five states. Speed-limit configurations ranged from a uniform 75 mph for cars and heavy trucks to 65 mph for automobiles and 55 mph for trucks. The researchers also analyzed speed, accident and maintenance data and interviewed truck drivers, safety and maintenance managers of commercial trucking companies and original equipment manufacturers of trucks, tires and engines.
There is a caveat to their findings: vehicle dynamics, such as braking and maneuvering, improve on slower-moving trucks.
“People argue that heavy trucks require longer braking distances for any given speed, and lower truck speeds help equalize the stopping distance,” Johnson said. “On the other hand, opponents of lower truck speed limits have suggested that the differential speeds increase speed variance and therefore have a negative impact on highway safety. Our research demonstrates that it is likely that both of these arguments are correct.”
See Johnson’s report at www.mackblackwell.org/web/research/final-reports.htm.

Aleutian lowArticle Free Pass
Aleutian low, large atmospheric low-pressure (cyclonic) centre that frequently exists over the Aleutian Islands region in winter and that shifts northward and almost disappears in summer. Although the Aleutian low is associated with smaller eastward-moving low- and high-pressure centres, the region’s average pressure is low. It is the source region of the maritime polar air masses that influence the climate of the western U.S. The low-pressure centres that persist in the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere consist of the Aleutian low and the Icelandic low.
What made you want to look up "Aleutian low"? Please share what surprised you most...

Mersen, Treaty of
Mersen, Treaty of, 870, redivision of the Carolingian empire by the sons of Louis I, Charles the Bald (later Charles II) of the West Franks (France) and Louis the German of the East Franks (Germany), signed at Mersen (Dutch Meersen ), now in the Netherlands. The treaty superseded the tripartite division of the empire in 843 (see Verdun, Treaty of). It divided the kingdom of Lotharingia between Charles and Louis, following the death (869) of their nephew, Lothair, king of Lotharingia. France obtained the territories roughly corresponding to the modern Netherlands, Belgium, and Lorraine and Germany received Alsace and the left bank of the Lower Rhine. The borders established did not last long.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
More on Treaty of Mersen from Infoplease:
See more Encyclopedia articles on: German History

05/10/2012 - Americans love economic mobility. It’s kind of a founding myth for us: We see ourselves as having broken free from rigid, aristocratic Europe to form a meritocracy that guaranteed a chance to move up in the world. Though there has been much talk lately about rising income inequality in the United States, what has worried pundits on both the left and the right has been recent reports that Americans aren’t as economically mobile as citizens in other Western nations.
The Pew Economic Mobility Project has been studying this phenomenon, and is out with a new report examining which regions in America are the most and least mobile. Researchers looked at Americans ages 35 to 39 and then examined their incomes ten years later. The study covered the time period between 1978 and 2007, and tackled three different measures of income mobility: absolute mobility (as measured by inflation-adjusted income growth over time), and relative upward and downward mobility — i.e. movement up or down the socio-economic ladder. In other words, are Americans born poor becoming rich and vice-versa?
Interestingly enough, geographic mobility doesn’t appear have a large effect on economic mobility. That is, it doesn’t matter if you’re born in Maryland or you move there – you’re more likely move up the economic ladder either way. According to Erin Currier, Project Manager of the Pew Economic Mobility Project, individuals who do move states do have better economic mobility, but more than two-thirds of Americans stay in their birth state for the remainder of their lives. Therefore, “Geographic mobility might help an individuals’ economic mobility, [but] it’s not really driving state-level findings as a whole.”
So why are some states more economically mobile than others? This study doesn’t seek to specifically address the causes of relative mobility between states, but there are some important factors that the Economic Mobility Project has found are essential to promoting economic mobility overall, and these include things like like “educational attainment, savings and asset building, and neighborhood poverty during childhood,” according to Currier.
Read the full article, Which States Have the Most Economic Mobility?, on Time's website.

Subfertility, a condition in which a person is less fertile than average but still capable of contributing to a pregnency, affects about one in 20 men. Up to 80 percent of subfertility could be due to sperm damage caused by oxidative stress or harmful particles produced by a person's own body.
While infertility has historically been seen as a woman's problem, male infertility is present in up to half of infertile couples.
Varicocele, a condition in which a man has varicose veins in the scrotum, is the most common cause of male subfertility. Other causes include hormonal disorders, problems with quantity and motility of sperm, infections, obesity, drug use and exposure to radiation and chemotherapy. Depending on the condition, male infertility and subfertility can be treated with surgery, hormone therapy and assisted reproductive technologies.
While, as we've seen, some doctors dismissed the link between antioxidants and fertility, others said they were not surprised by the results because healthy nutrition and lifestyle are already recommended for couples planning to conceive.
Dr. Jeanne O'Brien, associate professor of urology at University of Rochester Medical Center, is one of those doctors. O'Brien said she routinely suggests that her patients take antioxidants if they want a baby. She also recommends decreasing alcohol consumption, smoking cessation, exercising and stress reduction.
"I tell them the antioxidants may help and certainly don't harm them at the recommended dosages," said O'Brien. "I believe it is the lifestyle changes and increased health awareness that accompanies antioxidant consumption that may make a difference in terms of increased fertility."
O'Brien said antioxidants are never her sole recommendations. "There are always additional factors, testing, medication or alternatives offered in conjunction with them," O'Brien said.
"I use antioxidants for select men with impaired semen quality and demonstration of elevated oxidative stress, which is manifest by increased levels of reactive oxygen species," said Kim. "However, I do not assess for oxidative stress if identifiable causes of male infertility are present. In clinical practice, improvements in pregnancy and live birth rates are certainly not as robust as suggested by the Cochrane review."
And Kim warns that, despite the hype around antioxidant supplements, they should not be consumed without a watchful eye. For example, excessive consumption of Vitamin E, or more than 400 units per day, has been shown to have possible negative cardiac and vascular effects.
"Although generally considered safe in moderation, numerous large-scale studies have indicated that many supplemental antioxidants can actually be detrimental to overall health, said Kim. "With an understanding of these caveats, an assessment of the severity of male factor infertility, and very modest expectations of possible benefit, a man could try antioxidants before attempting assisted reproduction."

Technology in the Classroom
Assistive Word Processing
Assistive technology to support writing includes special software as well as inexpensive word processors.
Using a Pen Scanner
Pen scanners, handheld scanner and Iris Pens
Effective Use of Switches
Augmentative or Alternative Communication
Augmentative or Alternative Communication or AAC. Picture symbol systems, symbol boards, voice output etc.
Word Q - Predictive Software Application
This application makes Dyslexic students want to write! Find out what all the excitement is when language delayed or impaired students use Word Q.
An extensive search database for those people looking for information on assistive products for people with disabilities.
Assistive Technology Solutions
This site offers a list of solutions and devices that make accessing the computer easier for students with disabilities.
Assisitive Technology Tools
A great site dedicated to enhancing the lives of children and adults with disabilities using the latest assistive technology.
Communicating with Technology
Find out about synthetic speech systems, speech to text and screen readers. Great for the visually or hearing impaired student.
A Language Arts Lesson Plan on Summarizing Text
A lesson plan for teachers to use technology and students' interest in texting to reinforce summarizing skills and to increase reading comprehension. This lesson plan is aimed toward high school students.
Tips for Using a Smart Board in the Special Education Classroom
Smart Boards are fun tools for children with disabilities, working like giant touch screens.
IEPgoals.net Is a New Site Offering Support for Goal Writing
IEPgoals.net, a new website, provides goal writing guidance, especially useful for early intervention and children on the autistic spectrum disorder.

In the summer of 2007, shoppers at some food co-ops in the upper Midwest encountered a new label on their produce: “Local Fair Trade.” Seasonal staples such as cucumbers, squash, and broccoli were the first to don the label, a large, hard-to-miss sticker symbolizing the union of two approaches to sustainable food: eating food grown locally, and purchasing food traded fairly.
We’ve gotten used to a variety of labels on our food. There’s “organic,” which used to connote ideas like “pure” and “natural” but these days technically means food certified as organic by the USDA (if domestically produced) or by the food’s country of origin. “Local” usually means food grown or produced within a few hundred miles of its selling location. And “fair trade” is seen most commonly on popular imports such as coffee and chocolate; the label means that the food’s growers or producers were paid a decent wage.
So what does “local fair trade” mean? According to Erik Esse, the director of the Minneapolis-based Local Fair Trade Network, the label is an attempt to answer a question: “How can the principles of fair trade, which have effectively moved many farmers and workers in the developing world out of poverty and towards self-sufficiency, work here in the U.S., where our farmworkers are having some of the same problems?”
At the heart of the local or “domestic fair trade” label is the idea of fair and equitable relationships. The label can be applied to food grown in the U.S. under a set of guidelines, including a living wage and an emphasis on fair and healthy living conditions. The product of nearly a decade of careful planning, the domestic fair-trade label is an effort to incorporate social-justice awareness into our burgeoning efforts to eat foods that have been cleanly and sustainably produced.
As the fair-trade movement (both international and domestic) wants everyone to understand, the local people behind the food we eat deserve sustainability, too. The USDA’s national organic standards guarantee that organically certified food is not genetically modified and is grown without petroleum-based fertilizers or synthetic chemicals. But the standards have nothing to say about the people who produce the food. This fact appalls those who work closely with farmworkers, including Richard Mandelbaum of El Comité de Apoyo a los Trabajadores Agrícolas (CATA), a migrant-farmworker organization based in New Jersey.
“Organic standards include all sorts of rules about how livestock needs to be treated, but absolutely none for the human beings that are on the farm,” says Mandelbaum.
The Local Fair Trade Network’s Esse isn’t sure that enough consumers are paying attention to those human beings, either. “The way stores like to put up pictures of happy farmers these days — that’s in some ways great, in that it’s identifying that there’s a person growing their food,” he says. “But in some ways, those smiles mask the fact of how little money they get paid and how hard their lives are.”
Although some organic farms in the U.S. opt to pay their workers a living wage, as well as provide vacation days and access to health care, many do none of those things. Small-scale organic farmers, who often live hand-to-mouth themselves, rarely have the budget to do so. And most large, industrial-sized organic farms rely on hundreds if not thousands of underpaid migrant workers, in much the same way that conventional farms and food processors do.
According to a 2005 survey report from the University of California, Davis, the majority of the 188 California organic farms surveyed did not pay a living wage or provide medical or retirement plans. And despite the nationwide boom in organic food — the industry was worth more than $17 billion by the end of 2006 — the wealth has not trickled down. While the absence of synthetic pesticides (and the health impacts that accompany them) can be a draw to some workers, most employees on organic farms earn no more than those on conventional ones.
Across the country, three to five million people labor every year on farms and in factories, planting, cultivating, harvesting, and processing fresh produce and other agricultural products. Their lives are anything but easy. According to the National Agricultural Workers Survey, 61 percent of farmworkers live in poverty. In recent years, their median income has not kept up with inflation: for individual farmworkers, the median annual income is now $7,500, while for farmworker households, the median annual income is less than $10,000. (The overall U.S. median household income, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, is more than $48,000.) It is also estimated that between 72 and 78 percent of farmworker households have no health insurance.
Today’s domestic fair-trade movement dates back as far as 1999, when CATA, along with Rural Advancement Foundation International-USA (RAFI-USA) and several other partners, argued for an inclusion of labor issues in the federal organic standards.
“When it became clear that the issues of social justice and fairness would not be incorporated into the federal [organic standards],” says RAFI’s Michael Sligh, “that really triggered our work to look at opportunities to make that additional claim to the marketplace.”
The result was something called the Agricultural Justice Project (AJP), a group that set to work devising a separate set of standards that would cover both equity for the small-scale farmer as well as fair working conditions for farmworker. But not everyone was convinced.
“When we first started out, it wasn’t uncommon to get a shrug from those in the organic/sustainable community, with responses like, ‘I’m not sure why you’re focused on this,’” says CATA’s Mandelbaum. “But in the last two years, we’ve seen that consumers are increasingly dissatisfied with anonymous products, and really want to know how their food is made — environmentally of course, but also increasingly socially.”
In 2005, the Agricultural Justice Project, along with the international fair-trade organization Equal Exchange and several domestic farmer cooperatives, held the first meeting of the Domestic Fair Trade Working Group (now renamed the Domestic Fair Trade Association). By 2006, it became clear that the best place to pilot a domestic fair-trade label was the Minnesota/Wisconsin area.
According to Erik Esse, whose Local Fair Trade Network is the Minneapolis-based arm of the movement, there are around 40 food co-ops in Minnesota and more than 25 in Wisconsin. “The fact that consumer cooperatives are so key to the area,” he says, “as opposed to the corporate natural-food-store model, means we have a background that lends to embracing fair trade. [The customers] already believe in democracy and in consumer activism.”
By early 2007, four small farms in the upper Midwest had been chosen to participate in the Domestic Fair Trade Working Group’s pilot project, along with two food co-ops in the Minneapolis area. All the farms involved were closely audited, including their business practices and employee policies. And they pledged to, among other things, “1) Respect workers’ freedom of association and right to collective bargaining, 2) Provide adequate health and safety protections, including access to adequate medical care, information on potential hazards, and using the least toxic methods available, and 3) Pay a living wage.”
Esse points out that although small-scale farmers and farmworkers are often in similar financial situations, there is still some tension between the two groups. “Farmers don’t always want to stir the pot,” he says. “We often hear, ‘Things are going fine; why would I want to bring this up?’”
Rufus Hauke, of Keewaydin Farms in Viola, Wisconsin, does want to stir the pot. He’s a produce farmer participating in the pilot project who, along with his brother, decided to remake the family farm according to a vision for what he calls “the next evolution of food.” Although he has only a few employees, Hauke was excited to offer them the paperwork and training necessary to help get the first Keewaydin Fair Trade growing season off the ground.
Culinate’s features address the practical challenges and joys of food.
Want more? Comb the archives.
Flatbreads from around the continent
Beyond a supporting role
The great Sicilian-Neapolitan kitchen rivalry
Five ideas each month for eating better

Subscribe Free! to the DigiFreq Pro Audio and Music Technology Newsletter
Numerous studies, including one released last month by University of Louisville researchers, indicate that learning to play the piano as a preschooler sets a child up for later academic success. And now "Piano For Preschoolers" has introduced a new way for parents to teach their children the piano - complete with a Casio(R) keyboard.
Developed by Angie Crellin, a mother of two who has studied the piano for over 30 years, "Piano For Preschoolers" uses color-coded notes printed on a traditional musical staff to teach songs preschoolers already love, like "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star." A corresponding color strip sits behind the piano's keys and guides the child to the correct key for each note.
Crellin came up with the "Piano For Preschoolers" concept when her son, a preschooler at the time, expressed interest in playing the piano. Crellin's daughter had done the same several years before, but she had quickly lost interest once Crellin introduced popular beginning piano books to the lessons. Not wanting the same thing to happen with her son, Crellin decided to create a program that was fun for children and easy for parents to teach. Hundreds of hours of research later, she had "Piano For Preschoolers."
"The results were amazing," said Crellin. "My son loved playing real songs he recognized and couldn't wait to learn more. But the truly remarkable thing was that my preschool son started helping my second-grade daughter with her math homework."
Crellin's results correspond to those obtained by Dr. Frances Rauscher of the University of Wisconsin and Dr. Gordon Shaw of the University of California. The researchers, who have long studied the connection between math and music, compared the effects of musical and nonmusical training on preschoolers' intellectual development. They found that preschoolers who received piano or keyboard training performed 34% higher on tests measuring spatial-temporal ability than did other preschoolers. Those who received piano or keyboard training could think in pictures and see the pictures moving or changing shape over time - a crucial skill for later success in mathematics, science and engineering.
But the pint-sized students of "Piano For Preschoolers" don't care about all that. Most are just having fun playing for rapt audiences of parents and grandparents.
"The 'Piano For Preschoolers' program really seems to be boosting children's self-confidence," said Crellin. "Customers report their preschoolers are practicing the piano with no prompting from the parents. And that's really the key. No four-year-old will stay motivated to learn if she isn't having fun."
The entire "Piano For Preschoolers" system is $129.95 plus shipping. It includes: a music book of 17 familiar songs written in color-coded notes; the durable color strip to set behind the piano keys; a parent/teacher guide with step-by-step instructions for each lesson; and a free Casio(R) SA-75 electronic keyboard.
For more information: www.pianoforpreschoolers.com

Big Leap Forward in Understanding Genetics Underlying Prevalent Diseases
The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC), a collaboration of 24 leading human geneticists analyzing thousands of DNA samples from patients suffering prevalent human diseases, have announced breakthrough research findings. Hailed as a "...new chapter in medical science...", genetic variants have been found for:
- Crohn's disease
- coronary heart disease
- rheumatoid arthritis
- Type I and Type II diabetes
Some of the fascinating findings:
- Type I Diabetes and Crohn's disease share a common gene, suggesting similar biological pathways!
- An obesity gene as well as three new genes linked to Type II Diabetes
- The WTCCC used gene chip technology, which is not unlike microchip technology, enabling scientists to scan hundreds of thousands of DNA markers at once.
Thank you jurvetson for use of photo Playing with DNA featuring James Watson!
Recent Blog Posts

A view can become a page or a block. There is no difference in work between a page and a block. A page needs a path to display the page. A block is assigned to a region to display the page. There might be a few seconds different to set them up. After that, you can blocks in far more ways than usually shown in tutorials.
Blocks have their uses including constructing complex pages. The content of a page is usually the content of a node in the content region. A view replaces the node to display a list or some other small variation of content.
Next you are asked to make the view more complicated. You scratch your head. What you really need is a collection of views displaying different content. You could use panels and a bunch of other complex approaches. Think about the format again.
If you want a list of different views. You can make each one a block then place them one after the other down the page. Consider a shop.
A shop might list the top selling product in each category with a view sorted by category. The marketing manager then asks for the categories in a different order. The CEO wants some categories to list the top three. The product manager wants one category to list only one product but all the colours for the product.
You could make each category a separate view with each view in a block. Each view can have different criteria. You can give your CEO, sales manager, and marketing manager access to the block admin page and let them fight over the sequence of the blocks.
What method do you use to determine when to use multiple views?
Use the one view when you list data one set of data. Use multiple views when people want different data selection. For example, some product categories have colours but not all product categories. Some product categories have multiple packs but not all product categories.
If the one list has to be by category then colour or pack size and all the products use the same content type, you could use one view to sort by category then colour then pack size. There will be no overlap or conflict or missing data.
The same list becomes more complicated when each product category has a different content type and each content type has a different set of attributes. You might be able to product one list in one view but it will be sensitive to change and management will want change. Start with two views or more views stacked as blocks to form one list.
Another example is a book shop where novels have different descriptions and content types compared to other books. Cook books may have a special content type to allow listing by food type, country, major ingredients, and the reality television show paying for the cook book.
If the data is exactly the same for each view but the display is different, consider multiple displays on one view. The technique is described in another page. you make the first view a page to list the data and validate your data selection. You then add some displays to create the blocks. Each display might vary by as little as selecting a different content type.
Top ten lists are popular and soon take up too much space. People start talking about variations. Perhaps the top three items, including teasers, followed by the next seven without teasers.

As a developmental pathway towards autonomy and dexterity in robot in-hand manipulation, HANDLE is a Large Scale IP project coordinated by the university Pierre and Marie Curie of Paris and include a consortium formed by nine partners from six EU countries: France, UK, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, and Germany.
The TACO project aims at enhancing the abilities of service robots by improving the sensing system with real 3D foveation properties and to increase their ability to interact with their natural environment in a more natural and human-like way.
The PV-Servitor project focuses on concepts for a fully autonomous cleaning robot for ground mounted large scale photovoltaic power plants consisting of 100 kW and over.
STIFF-FLOP is researching how to take some of the new capabilities in soft robotics and apply them to the development of tools for endoscopic surgery. This project takes inspiration from octopus tentacles for the design of flexible soft robots.
DEXDEB is researching meat deboning. Taking apart an animal carcass to produce high-quality pieces of meat is a skilled but unpleasant and dangerous task. In DEXDEB we are looking at two designs of robotic hand and using them as the “left hand” that pulls at the meat, while a human operator slices the meat with a knife held in their right hand. This will provide DEXDEB with a baseline for doing more complex human-robot interaction work later.
HYFLAM is investigating the role of robotics in biosafety level 3 and 4 laboratories. Working with a UK Government lab and Hamburg University, HYFLAM is looking at a range of skilled tasks and investigating whether a robotic hand can perform them, and how well it performs them when working with software like that developed in HANDLE. This could lead to a new generation of robotic systems for hazardous lab work.

Is it scientific fact that acid stabilizes meringue or is this a fallacy? If so does anyone know actually why and are there any other substances that do this well also?
Acids allow more air to be beaten into a meringue. In order to make meringue, the proteins in egg white must be denatured. In their natural state, the proteins are curled up into tightly packed balls. When the egg is beaten, they uncoil into long strands.
These strands then begin to coagulate, or join together, with the help of the sugar you add. The air you whisk in gets trapped between these joining strands, giving the meringue its characteristic light texture.
Acid delays coagulation, which means that there is more time for air to get trapped in amongst the proteins, resulting in a lighter meringue.
The acids usually added to meringue are white wine vinegar, lemon juice, or cream of tartar. Fresh eggs are more acidic than old ones, so these help too.
Some cooks use copper bowls to make meringue, because copper ions from the bowl bind to a particular protein (conalbumin) and strengthen it.
|show 3 more comments|
I have made two separate meringue mixtures side by side: one with vinegar and one without. In my experience it makes no difference to the final outcome provided that you add the sugar really slowly (a tablespoon at a time) and not too early. If this is done correctly then there is no need to add an acid.

International Women’s Day (IWD) was founded in 1910 in order to confront the great inequalities women faced in the labor force and society as a whole. Unfortunately, one hundred years later, women still make up a majority of the world’s poor.
Women’s wages in the U.S. are only 76% of men’s, but the disparity of long-term earnings between men and women is far worse. A study comparing total earnings between 1983 and 1998 showed women averaging just 38% of men’s wages (Institute for Women’s Policy Research, 2004).
In large part, this is because 80% of American women under 40 are mothers, according to the U.S. census. Without adequate paid maternity leave, mothers are frequently forced to quit stable jobs and disrupt career plans. Add to that $611 in average monthly childcare costs (U.S. Department of Labor), which is more than two weeks pay at the federal minimum wage.
Eighty-seven percent of single parent households are headed by women and of those 37% are in poverty (Association for Women’s Rights and Development). Once a family falls into poverty it is astoundingly hard for them to escape. Sixty percent of families that are in the bottom fifth of income remain there a decade later (Association for Women’s Rights and Development).
The impact of the financial crisis, however, is worldwide. Of the 1.5 million people living on a dollar or less per day, 70% are women (UN.org). Forced into the factories with the worst working conditions, women make up 90% of the world’s sweatshop labor (Women Thrive Worldwide). Often being laid off, these women are accustomed to making 13 cents to one dollar per hour (Powell and Skarbek 2004). Forced to work, women are less likely to attend school or leave the home before marriage. Seventy-seven million girls of primary school age worldwide are out of school, compared to only 55 million boys (The World Bank).
Women around the world are bound together by discrimination and economic servitude created by capitalism. Their work is devalued down to pennies, and often the largest use of their time - household labor - goes unpaid. IWD is a chance to remember and celebrate the struggles of women, which have won huge improvements in our lives. If women united internationally and with the wider struggles of working people to fight for equal rights, better working conditions, wages and stronger social services such as health care, child care and food support, we could collectively improve conditions for all.

Chile's economy is based on the export of minerals, which account for about half of the total value of exports. Copper is the nation's most valuable resource, and Chile is the world's largest producer. Agriculture is the main occupation of about 15% of the population; it accounts for about 6% of the national wealth, and produces less than half of the domestic needs. The Vale of Chile is the country's primary agricultural area; its vineyards are the basis of Chile's wine industry. Grapes, apples, pears, onions, wheat, corn, oats, peaches, garlic, asparagus, and beans are the chief crops. Livestock production includes beef and poultry. Sheep raising is the chief pastoral occupation, providing wool and meat for domestic use and for export. Fishing and lumbering are also important economic activities. Chile's industries largely process its raw materials and manufacture various consumer goods. The major products are copper and other minerals, processed food, fish meal, iron and steel, wood and wood products, transportation equipment, and textiles.
The dependence of the economy on copper prices and the production of an adequate food supply are two of Chile's major economic problems. Chile's main imports are petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, electrical and telecommunications equipment, industrial machinery, vehicles, and natural gas. In addition to minerals, it also exports fruit, fish and fish products, paper and pulp, chemicals, and wine. The chief trading partners are the United States, China, Brazil, Argentina, and South Korea.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
More on Chile Economy from Fact Monster:
See more Encyclopedia articles on: South American Political Geography

| ||Minding Your Mind || |
When Striving for Perfection Is a Problem
Last Reviewed by Faculty of Harvard Medical School on May 4, 2012
By Howard LeWine, M.D.
Harvard Medical School
Some people can't live with the slightest imperfection. Their need to appear or be perfect perfectionism is so intense that it's exhausting if not painful.
But striving for perfection, while accepting that perfection rarely can be achieved, can lead to growth and development and a feeling of satisfaction. It can be a powerful motivator as long as it is based on reasonable standards and expectation. For example, the desire to have a perfect golf swing or tennis stroke can enhance the pleasure you take in these pursuits, whether you are an amateur or professional.
Perfectionism is unproductive, however, when it is linked to excessively high standards and is driven by a fear of failure.
Back to top
Types of Perfectionism
Perfectionism comes in many forms:
- Obsessive concern over mistakes
- Setting excessively high personal standards
- Perceiving parents as overly critical
- Unreasonable doubts about ability to perform tasks
- An over-emphasis on organization
- Trying to live up to high expectations you're convinced other people, such as parents, have of you
- Having high expectations of other people
But whatever form it takes, perfectionism can rob you of life's pleasures.
Back to top
The Roots of Perfectionism
It may not be so easy to figure out where perfectionism comes from. For some, it is a part of their inborn temperament like perfect skin and teeth. Researchers have linked perfectionism to anxiety, depression and eating disorders. The trait of perfectionism is common among people with obsessive-compulsive disorders. Or it could be a response to having parents who expected too much from you. Maybe they never let you off the hook, even if you got 98 out of 100 on an exam.
Back to top
The Role of Indirect Aggression
What goes on outside the home is also a big factor in the development of perfectionism. For some women, perfectionism is a way to cope with indirect aggression, a term for the socially manipulative behaviors of the stereotypical "mean girls" that they may have experienced.
A recent study published in the journal Aggressive Behavior supports the idea that perfectionism may develop in a social group and suggests that indirect aggression triggers it. The "aggressor" talks behind a person's back, gives someone the "silent treatment," tells secrets, or is nice in private but rejecting in public to hide her hostility toward another.
Girls and women tend to resort to this kind of social bullying because they are not encouraged or taught how to express aggressive or competitive feelings directly. They become aggressive in ways that can be easily concealed or denied.
For the study, researchers at McMaster University asked two groups of college-age women to fill out surveys about what types of verbal abuse, physical abuse and indirect aggression they had experienced in grades 3 through 12. They also asked the women to answer questions to gauge whether they were perfectionists.
The women who recalled experiencing indirect aggression in childhood were more likely to become perfectionists by the time they reached college. Verbal and physical abuse apparently was not linked to perfectionism.
The authors acknowledge that the study asked subjects to report on old experiences and that women who are perfectionistic might be more likely to recall past events in a negative way, no matter how they were treated in reality.
Even so, the authors say that a victim of indirect aggression may without knowing it come to feel that being "perfect" is the only way to assert herself in social situations or maintain control. Thus, perfectionism becomes a way to cope with a threatening environment.
Back to top
Making Perfectionism Work for You
There is a fine line between the positive aspects of striving to be perfect and perfectionism that can be detrimental. Striving to be perfect can be very positive as long as it:
- Is realistic
- Moves you forward
- Helps you feel stronger
- Gives you the satisfaction you deserve after all that hard work.
Perfectionism becomes a problem when it makes you feel worse instead of better, or when your inability to be satisfied unless you are perfect realizing that it will always be out of reach causes suffering.
You can make perfectionism work for you. Here's how:
- Look at and change unrealistic and self-destructive thought patterns with cognitive behavior therapy.
- Understand how you became perfectionistic and ease up on unwarranted self-criticism. Psychodynamic therapy can help you do this.
- If you do have one of the underlying disorders linked to perfectionism (obsessive-compulsive disorder, anxiety or depression), then a medication or psychotherapy may help by targeting the pressure coming from that source.
Consult a mental health professional as a first step. The goal is to let go of the excessively high standards and find ways to cope with fears of failure. At the same time, you want to hold on to the positive force of striving for perfection.
Back to top
Howard LeWine, M.D. is chief editor of Internet Publishing, Harvard Health Publications. He is a clinical instructor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital. Dr. LeWine has been a primary care internist and teacher of internal medicine since 1978.

GNU Octave is a high-level language, primarily intended for numerical computations. It provides a convenient command line interface for solving linear and nonlinear problems numerically, and for performing other numerical experiments. It may also be used as a batch-oriented language. Octave has extensive tools for solving common numerical linear algebra problems, finding the roots of nonlinear equations, functions written in Octave's own language, or by using dynamically loaded modules written in C, C++, Fortran, or other languages.
Donations to support the software can be made at https://my.fsf.org/donate/working-together/octave.
DocumentationUser manual included; User FAQ included; Printed and online user manual available from http://www.network-theory.co.uk/octave/manual/
- PARI GP
- Octave-data smoothing
- Octave-information theory
- Octave-linear algebra
- GNU Oflox
This is a GNU package:octave
released on 31 May 2012
|License||Verified by||Verified on||Notes|
|GPLv2||Kelly Hopkins||6 December 2011|
|GPLv3orlater||Kelly Hopkins||29 January 2010|
Leaders and contributors
|John W. Eaton||Maintainer|
Resources and communication
|Developer||VCS Repository Webview||http://www.octave.org/hg/octave|
|Required to build||GNU make|
|Required to build||a recent version of g++|
|Required to build||libstdc++|
|Required to build||fortran|
This entry (in part or in whole) was last reviewed on 4 February 2012.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included in the page “GNU Free Documentation License”.
The copyright and license notices on this page only apply to the text on this page. Any software described in this text has its own copyright notice and license, which can usually be found in the distribution itself.

Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
Developmental Psychology: Cognitive development · Development of the self · Emotional development · Language development · Moral development · Perceptual development · Personality development · Psychosocial development · Social development · Developmental measures
BSID-III is the current version and is a standard series of measurements used primarily to assess the motor (fine and gross), language (receptive and expressive), and cognitive development of infants and toddlers, ages 0-3. This measure consists of a series of developmental play tasks and takes between 45 - 60 minutes to administer. Raw scores of successfully completed items are converted to scale scores and to composite scores. These scores are used to determine the child's performance compared with norms taken from typically developing children of their age (in months). The assessment is often used in conjunction with the Social-Emotional Adaptive Behavior Questionnaire. Completed by the parent or caregiver, this questionniare establishes the range of adaptive behaviors that the child can currently achieve and enables comparison with age norms.
- Essentials of Bayley Scales of Infant Development II Assessment Maureen M. Black, Kathleen Matula. New York: John Wily, 1999. ISBN: 978-0-471-32651-9
- "Scales of Infant Development and Play-Based Assessment in Two-Year Old At-Risk Children" Lisa Kelly-Vance, Howard Needelman, Kim Troia, Brigette Oliver Ryalls, University of Nebraska-Omaha, USA Developmental Disabilities Bulletin, Vol. 27 (1), 1999
- "Poor predictive validity of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development for cognitive function of extremely low birth weight children at school age." Hack M, Taylor HG, Drotar D, Schluchter M, Cartar L, Wilson-Costello D, Klein N, Friedman H, Mercuri-Minich N, Morrow M. Pediatrics. 2005 Aug;116(2):333-41.

Science Fair Project Encyclopedia
|President of the|
Historically, Landes was part of Gascony. It was one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on March 4, 1790. It was created from parts of the provinces of Guyenne and Gascony.
- Prefecture website (in French)
- Conseil Général website (in French)
Landes is also the name of a commune in the Charente-Maritime département, in France.
The contents of this article is licensed from www.wikipedia.org under the GNU Free Documentation License. Click here to see the transparent copy and copyright details

Scripture always speaks with absolute authority. It is as authoritative when it instructs us as it is when it commands us. It is as true when it tells the future as it is when it records the past. Although it is not a textbook on science, wherever it intersects with scientific data, it speaks with the same authority as when it gives us moral precepts. Although many have tried to set science against Scripture, science never has disproved one jot or tittle of the Bible--and it never will.
It is therefore a serious mistake to imagine that modern scientists can speak more authoritatively than Scripture on the subject of origins. Scripture is God's own eyewitness account of what happened in the beginning. When it deals with the origin of the universe, all science can offer is conjecture. Science has proven nothing that negates the Genesis record. In fact, the Genesis record answers the mysteries of science.
A clear pattern for interpreting Genesis is given to us in the New Testament. If the language of early Genesis were meant to be interpreted figuratively, we could expect to see Genesis interpreted in the New Testament in a figurative sense. After all, the New Testament is itself inspired Scripture, so it is the Creator's own commentary on the Genesis record.
What do we find in the New Testament? In every New Testament reference to Genesis, the events recorded by Moses are treated as historical events. And in particular, the first three chapters of Genesis are consistently treated as a literal record of historical events. The New Testament affirms, for example, the creation of Adam in the image of God (James 3:9).
Paul wrote to Timothy, "Adam was formed first, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, fell into transgression" (1 Timothy 2:13-14). In 1 Corinthians 11:8-9, he writes, "Man is not from woman, but woman from man. Nor was man created for the woman, but woman for the man."
Paul's presentation of the doctrine of original sin in Romans 5:12-20 depends on a historical Adam and a literal interpretation of the account in Genesis about how he fell. Furthermore, everything Paul has to say about the doctrine of justification by faith depends on that. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all shall be made alive" (1 Corinthians 15:22). Clearly Paul regarded both the creation and fall of Adam as history, not allegory. Jesus Himself referred to the creation of Adam and Eve as a historical event (Mark 10:6). To question the historicity of these events is to undermine the very essence of Christian doctrine.
Moreover, if Scripture itself treats the creation and fall of Adam as historical events, there is no warrant for treating the rest of the creation account as allegory or literary device. Nowhere in all of Scripture are any of these events handled as merely symbolic.
In fact, when the New Testament refers to creation, (e.g., Mark 13:19; John 1:3; Acts 4:24; 14:15; 2 Corinthians 4:6; Colossians 1:16; Hebrews 1:2, 10; Revelation 4:11; 10:6; 14:7) it always refers to a past, completed event--an immediate work of God, not a still-occurring process of evolution. The promised New Creation, a running theme in both Old and New Testaments, is portrayed as an immediate fiat creation, too--not an eons-long process (Isaiah 65:17). In fact, the model for the New Creation is the original creation (cf. Romans 8:21; Revelation 21:1, 5).
Hebrews 11:3 even makes belief in creation by divine fiat the very essence of faith itself: "By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that the things which are seen were not made of things which are visible." Creation ex nihilo is the clear and consistent teaching of the Bible.

The CEI is currently involved in many international space missions and projects.
Gaia: Gaia was adopted within the scientific programme of the European Space Agency (ESA) in October 2000. The mission aims to: measure the positions of ~1 billion stars both in our Galaxy and other members of the Local Group, with an accuracy down to 20 µas, perform spectral and photometric measurements of all objects, derive space velocities of the Galaxy's constituent stars using the stellar distances and motions, and create a three-dimensional structural map of the Galaxy. The gathered large datasets will provide astronomers with a wealth of information covering a wide range of research fields: from solar system studies, galactic astronomy, cosmology to general relativity. The CEI is involved in a number of different projects including modelling the CCDs designed for the Gaia mission to simulate the charge trapping effect of radiation damage, analysis of the BP/RP and RVS radiation campaign datasets and the development of the data processing pipeline.
IXO: The International X-ray Observatory (IXO) is a new X-ray telescope with joint participation from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), and Japan's Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA). This project supersedes both NASA's Constellation-X and ESA's XEUS mission concepts. IXO is a next-generation facility designed to examine three main areas: black holes and matter under extreme conditions, formation and evolution of galaxies, clusters and large scale structure, and the life cycles of matter and energy. The IXO optics will have 20 times more collecting area at 1 keV than any previous X-ray telescope. The focal plane instruments will deliver up to 100-fold increase in effective area for high resolution spectroscopy from 0.3-10 keV, deep spectral imaging from 0.2-40 keV over a wide field of view, unprecedented polarimetric sensitivity, and microsecond spectroscopic timing with high count rate capability. The CEI is currently developing instrumentation for the X-ray Grating Spectrometer (XGS) readout.
Euclid: Euclid is a medium class mission candidate for launch in 2017 as part of the Cosmic Vision 2015-2025 programme and will spend five years in orbit at L2. The mission is a combination of two missions: the Dark UNiverse Explorer (DUNE) and the SPectroscopic All Sky Cosmic Explorer (SPACE). The primary goal is to study the dark universe by means of two main cosmological probes: the Weak Lensing (WL) technique which maps the distribution of dark matter and measures the properties of dark energy in the universe and the Baryonic Acoustic Oscillations (BAO) technique which uses the scales in the spatial and angular power spectra as "standard rulers" to measure the equation of state and rate of change of dark energy.
The CEI is working with a number of institutes, including ESA and Mullard Space Science Laboratory (MSSL) on the characterisation of the radiation effects to the Euclid CCDs. This work involves pre- and post-irradiation characterisation of the e2v CCD204s provided by ESA, based on the same architecture as the CCD203 which is proposed to be used onboard Euclid. A model of the CCD204 pixel structure is being created to explore the electron density for charge storage as a function of signal size and being used in CTE simulations under a variety of signal conditions to predict CTE effects at the mid and end of mission. The aim is to provide recommendations on CCD design modifications for improved radiation tolerance, device operation and shielding.
Chandrayaan-1 & 2: The Indian Space Research Organisation Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft was launched on the 22nd of October 2008. It spent nine months in a 100 km circular orbit around the Moon before communication was lost. During this time it surveyed the around 15 percent of the lunar surface providing a map of chemical characteristics and 3-dimensional topography. The spacecraft carried a number of instruments including a terrain mapping camera, infrared spectrometers, and the Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS). The C1XS instrument consisted of 24 e2v technologies CCD54 swept-charge device silicon X-ray detectors arranged in 6 modules that will carried out high quality X-ray spectroscopic mapping of the Moon using the technique of X-ray fluorescence in the energy range 0.5-10 keV.
The CEI was involved in performing the proton radiation damage assessment for the CCD54 devices recommending instrument shielding, operating temperature and operating potentials. The pre-flight characterisation of the 14 modules available for flight selection was also conducted recommending ten modules suitable for use in the instrument. The ESA space environment information system (SPENVIS) software was utilised to estimate the worse case end of life 10 MeV equivalent proton fluence, which was used to irradiate a number of CCD54 devices to investigate their post irradiation performance. The CEI continues to be involved in the instrument in an advisory role on the observed radiation effects to the CCD54 devices.
Chandrayaan-2 is the second Indian lunar mission, to be launched in 2014 into a 200 km polar orbit where is will use and test various new technologies. The spacecraft will include a number of instruments, one being the Chandrayaan-2 Large Area Soft X-ray Spectrometer (CLASS) instrument which is a continuation of the successful C1XS instrument. CLASS will map the abundance of major rock forming elements on the lunar surface, mapping elemental abundances with a nominal spatial resolution of 25 km. The instrument uses the second generation swept charge device, CCD236, and has a geometrical area three times that of C1XS which will allow for data collection at low levels of solar activity.
The CEI will provide assistance with the characterisation of the SCDs and an analysis of the impact of radiation damage on their performance. Initial studies have demonstrated a factor of two improvement in radiation hardness, further optimisation and a more detailed investigation into device performance is currently underway.
UKube-1: The UK Space Agency is planning to launch their first cubesat later this year. The cubesat platform allows fast mission turnaround of small payloads, allowing more groups to be involved with the missions. After launch in late 2011, the satellite will spend 1 year in a low Earth orbit (~400km), with a view to operating for a further 2 years if successful.
The CEI has successfully bid for design and production of a single payload, working in tandem with Clydespace to develop a payload responsible for imaging of the Earth with narrow and wide field imagers. In addition the group plans to include an imager to monitor radiation damage effects on the 0.18µm CMOS sensors, which have been previously characterised on the ground. This is the first such instrument under total development by the group, and will provide ample training and expansion of knowledge of mission development within the group. Click Here to access the mission page for more information.

Yes, let's start with the basics:
What are the typical mistakes people make with percentages?
What is the margin of error in a poll?
It would be virtually impossible to conduct a poll on the entire voting population in the United States. Pollsters therefore question a sample of a population.
What is the difference between causation and correlation?
One of the most common errors we find in the press is the confusion between correlation and causation in scientific and health-related studies.
What does it mean for a result to be “statistically significant”?
How can we tell whether two events happen at the same time by chance, or for a reason?
What is the difference between absolute and relative risk?
Which one tells you about the actual risk ?
What is the difference between controlled, observational and case controlled studies?
There are advantages and disadvantages to each type, and an awareness of these differences makes for a savvier consumer of public health information.
What are confounding factors and how do they affect studies?

Volume 15, Number 2—February 2009
Reemergence of Human and Animal Brucellosis, Bulgaria
Bulgaria had been free from brucellosis since 1958, but during 2005–2007, a reemergence of human and animal disease was recorded. The reemergence of this zoonosis in the country highlights the importance of maintaining an active surveillance system for infectious diseases that will require full cooperation between public health and veterinary authorities.
According to the World Health Organization (1), brucellosis is one of the most common zoonoses worldwide and is considered a reemerging infectious disease in many areas of the world. An estimated 500,000 new human cases occur annually worldwide (2). In Europe, 1,033 human brucellosis cases were reported in 2006 (3); data from a passive surveillance system were based on clinical findings, supported by epidemiologic criteria, and confirmed by serologic tests. Here we report the results of a survey performed in Bulgaria during 2005–2007, which has been considered free from Brucellosis melitensis and B. abortus disease since 1958 (4).
In Bulgaria, until 1998 serologic screening was mandatory for all cattle, sheep, and goats >12 months of age. Afterward, based on risk assessment, animal surveillance activities covered 100% of heads reared in municipalities along the borders with countries endemic for brucellosis such as Turkey, Greece, and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; 50% of the animals reared in other municipalities of the regions bordering the aforementioned countries; and 25% of animals reared in the inner Bulgarian regions. Currently, an active surveillance system is in place for dairy factory employees and persons considered at risk after outbreaks in ruminants.
During 2005–2007 (Figure 1), a total of 105 human cases of brucellosis were diagnosed among 2,054 persons who were tested on the basis of clinical suspicion or risky exposure. A human case of brucellosis was considered confirmed if results of serologic tests, such as ELISA or complement fixation test, were positive, in accordance with the World Health Organization case definition (5). Bacteria isolation and characterization had not been performed routinely.
The alert started in 2005 (Figure 1, panel A), when a case of brucellosis occurred in a Bulgarian migrant animal keeper working in Greece. Active surveillance of persons at risk was implemented, enabling detection of a total of 34 human cases of brucellosis. All cases were classified as imported cases; therefore, no supplemental active surveillance on animals was implemented. Additionally, during routine screening for at-risk workers, 3 other persons employed in a dairy factory were found to be seropositive. Due to the lack of traceability of the raw material used in the factory, it was not possible to trace the origin of the infection. At that time, there was no evidence of animal cases of brucellosis.
During 2006 (Figure 1, panel B), a total of 10 cases of human brucellosis were reported from different regions of the country. According to anamnestic information, these case-patients had different sources of infection: 3 of the 10 were considered imported infections; 1 case-patient was diagnosed during hospitalization in Sicily (Italy), where the patient reported having eaten ricotta cheese, and 2 occurred in Bulgarian migrant animal keepers working in Greece. Concerning the origin of infection, epidemiologic data suggest that 5 of the 10 cases were related to occupational risk and the remaining to consumption of raw milk and milk derivates. Surveillance activities enabled detection of 10 animals (7 small ruminants and 3 cows) with positive serologic results; these animals were then killed and destroyed. During 2007 (Figure 1, panel C), a total of 58 human cases were identified. Of 58 cases, 54 were classified as autochthonous (i.e., acquired by imported animals found to be infected during regular veterinary surveillance). These cases were identified in a Bulgarian region bordering Greece and Turkey (Haskovo region).
Two other cases, which were also classified as autochthonous, were diagnosed in patients who stated they had consumed a risky product (i.e., raw milk handled without adherence to hygienic standards). The remaining 2 cases were classified as imported because they involved Bulgarian migrant animal keepers working in Greece. Active surveillance in place for animals found a total of 625 heads (618 small ruminants, 7 cows) with positive serologic results; all were killed and destroyed. Analagous with what we observed in humans, most of the infected animals were found in the Haskovo region. All animals found to be infected during surveillance activity were bred at the family farm, and their milk and dairy products were prepared and eaten without adherence to proper hygienic standards.
Our data show that brucellosis is reemerging in Bulgaria (Figure 2). On the basis of information provided in this report, we can make several hypotheses regarding the causes of the resurgence of a previously controlled infection in a transitional, rapidly changing country.
Overall, 105 human cases of human brucellosis were identified over a 3-year period. Of them, 84 cases (80%) were identified in persons at occupational risk. This finding suggests that when brucellosis is introduced into naive territories (i.e., those territories that were considered officially free of brucellosis), the primary source of infection for humans is direct contact with infected animals (i.e., exposure to abortion/delivery products) or domestic consumption of products produced on family farms (milk, raw cheese). However, environmental exposure can also occur, especially in infants and children, who are considered at lower risk for direct contact with potentially infected animals, as recently observed (6). This hypothesis appears to be consistent with the context of a naive setting, where preventive measures are not routinely implemented. Continuous health education and other strategies may contribute to reduce the circulation of human brucellosis in endemic areas (7).
The reemergence of brucellosis is not limited to Bulgaria but involves several countries in the Balkan region and even in the Caucasian region (P. Pasquali, unpub. data). This trend or reemergence has several explanations. First, due to socioeconomic changes, many countries in these regions are experiencing a dramatic increase of animal trade, animal movement, and occupational migration, which in turn may increase the risk for introduction and spread of infectious diseases, such as brucellosis, from other disease-endemic countries like Greece or Turkey (2). Second, the process that has characterized the change of the social and administrative organization since the collapse of the Soviet Union is far from being completed; the public health systems are still flawed in many countries. Finally, part of the increase may simply be that brucellosis is a complex disease, which has different cycles of expansion and regression.
Before drawing conclusions, we should mention 2 possible limitations of the study. First, samples from patients with positive serologic results were used for bacterial culture for brucellosis only if sample collection was properly timed; no culture positive case is available. Second, we cannot exclude the possibility that part of the increase in cases of brucellosis could be due to improved surveillance; in particular, temporal trends and geographic comparison might be, to some extent, affected by the intensity of screening activities. However, this increased surveillance is unlikely to bias the observed shift from imported to locally acquired cases.
In conclusion, this report shows how a disease such as brucellosis may increase its public health impact, particularly in transitional countries such as Bulgaria. Our findings emphasize the importance of the combination of health education and active surveillance systems for controlling infectious diseases and highlight the need for cooperation between public health officials and veterinary officers. Creating and improving capacity building are necessary to properly address issues that pose public health hazards.
Dr Russo is a physician at Sapienza University in Rome. His research interests are infectious diseases in resource-limited countries in the context of natural disasters.
The authors thank Massimo Amicosante and Luca Avellis for logistic support.
This work was conducted as part of a cooperative effort between Italy and Bulgaria, supported by the European Union.
- Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Organisation for Animal Health, and World Health Organization. Brucellosis in human and animals. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006. WHO/CDS/EPR/2006.7 [cited 2009 Jan 7]. Available from http://www.who.int/entity/csr/resources/publications/Brucellosis.pdf
- Pappas G, Papadimitriou P, Akritidis N, Christou L, Tsianos EV. The new global map of human brucellosis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006;6:91–9.
- European Food Safety Authority–European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The community summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents, antimicrobial resistance and foodborne outbreaks in the European Union in 2006. EFSA Journal. 2007;2007:130 [cited 2009 Jan 5]. Available from http://www.efsa.europa.eu/cs/BlobServer/DocumentSet/Zoon_report_2006_en,0.pdf?ssbinary=true
- Corbel MJ. Brucellosis: an overview. 1st international conference on emerging zoonoses (Jerusalem, Israel). Emerg Infect Dis. 1997;3:213–21.
- Robinson A. Guidelines for coordinated human and animal brucellosis surveillance. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2003. FAO Animal Production and Health Paper 156.
- Makis AC, Pappas G, Galanakis E, Haliasos N, Siamopoulou A. Brucellosis in infant after familial outbreak. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:1319–20.
- Jelastopulu E, Bikas C, Petropoulos C, Leotsinidis M. Incidence of human brucellosis in a rural area in western Greece after the implementation of a vaccination programme against animal brucellosis. BMC Public Health. 2008;8:241.
Suggested citation for this article: Russo G, Pasquali P, Nenova R, Alexandrov T, Ralchev S, Vullo V, et al. Reemergence of human and animal brucellosis, Bulgaria. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Feb [date cited]. Available from http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/15/2/08-1025.htm

Charles Heywood kept his cannon firing even as his ship sank.
Born in Waterville on Oct. 3, 1839, Heywood was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps at New York City on April 5, 1858. Thirty-five months later he reported aboard the USS Cumberland, a 24-gun sloop of war then assigned to the Gosport Navy Yard in Portsmouth, Va.
Fearing the shipyard’s capture by Confederate militia, senior Navy officers ordered Gosport abandoned on April 20, 1861. After mining key installations with barrels of gunpowder, Heywood and his Marines lit the fuses and hastened aboard the USS Cumberland, already slipping seaward on the ebbing Elizabeth River.
The resulting explosions and fires caused significant damage, but Confederate engineers quickly repaired crucial machinery. They also raised the burned and scuttled USS Merrimac. Upon its hull arose an ironclad, the CSS Virginia. Measuring 263 feet in length and weighing 3,200 tons, the steam-engine ironclad mounted 10 massive cannons. The skipper was Capt. Franklin Buchanan.
He intended to sail into Hampton Roads and sink the Yankee warships stationed there. By the time Buchanan ordered his ship to sail on March 8, 1862, Heywood was a captain commanding the USS Cumberland’s Marine contingent.
Brilliant late-winter sunshine and warm air engulfed Hampton Roads as the CSS Virginia stood downriver that Saturday. Buchanan had already selected his first target. “I am going to ram the Cumberland,” which was equipped with “the new rifled guns, the only ones in their whole fleet we have cause to fear,” he told Chief Engineer H. Ashton Ramsay. “The moment we are out in the Roads, I’m going to make right for her and ram her.”
That morning, the USS Cumberland lay moored some 300 yards off Newport News on the north shore of Hampton Roads. Aboard the Cumberland, Cmdr. William Radford had gone ashore, leaving Lt. George Morris, the executive officer, in command.
At noon, sailors on watch aboard the Cumberland “discovered three vessels under steam, standing down the Elizabeth River toward Sewell’s Point,” Morris wrote on March 9. One ship belched black smoke; Morris, Heywood, and other USS Cumberland officers could see the smoke without using their spyglasses.
Buchanan’s underpowered ironclad steamed ponderously into Hampton Roads. After the CSS Virginia cleared Sewell’s Point about 1:30 p.m., Buchanan steered west to attack the USS Cumberland.
Aboard that ship, crewmen had already “double breeched the guns on the main deck, and cleared [the] ship for action,” Morris reported. He ordered the sloop pivoted on her anchor so that her starboard broadside would face the ironclad.
Assigned to his ship’s after gun division, Heywood stood with his gun crews and watched as the Virginia approached. At 2 p.m. aboard the ironclad, Lt. Charles Simms fired the bow pivot gun, a 7-inch Brooke rifle.
According to William C. Davis writing in “Duel Between the First Ironclads,” Simms’ cannon ball “screamed across the Roads and hit” the USS Cumberland “squarely, passing through the starboard-quarter rail” and hurling wood splinters into nearby Marines. After a Cumberland gun crew fired their ship’s forward 10-inch pivot gun and missed, Simms’ second shot exploded amidst that gun crew and killed all but two men.
“Our firing became at once very rapid from the few guns we could bring to bear” as the ironclad “approached slowly,” recalled Master Moses Stuyvesant, who commanded the sloop’s after gun division. Simms’ pivot gun pounded the Cumberland; as shell fragments and wood splinters struck down sailors and Marines alike, Heywood’s crews fired their cannons through the dense smoke.
At approximately 2:30 p.m., Cumberland pilot A.B. Smith thought the approaching ironclad resembled “a huge half-submerged crocodile” with its “iron ram projecting, straight forward.”
Steaming at 6 knots, the Virginia “stood on and struck us under the starboard fore channels” near the Cumberland’s bow, Morris reported. “She delivered her fire at the same time; the destruction was great. We returned the fire with solid shot with alacrity.”
The ironclad’s ram opened a hole about 7 feet across. Flooding with seawater, the USS Cumberland listed to starboard — and the ship’s weight bore the Virginia downward.
The ironclad was already reversing its engines as the tide pivoted the trapped Virginia alongside the sinking Cumberland. Then the ram broke off, freeing the ironclad from a potential watery grave. Buchanan backed his ship until it lay parallel to the Cumberland and only 20 feet away.
Cannons flashed and boomed for some 30 minutes as Heywood and his comrades heroically fought the Virginia amidst “a scene of carnage and destruction never to be recalled without horror,” Stuyvesant remembered. Blood and gore splattered across the main deck as Heywood shouted at sailors and Marines to drag wounded comrades to the ship’s port side.
Now the sea lapped at the Cumberland’s main deck as the bowsprit disappeared into Hampton Roads. Gun crews kept firing until their cannons submerged. Stationed near the stern, Heywood worked his guns even as another cannon broke loose and lurched across the deck to crush a sailor.
“At 3:35 [p.m.] the water had risen to the main hatchway, and the ship canted to port, and we delivered a parting fire, each man trying to save himself by jumping overboard,” Morris recalled. Acknowledging that severely wounded men taken below decks could only be left to drown, he credited specific officers for their coolness under fire.
“I can only say in conclusion that all did their duty and we sunk with the American flag at the [mast] peak,” Morris closed his report.
Even as the Cumberland’s deck sharply canted, Heywood remained with the aft guns. “The water began to swash over the upper deck, and still every unencumbered gun was hurling defiance at the foe,” wrote John S.C. Abbott in “The History of the Civil War in America, Vol. 1,” published in 1863.
“The ship careened upon one side. The last gunner [Heywood], knee-deep in water, pulled the trigger of the last gun,” Abbott wrote. Then “the majestic frigate, with all her dead and all her wounded, sank like lead.”
And Charles Heywood went overboard into Marine Corps lore.
His heroism went noticed. “I omitted to mention to you the gallant conduct of Lieutenant Charles Heywood … whose bravery upon the occasion of the fight with the Merrimack won my highest applause,” Morris wrote Navy Secretary Gideon Welles on April 12.
Heywood received a brevet promotion to major after the battle. Of the 46 Marines aboard the USS Cumberland, 14 died. Another 107 sailors were killed aboard the sloop on March 8.
The next day, the Monitor fought the Virginia in Hampton Roads in history’s first ironclad-to-ironclad sea battle. Most history books still call the Virginia the “Merrimac.”
Heywood would fight during another famous Civil War battle; he was commanding two gun crews aboard the USS Hartford at Mobile Bay, Ala. as Adm. David Farragut roared, “Damn the torpedoes! Full speed ahead!” on Aug. 5, 1864. Within an hour, Heywood and Farragut traded shot and shell with another Confederate ironclad, the CSS Tennessee — commanded by Adm. Franklin Buchanan.
This time Buchanan lost and Heywood won.
Named the ninth Marine Corps commandant on Jan. 30, 1891, Charles Heywood instituted important changes to the corps’ mission and strength. Promoted to major general a year before his 1903 retirement, he died at Washington, D.C., on Feb. 26, 1915. His wife, Caroline Bacon, outlived him by 12 years.
Heywood lies buried in Section 2, Lot 1115 at Arlington National Cemetery.
Brian Swartz is the BDN special sections editor. An avid Civil War buff, he has extensively explored and photographed Civil War battlefields throughout the South. Swartz may be reached at email@example.com or visit his blog at http://maineatwar.bangordailynews.com.

"One death is a tragedy. A million deaths is a statistic." -Joseph Stalin
When figuring out how people will respond to a foreign tragedy, it comes down to three things: location, location, location.
And TV cameras too.The September 11, 2001 homicide attacks
killed about 3,000 people yet it's had more impact on American politics and foreign policy than anything since World War II. And to the great extent that American foreign policy impacts the rest of the world, it had a huge impact on international affairs as well.
While 3,000 is pretty big death toll for a single incident, there have been other wars and attacks with greater loss of life that had a relatively miniscule influence on American or international affairs. Why? Because those attacks didn't occur in the heart of New York City. The international response would've been significantly less if the attack had been launched in Kathmandu, Bogota or Algiers (in countries with homegrown terrorist problems).The Asian tsunami of 2004
had a devastating effect and cost an estimated 283,000 lives and over a million displaced. It generated an international response that was probably unprecedented in scale. As someone who regularly reads articles on underfunded international crisis appeals, I was heartened by the response to the tsunami. That it hit easily accessible coastal regions, including many tourist areas, made it easier to TV crews to get images. That Europeans and Americans were amongst the victims, if a tiny fraction, ensured that it got coverage in the western media.
But if I told you there was a conflict that has cost almost 15 times as many lives as the tsunami, could you name that crisis? If I told you there was a crisis that, in mortality terms, was the equivalent of a three 9/11s every week for the last 7 years
, would you know which one I'm talking about?
I bet few westerners could, even though it's by far the deadiest conflict of the last 60 years.
The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) is killing an estimated 38,000 people each month, according to the British medical journal The Lancet
. And if not for the involvement of humanitarian non-governmental organizations and UN relief agencies, the toll would be much higher.Most of the deaths are not caused by violence but by malnutrition and preventable diseases after the collapse of health services, the study said
, notes the BBC. Since the war began in 1998, some 4m people have died, making it the world's most deadly war since 1945, it said.
A peace deal has ended most of the fighting but armed gangs continue to roam the east, killing and looting.
The political process in the DRC is slowly inching in the right direction. Voters in the country recently approved a new constitution
, to replace the one imposed on it by the outgoing Belgian colonialists. EU officials praised the referendum as free and fair, probably the first truly open poll in the country's history. Elections are scheduled for June of this year.
However, instability reigns in much of the country, particularly the east. And central government throughout the entireity of the country has never been strong in this gigantic country. There are 17,000 UN peacekeepers doing the best they can but the country's the size of Western Europe. (By contrast the Americans and British have ten times as many troops in Iraq, a country that's less than 1/5 the size of the DRC. And we know how many problems they're having there)
And this shows why war should ALWAYS be a last resort. Most of the deaths have not been directly caused by war
(bullet wounds, landmines, etc). Most of the deaths have been caused by factors provoked by war's instability and destruction. The destruction of all infrastructure like roads and medical clinics. The inability to get to sources of clean water. The fear of leaving the house to tend the fields or go to the market.
38,000 people a month. If you get pissed off at Howard Dean or Pat Robertson, spare a little outrage for this.
And maybe a few bucks.
WANNA HELP? TAKE YOUR PICK
-Doctors Without Borders
-World Food Program
-Catholic Relief Services

There isn't a huge difference in the way residential homes are built in Japan compared to in the U.S., although the Japanese are more likely to invest in special earthquake engineering, particularly in commercial and higher-end residential buildings.
Home builders in both Japan and the U.S. use a lot of wood-frame construction, which is flexible and tends to ride out a quake fairly well, said Heidi Faison, outreach director at the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center in Berkeley, Calif. But wood frame structures do have potential vulnerabilities in two key areas: the foundation and the wall that supports a crawl space, which is called a cripple wall.
She recommends home buyers hire an engineer to make sure the wood frame is bolted to the foundation. If a house has a crawl space underneath it or you need to climb a few steps to get up to the first floor, it likely is supported by a cripple wall, which can buckle in an earthquake. If you're in an earthquake-prone location, that space needs to be filled in with a solid material.
Gary Ehrlick, a structural engineer and program manager for Structural Codes & Standards at the National Association of Home Builders, outlines some other house features to consider:
• Look at the garage, if the house has one. A large garage door opening or a lot of big windows on the first floor, that can create a soft story -- an open space without enough support to withstand violent shaking.
• Brick veneer can present a major hazard if it's not attached well. Brick was a problem in the 6.3 magnitude temblor that struck New Zealand last month. "It doesn't create as much of a hazard inside, but outside it can injure or kill,'' he said.
• Houses built on a slope are often an issue. They need to be tied back well with footings. Also make sure the slope is stable. Liquefaction -- where saturated soil becomes liquid -- can be a problem and can occur when a building is located near a lake or river. In an earthquake, liquefaction can cause the ground to behave like quicksand, as seen in New Zealand and in the 1989 earthquake in Loma Prieta in the mountains of Santa Cruz, Calif.
In Japan, most of the damage was actually inflicted by the subsequent tsunami, just as most of the destruction in the San Francisco quake of 1906 was caused by fires that ripped through the city after gas lines were ruptured.
A disaster's chain of events makes the preparation scenario a bit more complicated.
There is a growing interest in designing homes better able to survive a tsunami. The basic idea in tsunami design, as in flood-resistant construction is to get some of your structure up above the expected level of water, said Gary Ehrlick.
"In commercial structures they talk about vertical evacuation zones.'' Under this theory, the first floor, built out of concrete or steel, is strong enough to withstand the pressure of the water. The "zone of refuge'' occupies the upper floors.
Another concept that came out of the earthquake/tsunami that leveled Banda Aceh, Indonesia, on Check out our gallery of Day in 2004 is a house where the first floor allows the wave to wash through it, destroying the walls but preserving the foundation. This would be a concrete frame with columns or wall segments in each corner of the house. The walls are panels made out of something light, like bamboo or wood. After a disaster, such panels would be easy to replace.
Check out our photo gallery of a tsunami-resistant home designed by Kazunori Fujimoto Architect & Associates:
Gallery: See Photos of Earthquake Proof Home
More on AOL Real Estate:
Find out how to calculate mortgage payments.
Find homes for sale in your area.
Find foreclosures in your area.
Get property tax help from our experts.

Tomorrow, in Philadelphia, Queen's University professor Arthur B. McDonald is scheduled to receive a half-share of the Benjamin Franklin Institute's annual physics prize. It is the latest in a long series of honours for Prof. McDonald, who was the director of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO). As one of the oldest internationally recognized honours for research achievements, the Franklin Medal puts him on an altogether new plane, amidst what the French call les nobelisables.
The scientific prestige surrounding the SNO, which ceased collecting data in November of last year, is still growing. As an experiment, it performed exactly as promised, and in an environment of institutional cost-cutting, it did so at a cost (about $70-million) much lower than that required by other particle-physics projects around the world. For every plaudit the SNO receives, there are hundreds, perhaps thousands of Canadians eligible for a share of reflected glory. They ranged from the dozens of physicists who worked on the data-crunching, to the federal bureaucrats who recognized SNO's value and steered clear of it with their budget axes, to the executives at Inco who arranged to set aside space for the project a mile and a half down in the company's Creighton Mine. And let's not forget the miners, who went down into the pit with physicists every day, and during a 1997 strike allowed them to cross a picket line in order to continue their work.
All this was done in the name of hunting the elusive neutrino, a subatomic particle that has no electrical charge and that passes through almost all matter without being stopped or deflected. The existence of neutrinos had been predicted in 1930, and they were first detected in nature as early as 1956, but 40 more years of research had left scientists uncertain whether they possessed any mass. Meanwhile, the sun's interior, a naturally occurring fusion reactor, seemed to be producing only about one-half to one-third as many neutrinos as the so-called Standard Model of particle physics predicted.
The "solar neutrino" problem was a big one. It seemed that scientists would either be required to revise their existing inferential images of the sun's interior, or to do away with the Standard Model itself. For a while it seemed possible that the sun was a lot cooler on the inside than anyone had thought, a discovery that would have had consequences for the ultimate fate of the solar system. Fortunately, when physicists began looking for ways the Standard Model could be modified to allow for the mysteriously low rate of solar neutrino emissions, they realized that if neutrinos did have mass, they were capable of flipping freely in space between three different "flavours" --only one of which earlier neutrino observatories had been capable of observing.
On June 18, 2001, the SNO -- basically a giant tank of heavy water surrounded by cameras that could detect the "flash" created by a single neutrino penetrating to the Earth's core -- solved all of these problems with the release of just one batch of results. It turned out that neutrinos do have mass, that Earth is receiving all three types of neutrinos from the sun and that the total number agrees with established models. Nobel laureate John Bahcall described the discovery in 2004 as "epochal", "revolutionary" and the "fingerprints on the smoking gun" of the solar-neutrino problem.
In the future, the discoveries that the SNO made possible may be placed on a par with Ben Franklin's own research into electricity. Already "neutrino astronomy" is an important field; detectors like SNO will give astronomers early warning of the next supernova in our galactic neighbourhood. As the SNO's "smoking gun" showed, neutrino detection is like having an extra sense to work with when it comes to understanding the solar core. And futurists are spinning wild ideas for neutrinobased imaging and telecommunications -- ideas that now seem as far-fetched, but just as tempting, as alternating current would have been to Franklin.

By Rob Coppinger in London
European hypersonic civil transport project heats up as three concepts undergo trials
An aircraft capable of flying five times the speed of sound and reaching Sydney in between two and four hours from Brussels is the leading design in a €7 million European research project to find a hypersonic civilian airliner replacement to the supersonic Concorde.
A Mach 5 civil transport aircraft designed by a UK team is leading a pack of three concepts undergoing preliminary studies for the three-year, €7 million ($9 million) European hypersonic research project, Long Term Advanced Propulsion Concepts and Technologies (LAPCAT).
With €4 million from the European Commission and the rest from industry, LAPCAT aims to develop a vehicle capable of travelling from Europe to Australia in 2-4h.
Oxfordshire-based Reaction Engine says its A2 (a Flight artist's impression of which is pictured above), meets take-off noise restrictions and is powered by hydrogen-fuelled turbine-based combine cycle (TBCC) engines.
The other two concepts are an EADS Mach 8 vehicle with rocket-based combined cycle propulsion and German aerospace research centre DLR’s kerosene-fuelled, TBCC-powered Mach 4 craft.
LAPCAT is being co-ordinated by the European Space Agency for the EC. “Results so far show [the Mach 5 vehicle from Reaction Engines] can avoid later [technology] pitfalls and could travel from Brussels to Sydney,” says ESA’s LAPCAT project co-ordinator Johan Steelant. Criteria for vehicle evaluation include safety, ability to reach diversion airports, adaptability to different sonic boom restrictions and technological maturation. Steelant cites the heat exchangers in Reaction Engine’s Scimitar TBCC engine as being more advanced in their development.
Later this month tests of an experimental engine intake will start at a DLR windtunnel facility. These should be followed by nozzle tests in July and eventually combustion chamber and combined intake, chamber and nozzle testing.

Matisse: Radical Invention, 1913-1917
July 18–October 11, 2010
Matisse conceived this "souvenir of Morocco" in 1912, stretched a canvas for it in 1913, and returned to the composition late in 1915, only to start again on a new canvas in early 1916. Black is the principal agent, at once simplifying, dividing, and joining the three zones of the canvas: the still life of melons and leaves on a gridded pavement, bottom left; the architecture with domed marabout, top left; and the figures, at right. Next to a seated Moroccan shown from behind, the large curving ocher shape and circular form derive from a reclining figure in the sketches. Above the shadowed archway, figures in profile may be discerned in the two windows: at right, the lower part of a seated man; at left, the upper part of a man with raised arms. Matisse built up the surface with thin layers of pigment, the color of the underlying layers modifying those on top. Painter Gino Severini reported that "Matisse said . . . that everything that did not contribute to the balance and rhythm of [this] work, had to be eliminated . . . as you would prune a tree."
Matisse developed this painting of what he described as “the terrace of the little cafe of the casbah” in the years following two visits to Morocco, in 1912 and 1913. As he worked on various studies he eliminated details he felt were extraneous to the painting’s overall balance. A balcony with a flowerpot and a mosque behind it are at upper left, at lower left is a still life of vegetables, and to the right is a man wearing a round turban, seen from behind. Matisse’s generous application of black paint helps unify the three sections of the painting across its abstract expanse.
Matisse: Radical Invention, 1913–1917, July 18–October 11, 2010
Director, Glenn Lowry: Matisse first conceived this painting in 1912, while he was visiting Morocco. But he didn't actually start the canvas until early 1916. Once he did, he continued working on it—with great focus and concentration—through the fall.
Curator, John Elderfield: The forms are difficult to decipher. I know some people who have thought that what Matisse says are melons and leaves are in fact the Moroccans, but Matisse is insistent that they are not. I think one can clearly see the figure whose back is towards us. And if we look at it carefully we can see that that figure's grown in size. To the right of it, that black area does seem to derive from drawings of an arched doorway with light hitting the bottom, but the top part is in shadow, leading into another architectural space. And the two elements at the top are ones which we can trace back to drawings he made in Morocco—the one at the right, of a sort of seated figure, and the one to the left, more puzzling, but somewhat amusingly, in one of the drawings—and he refers to this in his letter—is of a figure who has got his arms raised to look through binoculars. All that remains is the forearms and part of the body, and Matisse is quite happy to have carried it to that point of almost unintelligibility. But I don't think the painting asks us to be specific about these forms.
Curator, Stephanie D’Alessandro: I don't think so either. I think there's a level of memory and recollection, and maybe even nostalgia with this picture.
Glenn Lowry: One aspect of Morocco that stayed with Matisse was the harsh contrast between the midday sun and the shade, evoked here in the black background.
Conservator, Michael Duffy: You can see how it defines certain shapes. Particularly the shape in the middle, this curved shape, which is made up of ochre and white. The black edge on the left is painted over, so he actually defines the form further by overlaying the black paint. When you look closely at the black paint, you'll see that it covers areas of blue and pink underneath, and that gives the black a very warm color. And it's very typical of the way Matisse painted. Rather than blending his colors together, to achieve one color, he would typically layer colors, even black, over several layers, in order to build up a kind of rich, optical surface.
MoMA Audio: Collection, 2008
Curator Emeritus, John Elderfield: This painting was made in 1915–1916 and is a remembrance of visits that Matisse made to Morocco. And while the paintings made in Morocco are beautifully, limpidly colored, obviously the remembrance is rather of the great heat, of contrasts of color in the conditions of very bright light.
The Moroccans themselves are on the right on the terrace with their melons and gourds—the green and yellow forms at the left. We can see a figure with his back to us, and then, with more difficulty, figures in windows at the top. In the background is a mosque with a vase of blue and white flowers standing on the parapet.
Matisse said that he put black in his pictures to simplify the composition. And indeed, through the teens and into the 1920s, he regularly puts in a little dosing of black to hold everything else in place. I think, unquestionably, he was thinking of shadow, and of the kind of stifling midday sun in North Africa. There is that element of renunciation of color and wanting to put in an element of real gravity in the composition. Its hard to imagine any other color doing it in that same way.
The Museum of Modern Art , MoMA Highlights, New York: The Museum of Modern Art, revised 2004, originally published 1999, p. 79
The Moroccans marvelously evokes tropical sun and heat even while its ground is an enveloping black, what Matisse called "a grand black, . . . as luminous as the other colors in the painting." Utterly dense, this black evokes a space as tangible as any object, and allows a gravity and measured drama without the illusion of depth once necessary to achieve this kind of grandeur.
The painting, which Matisse described as picturing "the terrace of the little café of the casbah," is divided into three: at the upper left, an architectural section showing a balcony with flowerpot and the dome of a mosque behind; a still life, of four green-leafed yellow melons at the lower left; and a figural scene in which an Arab sits with his back to us. To his right is an arched doorway, and windows above contain vestigial figures. The form to his left is hard to decipher, but has been interpreted as a man's burnoose and circular turban.
During his visit to Morocco in 1912-13, Matisse had been inspired by African light and color. At the same time, he faced the challenge of Cubism, the leading avant-garde art movement of the period, and The Moroccans summarizes his memories of Morocco while also combining the intellectual rigor of Cubist syntax with the larger scale and richer palette of his own art.
Matisse Picasso, February 13–May 19, 2003
Narrator: In 1911 and again in 1912 Matisse traveled to Morocco. Three years later, he tapped those memories for this big souvenir picture, The Moroccans. By that time he was deeply involved in the Cubist vocabulary of reduced geometric form.
Curator, John Elderfield: What it shows is on the upper left a mosque with a vase of flowers on the right hand side. In the bottom left is a pavement with melons with their green leaves. And at the right, more difficult to figure out, various figures who are presumably sitting on some sort of terrace outside a cafe in Tangier. One can I think clearly understand the figure with his back to us, with a white turban and, blue shirt. And to the right, what looks like the top of an archway in shadow.
Matisse talked about the black as being a way of representing heat and light. And as one gets further south, one gets these very strong black and white contrasts. It's also trying to convey some of the sense of the intense light, and the almost tangible heat of Tangier.
Curator, Kirk Varnedoe: Certainly Picasso must have looked intensely at a major picture like this, and learned from it a new vocabulary of Cubism, more highly abstracted, more monumental. When you compare The Moroccans to Picasso's Three Musicians of 1921...what leaps out at you are certain similarities—the use of black for example. But Picasso unlike Matisse is not a traveler. Picasso often said, "If someone didn't come to the studio in the morning, I wouldn't have anything to paint in the afternoon."
Narrator: The Three Musicians most likely represent the artist and his friends. Picasso himself is at the center, identified by the harlequin costume and guitar he often used as his symbols. To the right, the man dressed as a monk with a stylized beard is probably Picasso's friend the poet Max Jacob, who had entered a monastery after the First World War. And the large white figure with the clarinet may be another poet friend, Guillaume Apollinaire, who had died from war wounds.
Kirk Varnedoe: The picture has a kind of gravity, a kind of sadness or melancholy, which is played off by small and amusing details, like the tiny little zig zags that represent the hand on the notes of music, or the dog that lies under the table to the left. So you imagine the music being played. Is it syncopated like a kind of bright jazz, and on the other hand melancholy like a threnody? And when you compare this in its detail, then you sense how monumental the Matisse is by comparison, and how in a certain sense impersonal it is.

EARLY SPRING in the Lamar River Valley: several wolves chase elk while an interested grizzly bear awaits the outcome. Grizzlies can drive wolves off a kill; more often they scavenge after the wolves have eaten their fill. Image: DIANE HARGREAVES
Several scrawny cottonwood trees do not usually generate much excitement in the world of ecology. But on a wind-whipped August afternoon in Yellowstone National Park's Lamar Valley, William J. Ripple, a professor of botany at Oregon State University, stands next to a 12-foot-high cottonwood tree and is quietly ecstatic. "You can see the terminal bud scars," the bespectacled Ripple says, bending the limber tree over to show lines that mark a year's growth of a foot or more on the broom-handle-size trunk. "You can see that elk haven't browsed it this year, didn't browse it last year and, in fact, haven't browsed it since 1998."
Ripple gestures at the sprawling mountain valley around us and points out that although numerous other cottonwoods dot the landscape, this knot of saplings comprises the only young ones--the rest of this part of the Lamar is a geriatric ward for trees. The stately specimens that grow in the valley bottom are 70 to 100 years old, and not a newcomer is in sight to take their place. On the hillside, aspen trees present a similar picture. Groves of elderly aspen tremble in the wind, but no sprouts push up in the understory.

Darfur’s people are a complex mosaic of between 40 and 90 ethnic groups, some of ‘African’ origin (mostly settled farmers), some Arabs. All Darfurians are Muslim. The Arabs began arriving in the 14th century and established themselves as mainly nomadic cattle and camel herders. Peaceful coexistence has been the norm, with inevitable disputes over resources between fixed and migratory communities resolved through the mediation of local leaders. For much of its history, the division between ‘Arab’ and ‘African’ has been blurred at best, with so much intermarriage that all Darfurians can claim mixed ancestry. Identities have been defined in different ways at different times, based on race, speech, appearance or way of life.
An Independent Sultanate
At the heart of Darfur is an extinct volcano in a mountainous area called Jebel Marra. Around it the land is famously fertile, and it was here that the earliest known inhabitants of Darfur lived – the Daju. Very little is known about them. The recorded history of Darfur begins in the 14th century, when the Daju dynasty was superseded by the Tunjur, who brought Islam to the region.
Darfur existed as an independent state for several hundred years. In the mid-17th century, the Keyra Fur Sultanate was established, and Darfur prospered.
In its heyday in the 17th and 18th centuries the Fur Sultanate’s geographical location made it a thriving commercial hub, trading with the Mediterranean in slaves, ivory and ostrich feathers, raiding its neighbours and fighting wars of conquest in the surrounding region.
Darfur under siege
In the mid-19th century, Darfur’s sultan was defeated by notorious slave trader Zubayr Rahma, who was in turn subjugated by the Ottoman Empire. At the time, this included Egypt and what is now northern Sudan. The collapse of the Keyra dynasty plunged Darfur into lawlessness. Roaming bandits and local armies preyed on vulnerable communities, and Islamic ‘Mahdist’ forces fighting British colonial control of the region sought to incorporate Darfur into a much larger Islamic republic. A period of almost constant war followed, until 1899 when the Egyptians – now under British rule – recognized Ali Dinar, grandson of one of the Keyra sultans, as Sultan of Darfur. This marked a de facto return to independence, and Darfur lived in peace for a few years.
Colonial ‘benign neglect’
Ali Dinar refused to submit to the wishes of either the French or the British, who were busy building their empires around his territory. Diplomatic friction turned into open warfare. Ali Dinar defied the British forces for six months, but was ambushed and killed, along with his two sons, in November 1916. In January 1917 Darfur was absorbed into the British Empire and became part of Sudan, making this the largest country in Africa.
The only aim of Darfur’s new colonial rulers was to keep the peace. Entirely uninterested in the region’s development (or lack thereof), no investment was forthcoming. In stark contrast to the north of Sudan, by 1935 Darfur had only four schools, no maternity clinic, no railways or major roads outside the largest towns. Darfur has been treated as an unimportant backwater, a pawn in power games, by its successive rulers ever since.
Independence brings war
The British reluctantly but peacefully granted Sudan independence in 1956. The colonialists had kept North and South Sudan separate, developing the fertile lands around the Nile Valley in the North, whilst neglecting the South, East and Darfur to the west. They handed over political power directly to a minority of northern Arab élites who, in various groupings, have been in power ever since. This caused the South to mutiny in 1955, starting the first North-South war. It lasted until 1972 when peace was signed under President Nimeiry. But the Government continually flouted the peace agreement. This, combined with its shift towards imposing radical political Islam on an unwilling people, and the discovery of oil, reignited conflict in the South in 1983.
Darfur, meanwhile, became embroiled in the various conflicts raging around it: not just internal wars by the centre over its marginalized populations – many of the soldiers who fought for the Government against the South were Darfurian recruits – but also regional struggles. The use of Darfur by Libya’s Colonel Qadafhi as a military base for his Islamist wars in Chad promoted Arab supremacism, inflamed ethnic tensions, flooded the region with weaponry and sparked the Arab-Fur war (1987-89), in which thousands were killed and hundreds of Fur villages burned. The people’s suffering was exacerbated by a devastating famine in the mid-1980s, during which the Government abandoned Darfurians to their fate.
Bashir seizes power
In 1989 the National Islamic Front (NIF), led by General Omar al-Bashir, seized power in Sudan from the democratically elected government of Sadiq al Mahdi, in a bloodless coup. The NIF revoked the constitution, banned opposition parties, unravelled steps towards peace and instead proclaimed jihad against the non-Muslim South, regularly using ethnic militias to do the fighting. Although depending on Muslim Darfur for political support, the NIF’s programme of ‘Arabization’ further marginalized the region’s ‘African’ population.
The regime harboured several Islamic fundamentalist organizations, including providing a home for Osama bin Laden from 1991 until 1996, when the US forced his expulsion. Sudan was implicated in the June 1995 assassination attempt on Egyptian President Mubarak. Its support for terrorists and increasing international isolation culminated in a US cruise-missile attack on a Sudanese pharmaceutical factory in 1998, following terrorist bombings of the US embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam.
The Janjaweed: ‘counterinsurgency on the cheap’
Janjaweed fighters, with their philosophy of violent Arab supremacism, were first active in Darfur in the Arab-Fur war in the late 1980s. Recruited mainly from Arab nomadic tribes, demobilized soldiers and criminal elements, the word janjaweed means ‘hordes’ or ‘ruffians’, but also sounds like ‘devil on horseback’ in Arabic. The ruthlessly opportunistic Sudanese Government first armed, trained and deployed them against the Massalit people of Darfur in 1996-98. This was an established strategy by which the Government used ethnic militias to fight as proxy forces for them. It allowed the Government to fight local wars cheaply, and also to deny it was behind the conflict, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement
When President George W Bush came to power in 2000, US policy shifted from isolationism to engagement with Sudan. After 11 September 2001 Bashir ‘fell into line’, started to co-operate with the US in their ‘war on terror’ and a peace process began in earnest in the South. After years of painstaking negotiations, and under substantial pressure from the US, in January 2005 a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) was signed between the Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), ending 21 years of bloody war which killed two million people, displaced another four million and razed southern Sudan to the ground.
A surprisingly favourable deal for the South, the CPA included a power-sharing agreement leading up to a referendum on independence for the South in 2011, a 50-50 share of the profits from its lucrative oilfields, national elections in 2009, and 10,000 UN peacekeepers to oversee the agreement’s implementation. But the ‘comprehensive’ deal completely ignored Darfur, catalyzing the conflict that is currently engulfing the region.
The rebels attack
Rebellion had been brewing in marginalized, poverty-stricken Darfur for years. After decades in the political wilderness, being left out of the peace negotiations was the final straw. Inspired by the SPLA’s success, rebel attacks against Government targets became increasingly frequent as two main rebel groups emerged – the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM). By early 2003 they had formed an alliance. Attacks on garrisons, and a joint attack in April on an airbase that reduced several Government planes and helicopters to ashes, were causing serious damage and running rings around the Sudanese army.
Facing the prospect of its control over the entire country unravelling, in 2003 the Government decided to counterattack. Manipulating ethnic tensions that had flared up in Darfur around access to increasingly scarce land and water resources, they unleashed the Janjaweed to attack communities they claimed had links to the rebels.
Julie Flint and Alex de Waal, Darfur: a Short History of a Long War, Zed Books, 2005; Ruth Iyob and Gilbert M. Khadiagala, Sudan: The Elusive Quest for Peace, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2006; Douglas H. Johnson, The Root Causes of Sudan’s Civil Wars, Indiana University Press, 2006; Gerard Prunier, Darfur: The Ambiguous Genocide, Cornell University Press, 2007; www.wikipedia.org
This first appeared in our award-winning magazine - to read more, subscribe from just £7

Evaluating Tagging Methods and Movement Patterns of Round Gobies
The round goby (Neogobius melanostomus) is an invasive fish species introduced in the St. Clair River in 1990 and is now found throughout the Great Lakes basin. Information on round goby movement and behavior is needed to understand their potential impact on the Great Lakes. Research on potential tagging methods and movement of round gobies is scant. We explored the use of marking round gobies with passive integrated transponder (PIT) tags in order to determine the effects of tagging on growth and mortality. In general, we found that the presence of a tag in the fish had no strong effect on growth or mortality. We also conducted a study on the movement patterns of round gobies in Muskegon Lake. Using PIT tagged fish we followed 48 round gobies enclosed in a 20x20-m block net for 22 days. Our goal was to determine the movement patterns of the gobies within the block net and examine the effects of various factors on these patterns. However, during the course the study, we found that the equipment used was not optimal for use with round gobies. Due to a high escape rate and low detection rate of fish, no conclusions could be surmised on round goby movement. Overall, we determined that although PIT tags do not strongly affect the growth or mortality of round gobies, the equipment available currently seems to be inadequate for tracking round gobies in shallow-water, lake habitats.
Faculty Mentor: Carl Ruetz
Page last modified July 14, 2009

The Immigration History Research Center is home to thousands of feet of archival records that illuminate the immigrant experience, past and present. While these records are available to students and teachers for research in the University of Minnesota’s Andersen Library, exploring the archive from afar is as simple as connecting to the internet. The IHRC’s collection of digitized archival material provides a plethora of resources suitable for a variety of purposes, including the creation of curriculum for K-12 educators interested in migration history.
What were characteristics of the immigrant experience? How did immigrants and refugees adjust to their new lives in the United States? Inversely, how did American citizens born in the United States react to the increased diversification of their communities, and learn to live with individuals from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds? Minnesota K-12 Academic Standards in Social Studies expect students of all grade levels to consider how immigrants and citizens alike participate in the civic lives of their communities, and to understand the steps that immigrants take to become United States citizens. Incorporating digitized archival material into lesson plans will provide opportunities for students to engage these questions, and prompt young people to begin considering the many types of common experiences that bring together people from all corners of the globe.
In the pages that follow, IHRC staff members have identified digitized images from the collections of the Ukrainian Folk Ballet of the Twin Cities; Immigration and Refugee Services of America; and the International Institute. Founded in 1919, the International Institute was established to provide various services for migrants who recently arrived to the United States. With branches in Minneapolis/Saint Paul, St. Louis, San Francisco, and other major U.S. cities, the International Institute continues to address the needs of the immigrants and refugees who settle in the United States.
The images have been organized thematically in order to initiate student discussion related to Minnesota K-12 Academic Standards and Benchmarks that address the study of migration. By incorporating these archival records into lesson plans, students will be able to think critically about the immigrant experience. Furthermore, working directly with primary sources will enable students to practice and develop research skills that will become increasingly important as they progress in their studies.
English language class
To discover more digital records for use in K-12 lesson plans, visit the IHRC’s portal for digital resources via the University of Minnesota’s UMedia Archive:http://ihrc.umn.edu/research/digitalsources.php
Click here for additional resources.
Back to the Spotlight on Selected Sources index page
Back to all finding aids in IHRC VITRAGE.

The Basics of Home Canning
I never missed the signs of summer coming to a close while I was growing up: shopping for school clothes, getting backpacks and pencils together...and the smell of boiling tomatoes, hot peppers, and pectin permeating the kitchen.
With eleven kids to care for, canning food was not only an event in my household, but a necessity. As soon as we saw the familiar sight of glass mason jars lining the kitchen cupboard, we knew it wouldn’t be long before we were recruited to pick tomatoes, peel peaches, or even pit cherries. Sometimes it seemed mom felt the need to can every living thing in our backyard (with the exception of the dog).
But those long days spent working and canning as a family built stronger relationships, even if it didn’t always build our food storage, like the time a fateful food fight left half our tomatoes on the ground instead of in the bottles.
No matter what produce you plan to stuff away into bottles for the winter, canning can be the ideal way to preserve those fresh foods from your garden or the local market and also provide one last activity to bring your family together before the summer ends.
Canning requires some different utensils that you might not already have in your kitchen. Some of the necessary equipment includes: a boiling-water canner (or a big pot), mason-type jars (different sizes are available, wide-mouth jars are easiest to fill), lids and rings (you can only use the lids once), a jar lifter, and a candy thermometer.
Washing and Sterilizing
This is an important step in the canning process in order to get rid of all bacteria that could contaminate your food. Wash canning jars, new lids, and metal rings in hot, soapy water or the dishwasher, and rinse them thoroughly. To sterilize the jars place them upright in the canner, cover them with hot water, and boil for 10 minutes. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions that come with your lids.
Foods can be processed a number of different ways including: boiling-water, steam-pressure, and freezing. The recipes in this article follow the boiling-water process. To begin the boiling-water method, place a rack on the bottom of the pot to keep jars from touching the canner. Fill the canner half full with hot water and heat to 140º F for raw-packed foods, or 180º F for hot-packed foods. With the jars filled and capped, lower them into the canner with a jar lifter. Add more boiling water, if needed, so the water level is at least one inch above jar tops. Turn the heat to its highest position until water boils vigorously. Set a timer for the minutes required for processing food (according to the recipe).
Add more boiling water, if needed, to keep the water level above the jars. When jars have been boiled for the recommended time, turn off the heat and remove the canner lid. Using a jar lifter, remove the jars and place them on a towel, leaving at least one-inch spaces between the jars during cooling.Start Canning!
If you are trying to can for the first time, it would be best to start with fruit, because most use the boiling-water method. When selecting what fruits to can, select firm, ripe fruit.
Fruits are often canned in light sugar syrups. Depending on your desired taste, the amount of sugar in the syrup varies with fruits. For the recipes here, use a heaping 1/3 cup to 3/4 cup per quart of water. Place the sugar in a quart measuring pitcher and add cold water. Stir until the sugar is dissolved.
These are one of the most successfully canned of all foods. Wash and peel. Halve or quarter and cut out the cores. Boil gently in the syrup liquid for five minutes. Pack the hot pears in hot jars. Add the hot liquid, leaving 1/2-inch headspace. Process for 20 minutes.
Dip peaches in boiling water and remove after a few seconds; slip off the skins. Cut the fruits in half and remove the pits. Place in a pan without crowding, cover with the desired liquid, and bring to a boil. Ladle the hot fruit into hot jars, packing the halves in layers, cut side down. Add the hot liquid, leaving a 1/2-inch headspace. Process for 20 minutes.
TomatoesTomatoes are a canning favorite and can easily be canned using the boiling-water method. To peel tomatoes: Using a small knife, cut a small X in the bottom of the tomatoes; do not cut the flesh. Ease the tomatoes one by one into a pot of boiling water. Leave ripe tomatoes in for about 15 seconds, barely ripe tomatoes for twice as long. Lift them out with a slotted spoon and drop into a bowl of ice water. Pull off the skin with the tip of a knife.
Wash, peel, and cut tomatoes into halves. Put in a pan without crowding, add water to cover, and boil gently for five minutes. Pack the hot tomatoes in hot jars. Add salt to taste. Add the hot cooking liquid, leaving 1/2-inch headspace. Process pints for 40 minutes in canner, quarts for 45 minutes.
Get Yourself into a Jam
Preserving jams can also be a rewarding and easy way to fill your food storage. Jams can be preserved through freezing or canning. For first-timers, frozen jam is generally easier to preserve, but below is also a good canned berry jam recipe for the adventurous.Strawberry Jam (frozen)
2 cups crushed strawberries (1 qt.)
4 cups granulated sugar
1 box fruit pectin
Wash berries, remove stems, and crush. Measure the 2 cups of crushed berries into a large bowl. Measure the sugar into another bowl and then stir it into fruit. Set aside for 10 minutes. Stir occasionally.
Stir 1 box of fruit pectin and 3/4 cup water together in a small saucepan. Bring the mixture to a boil on high heat, stirring constantly. Boil and stir for 1 minute, and remove from the heat. Stir the pectin mixture into the fruit mixture, stirring constantly until the sugar is completely dissolved and no longer grainy.
Pour quickly into clean plastic containers to within 1/2" of the top. Wipe off the top edges of the containers and cover with the lids. Let stand at room temperature for 24 hours to set, and then refrigerate for immediate use or freeze. (Do not double this recipe; make one batch at a time.)
Berry Jam (canned)
Peel, core, and finely grate:
8 ounces tart green apples
- 2 pounds blackberries, blueberries, cranberries, elderberries, or raspberries (stemmed)
- 1 tablespoon orange juice
3 cups sugar
Cook together, crushing one-quarter of the berries that are in the pot, leaving the rest whole (but do not crush raspberries). Boil rapidly, stirring frequently, to the jelling point. This is the point preserves will jell once cooled; a good visual indicator is when, after boiling high and foamy in the pan, the mixture settles, and suddenly its surface is covered with furiously boiling small bubbles. You can also check using a thermometer. Jelling point is 8 to 10 degrees higher than the boiling point of water. Remove from the heat and skim off any foam before ladling into hot jars. Leave 1/4-inch headspace, and process for 10 minutes.

Winter Around the World:
Whether you observe Yule, Christmas, Sol Invictus, or Hogmanay, the winter season is typically a time of celebration around the world. Traditions vary widely from one country to the next, but one thing they all have in common is the observance of customs around the time of the winter solstice. Here are some ways that residents of different countries observe the season.
Althought Australia is huge geographically, the population sits at under 20 million people. Many of them come from a blend of cultures and ethnic backgrounds, and celebration in December is often a mix of many different elements. Because Australia is in the southern hemisphere, December is part of the warm season. Residents still hhave Christmas trees, Father Christmas, Christmas Carols and gifts which are a familiar Christmas and gifts, as well as being visited by Father Christmas. Because it coincides with school holidays, it's not uncommon for Australians to celebrate the season on vacation away from home.
In China, only about two percent of the population observes Christmas as a religious holiday, although it is gaining in popularity as a commercial event. However, the main winter festival in China is New Year celebration that occurs at the end of January. Recently, it's become known as the Spring Festival, and is a time of gift-giving and feasting. A key aspect of the Chinese New Year is ancestor worship, and painings and portraits are brought out and honored in the family's home.
In Denmark, Christmas Eve dinner is a big cause for celebration. The most anticipated part of the meal is the traditional rice pudding, baked with a single almond inside. Whichever guest gets the almond in his pudding is guaranteed good luck for the coming year. Children leave out glasses of milk for the Juulnisse, which are elves that live in peoples' homes, and for Julemanden, the Danish version of Santa Claus.
The Finns have a tradition of resting and relaxing on Christmas Day. The night before, on Christmas Eve, is really the time of the big feast -- and leftovers are consumed the next day. On December 26, the day of St. Stephen the Martyr, everyone goes out and visits friends and relatives, weather permitting. One fun custom is that of Glogg parties, which involve the drinking of Glogg, a mulled wine made from Madeira, and the eating of lots of baked treats.
Christmas was typically not a huge holiday in Greece, as it is in North America. However, the recognition of St. Nicholas has always been important, because he was the patron saint of sailors, among other things. Hearth fires burn for several days between December 25 and January 6, and a sprig of basil is wrapped around a wooden cross to protect the home from the Killantzaroi, which are negative spirits that only appear during the twelve days after Christmas. Gifts are exchanged on January 1, which is St. Basil's day.
India's Hindu population typically observes this time of year by placing clay oil lamps on the roof in honor of the return of the sun. The country's Christians celebrate by decorating mango and banana trees, and adorning homes with red flowers, such as the poinsettia. Gifts are exchanged with family and friends, and baksheesh, or charity, is given to the poor and needy.
In Italy, there is the legend of La Befana, a kind old witch who travels the earth giving gifts to children. It is said that the three Magi stopped on their way to Bethlehem and asked her for shelter for a night. She rejected them, but later realized she'd been quite rude. However, when she went to call them back, they had gone. Now she travels the world, searching, and delivering gifts to all the children.
In Romania, people still observe an old fertility ritual which probably pre-dates Christianity. A woman bakes a confection called a turta, made of pastry dough and filled with melted sugar and honey. Before baking the cake, as the wife is kneading the dough, she follows her husband outdoors. The man goes from one barren tree to another, threatening to cut each down. Each time, the wife begs him to spare the tree, saying, "Oh no, I am sure this tree will be as heavy with fruit next spring as my fingers are with dough today." The man relents, the wife bakes the turta, and the trees are spared for another year.
In Scotland, the big holiday is that of Hogmanay. On Hogmanay, which is observed on December 31, festivities typically spill over into the first couple of days of January. There's a tradition known as "first-footing", in which the first person to cross a home's threshold brings the residents good luck for the coming year -- as long as the guest is dark-haired and male. The tradition stems from back when a red- or blonde-haired stranger was probably an invading Norseman.

Pricing in the sky
Many policy problems (from road congestion to water and electricity shortages) can be greatly improved through the proper application of a simple concept–pricing. In this USA Today article, Reason's Bob Poole explains how to apply pricing to air traffic control: By charging planes to use the most congested airports and airways, the system would give its customers economic incentives to reschedule flight times or choose less-congested airports without such charges. That easing of demand would provide breathing room to address the looming shortfalls in air-traffic-control capacity. All sorts of new technology can increase this capacity, both cross-country and on the approaches to airport runways. "Synthetic vision" systems can permit pilots to land at socked-in airports at nearly the same rate as in clear weather. So the air-traffic system need not break down just because Chicago has a bad-weather day. Other advanced technologies can reduce the size of the protective bubble needed around planes en route to keep them safely separated.

The eye of a hurricane passes over Grand Bahama Island in a
direction 60.0° north of west with a speed of 41.0 km/h. Three
hours later, the course of the hurricane suddenly shifts due north,
and its speed slows to 25.0 km/h. How far from Grand Bahama is the
hurricane 4.50 h after it passes over the island?

Lesson 1: Why Pray?
This first lesson of a series of three will introduce children to the importance of prayer in their daily lives.
Christian Living, Knowing God, Listening, Prayer, Relationships
AS KIDS ARRIVE (10 minutes)
Display the following items on a table:
Telephone Newspaper Letters & Envelopes Road Map Radio
As the children arrive, give them a sheet of paper and ask them to list what they think the items on the table have in common. Just before class starts let the kids know that all the things displayed on the table are used to communicate with each other. Today our lesson is about another way we communicate. More specifically, it is about how we communicate with God.
OPENING PRAYER AND PRAISE (5 minutes)
Further info? Click here
MEMORY WORK (12 minutes)
"You will seek me and find me when you seek me with all your heart" Jeremiah 29:13
Write the verse on the board. Say the verse together as a group several times. Then erase one word. Have the kids say the verse correctly again with the missing word. Then erase another word and say the verse again. Continue erasing words until the kids can say the entire verse without seeing the words.
SCRIPTURE READING AND DISCUSSION (15 minutes)
Today we will learn that prayer is communicating or talking with God. We may not be able to call God on the telephone or send Him a letter, but prayer is just as real as e-mail or newspapers. Why should we pray? Because it makes our relationship with God stronger. Could you imagine trying to have a best friend without communicating with them? Prayer is seeking God and His direction for our lives. Praying also helps keep us out of trouble. Jesus told us to pray, "Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation." (Matthew 26:41)
Read James 5:13-16 (The Prayer of Faith)
Have the kids find James 5:13-16 in their Bibles. Ask for a volunteer to read the passage, or if you prefer, read the passage to the children yourself.
1. What is prayer? (Prayer is spiritual communication between ourselves and God.)
2. Can you pray when you are in trouble? (Yes.)
3. Can you pray when you are happy? (Yes.)
4. What is another name for happy prayers? (Praises.)
5. What are some of the examples of why to pray mentioned in James 5:13-16? (When you are in trouble, when you are happy, when you are sick, to show faith, for confession of sin, and to pray for others.)
6. What else can we pray for? (Some examples include: Guidance, Protection, Strength, Wisdom.)
7. Is the prayer of a righteous man powerful? Is it effective? (Yes the Bible tells us in James 5:16b that the prayers of the righteous are both powerful and effective.)
CLASS EXERCISE (5 minutes)
Answers Without Speaking (Activity) Click here
ALTERNATE CLASS EXERCISE (5 minutes)
So Don't Worry (Activity) Click here
APPLICATION (2 minutes)
Why pray? It's simple, to talk with God and to get His direction for our lives. God is so good and will help us when we are happy, sad, sick or even when we're in trouble. God will give us wisdom, strength and understanding if we only ask Him. In fact God is willing to give us many good things as long as we ask for them in accordance to His Will. God answers our prayers with signs, the Holy Spirit and His Word, the Bible. When we pray our relationship with God grows.
Did you ever see a human that thought he was a robot? If not, be sure to come back next week.
CLOSING PRAYER (2 minutes)
Further info? Click here

Constitution of Oregon: 2011 Version
Sec. 1. Election to accept or reject Constitution
2. Questions submitted to voters
3. Majority of votes required to accept or reject Constitution
4. Vote on certain sections of Constitution
5. Apportionment of Senators and Representatives
6. Election under Constitution; organization of state
7. Former laws continued in force
8. Officers to continue in office
9. Crimes against territory
10. Saving existing rights and liabilities
11. Judicial districts
Section 1. Election to accept or reject Constitution. For the purpose of taking the vote of the electors of the State, for the acceptance or rejection of this Constitution, an election shall be held on the second Monday of November, in the year 1857, to be conducted according to existing laws regulating the election of Delegates in Congress, so far as applicable, except as herein otherwise provided.
Section 2. Questions submitted to voters. Each elector who offers to vote upon this Constitution, shall be asked by the judges of election this question:
Do you vote for the Constitution? Yes, or No.
And also this question:
Do you vote for Slavery in Oregon? Yes, or No.
And in the poll books shall be columns headed respectively.
“Constitution, Yes.” “Constitution, No"
“Slavery, Yes." “Slavery, No."
And the names of the electors shall be entered in the poll books, together with their answers to the said questions, under their appropriate heads. The abstracts of the votes transmitted to the Secretary of the Territory, shall be publicly opened, and canvassed by the Governor and Secretary, or by either of them in the absence of the other; and the Governor, or in his absence the Secretary, shall forthwith issue his proclamation, and publish the same in the several newspapers printed in this State, declaring the result of the said election upon each of said questions. [Constitution of 1859; Amendment proposed by S.J.R. 7, 2001, and adopted by the people Nov. 5, 2002]
Section 3. Majority of votes required to accept or reject Constitution. If a majority of all the votes given for, and against the Constitution, shall be given for the Constitution, then this Constitution shall be deemed to be approved, and accepted by the electors of the State, and shall take effect accordingly; and if a majority of such votes shall be given against the Constitution, then this Constitution shall be deemed to be rejected by the electors of the State, and shall be void.–
Section 4. Vote on certain sections of Constitution. If this Constitution shall be accepted by the electors, and a majority of all the votes given for, and against slavery, shall be given for slavery, then the following section shall be added to the Bill of Rights, and shall be part of this Constitution:
“Sec. ___ “Persons lawfully held as slaves in any State, Territory, or District of the United States, under the laws thereof, may be brought into this State, and such Slaves, and their descendants may be held as slaves within this State, and shall not be emancipated without the consent of their owners.”
And if a majority of such votes shall be given against slavery, then the foregoing section shall not, but the following sections shall be added to the Bill of Rights, and shall be a part of this Constitution.
“Sec. ___ There shall be neither slavery, nor involuntary servitude in the State, otherwise than as a punishment for crime, whereof the party shall have been duly convicted.” [Constitution of 1859; Amendment proposed by S.J.R. 7, 2001, and adopted by the people Nov. 5, 2002]
Note: See sections 34 and 35 of Article I, Oregon Constitution.
Section 5. Apportionment of Senators and Representatives. Until an enumeration of the inhabitants of the State shall be made, and the senators and representatives apportioned as directed in the Constitution, the County of Marion shall have two senators, and four representatives.
Linn two senators, and four representatives.
Lane two senators, and three representatives.
Clackamas and Wasco, one senator jointly, and Clackamas three representatives, and Wasco one representative.
Yamhill one senator, and two representatives.
Polk one senator, and two representatives.
Benton one senator, and two representatives.
Multnomah, one senator, and two representatives.
Washington, Columbia, Clatsop, and Tillamook one senator jointly, and Washington one representative, and Washington and Columbia one representative jointly, and Clatsop and Tillamook one representative jointly.
Douglas, one senator, and two representatives.
Jackson one senator, and three representatives.
Josephine one senator, and one representative.
Umpqua, Coos and Curry, one senator jointly, and Umpqua one representative, and Coos and Curry one representative jointly. [Constitution of 1859; Amendment proposed by S.J.R. 7, 2001, and adopted by the people Nov. 5, 2002]
Section 6. Election under Constitution; organization of state. If this Constitution shall be ratified, an election shall be held on the first Monday of June 1858, for the election of members of the Legislative Assembly, a Representative in Congress, and State and County officers, and the Legislative Assembly shall convene at the Capital on the first Monday of July 1858, and proceed to elect two senators in Congress, and make such further provision as may be necessary to the complete organization of a State government.–
Section 7. Former laws continued in force. All laws in force in the Territory of Oregon when this Constitution takes effect, and consistent therewith, shall continue in force until altered, or repealed.–
Section 8. Officers to continue in office. All officers of the Territory of Oregon, or under its laws, when this Constitution takes effect, shall continue in office, until superseded by the State authorities.–
Section 9. Crimes against territory. Crimes and misdemeanors committed against the Territory of Oregon shall be punished by the State, as they might have been punished by the Territory, if the change of government had not been made.–
Section 10. Saving existing rights and liabilities. All property and rights of the Territory, and of the several counties, subdivisions, and political bodies corporate, of, or in the Territory, including fines, penalties, forfeitures, debts and claims, of whatsoever nature, and recognizances, obligations, and undertakings to, or for the use of the Territory, or any county, political corporation, office, or otherwise, to or for the public, shall inure to the State, or remain to the county, local division, corporation, officer, or public, as if the change of government had not been made. And private rights shall not be affected by such change.–
Section 11. Judicial districts. Until otherwise provided by law, the judicial districts of the State, shall be constituted as follows: The counties of Jackson, Josephine, and Douglas, shall constitute the first district. The counties of Umpqua, Coos, Curry, Lane, and Benton, shall constitute the second district.–The counties of Linn, Marion, Polk, Yamhill and Washington, shall constitute the third district.–The counties of Clackamas, Multnomah, Wasco, Columbia, Clatsop, and Tillamook, shall constitute the fourth district–and the County of Tillamook shall be attached to the county of Clatsop for judicial purposes.–

Want to stay on top of all the space news? Follow @universetoday on TwitterSedimentary rock covers 70% of the Earth. Erosion is constantly changing the face of the Earth. Weathering agents…wind, water, and ice…break rock into smaller pieces that flow down waterways until the settle to the bottom permanently. These sediments( pebbles, sand, clay, and gravel) pile up and for new layers. After hundred or thousands of years these rocks become pressed together to form sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary rock can form in two different ways. When layer after layer of sediment forms it puts pressure on the lower layers which then form into a solid piece of rock. The other way is called cementing. Certain minerals in the water interact to form a bond between rocks. This process is similar to making modern cement. Any animal carcasses or organisms that are caught in the layers of sediment will eventually turn into fossils. Sedimentary rock is the source of quite a few of our dinosaur findings.
There are four common types of sedimentary rock: sandstone, limestone, shale, and conglomerate. Each is formed in a different way from different materials. Sandstone is formed when grains of sand are pressed together. Sandstone may be the most common type of rock on the planet. Limestone is formed by the tiny pieces of shell that have been cemented together over the years. Conglomerate rock consists of sand and pebbles that have been cemented together. Shale forms under still waters like those found in bogs or swamps. The mud and clay at the bottom is pressed together to form it.
Sedimentary rock has the following general characteristics:
- it is classified by texture and composition
- it often contains fossils
- occasionally reacts with acid
- has layers that can be flat or curved
- it is usually composed of material that is cemented or pressed together
- a great variety of color
- particle size varies
- there are pores between pieces
- can have cross bedding, worm holes, mud cracks, and raindrop impressions
This is only meant to be a brief introduction to sedimentary rock. There are many more in depth articles and entire books that have been written on the subject. Here is a link to a very interesting introduction to rocks. Here on Universe Today there is a great article on how sedimentary rock show very old signs of life. Astronomy Cast has a good episode on the Earth’s formation.

What can be learned from the post-election crisis in Greece?
The traditional political establishment in Greece buckled under the weight of crippling austerity and a mass people’s movement when the country went to the polls May 6. Now that the voting is over, and attempts to form a government have failed, another election must be held, scheduled for June 17, raising new questions about the way forward for the Greek working class. The crisis deepens as panicking Greeks withdraw their savings from banks on the brink of collapse.
Since the fall of the U.S.-backed military dictatorship that ruled Greece from 1967-1974, two parties, PASOK and New Democracy, have dominated the political scene. However, both parties had their worst showing ever, and combined were only able to muster 32 percent of the vote, down from 77 percent in 2009. Instead, support grew for parties of both the left and the far right. With parliament deadlocked, unable to form a new governing coalition, a new election is pending and there is a distinct possibility of a protracted political crisis and a sharp polarization that provides an opportunity for the working class to decisively assert itself.
Background to the elections
Since the worldwide capitalist economic crisis began in 2007-2008, several countries in the eurozone, which all operate with the common euro currency, have experienced severe debt crises. These national economies are more intimately linked than ever before—which was supposed to be the benefit of the eurozone—so the problems of one immediately threatens the rest.
Germany, the strongest capitalist economy of the eurozone, along with the imperialist U.S., have been working hard to force economic restructuring on the most indebted countries, offering bailouts in exchange for severe cuts to social welfare programs and other austerity measures. They have worked through three main entities: the U.S.-dominated International Monetary Fund, the European Union and the European Central Bank, collectively referred to as the “Troika.” Over the last two years, the Troika has arranged for around €240 billion ($305 billion) in bailout funds for Greece to service its massive debt. In exchange, the Greek ruling class forced through devastating cuts that have led to repeated strikes and militant popular mobilizations.
The Troika has worked hand in hand with the Greek ruling class, which, while claiming to “understand” the opposition of the people, claims that austerity is a difficult but necessary step toward economic revival. The other option, they claim, is complete collapse. It is a story poor and working people across the world are familiar with, including in the United States.
Narrowly winning first place in the elections was New Democracy, a center-right party that was part of the existing government led by Lucas Papademos. An unelected banker, Papademos was appointed to lead the government through its unpopular debt deal. New Democracy campaigned on a platform of supporting the extreme austerity measures imposed by the Troika, and promised only to try to renegotiate some of the more painful terms of the debt deal.
The other pro-austerity party, the misnamed Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), came in third for the first time in the party’s history. PASOK is led by Evangelos Venizelos, the finance minister under the two previous governments. Venizelos was one of the main architects of the austerity “memorandum” and offered only a pitiful pledge that he would ask the country’s creditors to give them three years, rather than two, to reach absurdly unrealistic economic benchmarks.
Gains on the left
The biggest surprise of the election was the second-place finish of the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA), with 16.8 percent of the vote. SYRIZA is a collection of small communist tendencies and a larger reformist party that split from the Communist Party of Greece after the fall of the Soviet Union. SYRIZA is led by Alexis Tsipras, a former Communist Youth leader who has received significant international press attention. SYRIZA calls for canceling the bailout deal but keeping Greece inside the eurozone and European Union. This, it says, can be achieved through negotiations with the Troika and through nationalization of the Greek banking sector.
Although there are revolutionary forces within SYRIZA, the dominant line at present is fundamentally social democratic. The “peaceful revolution” they have declared mutes the questions of socialism and working-class power, and raises hopes in a radically reformed capitalism. For example, Tsipras stated in a letter to high-ranking European Union officials, “We must urgently protect the economic and social stability of our country. … It is our duty to re-examine the whole framework of the existing strategy, given that it not only threatens social cohesion and stability in Greece but is a source of instability for the European Union.” While SYRIZA’s leadership wants to reverse austerity, its appeal to “social cohesion and stability” means “stability” under a reformed capitalism.
The second most popular party on the left was the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), which registered a modest increase of 1 percent from their previous election result, ending up with 8.5 percent. This was below the 10-12 percent that most opinion polls predicted. The KKE put forward a platform calling for the socialization of the means of production under a “working class-people’s power” government. Of the left groups in parliament, the Communist Party is the only one to call for Greece to leave the European Union, a bloc of the major imperialist and peripheral capitalist states of Europe.
The KKE has played a major role in the massive fight-back movement waged by the Greek working class and especially in its advocacy for general strikes. It intervenes through mass organizations like the All-Workers Militant Front (PAME) in the labor movement, the Greek Women’s Federation and the Students Struggle Front, among others.
The lowest scoring of the three left parties was Democratic Left, a split to the right from SYRIZA formed in 2010. It only received 6.1 percent of the vote, but its leader Fotis Kouvelis is often ranked as the most popular politician in Greece by opinion polls. Democratic Left rejects the memorandum, but makes sure to balance its criticism of austerity with pledges of absolute loyalty to the eurozone.
Major gains for far right and fascists
Far-right forces experienced major gains in the election as well. The semi-fascist Popular Orthodox Rally suffered as punishment for its participation in the previous government, but new forces emerged. Independent Greeks, a split from New Democracy, came in fourth with 10.6 percent. The party rejects the austerity memorandum on nationalistic grounds and relies on anti-German and anti-Turkish demagogy in place of a specific political program.
The story that has perhaps gotten the most foreign press attention is the entrance of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn party into parliament with 7 percent of the vote, more than 20 times their score in 2009. Its logo is an ancient Greek symbol similar to a swastika, and until recently Adolf Hitler’s manifesto Mein Kampf was displayed prominently at the party’s headquarters.
Golden Dawn campaigned on a platform of expelling all immigrants from Greece and national chauvinist opposition to the Troika. While some voters were attracted to its racist rhetoric and acts of violence against immigrants, Golden Dawn bought the loyalty of others by operating food banks during a time of growing hunger.
The fascists’ success is a serious threat to the working class and all democratic forces in Greece. While its 7 percent may appear small, it is precisely under these polarized economic and political conditions, when the capitalist class cannot achieve stable rule through democratic means, that fascism has historically grown and taken power.
The main bourgeois parties cynically used the threat of Golden Dawn to present the false dilemma of austerity or a descent into fascism. But in reality, these mainstream parties’ promotion of anti-immigrant racism gave Golden Dawn political space to grow. Moreover, if it appeared that the working class could potentially become the ruling power in Greece, the bourgeoisie could accept, if not turn to, a fascist coup.
That the Greek ruling class has operated under fascist military rule before makes such a scenario all the more plausible.
It is up to the revolutionary left and the working class to develop a program and plan of action to smash fascism politically and in the streets.
A ‘government of the left’?
A central component of the SYRIZA campaign was its appeal for the formation of a “government of the left,” encompassing all the left forces opposed to the Troika. The formation of such a government was impossible given the election results and highly implausible given Greece’s undemocratic electoral laws governing coalitions. But SYRIZA’s call for a government of the left clearly resonated with much of the working class and contributed to its success. If SYRIZA were to emerge in first place in the June election, as presently projected, the left could achieve such a majority.
SYRIZA leader Tsipras and other social-democratic proponents of a government of the left argue that it would be able to cancel the memorandum, reverse the wave of austerity measures, potentially nationalize the banks and rebuild the Greek economy in a way that strengthens the working class. SYRIZA makes the case that the European ruling class would never let Greece default and exit the eurozone because of the economic havoc this would create in other heavily indebted states like Spain and Italy. In short, Tsipras pledges to reverse the balance of forces inside the eurozone; instead of the Troika forcing Greece into deeper austerity, Greece would leverage its power against the Troika.
While the Troika obviously wants to avoid a complete Greek default (lenders have already accepted a 53.5 percent write-down on the debt), they have had the last two years to prepare for this eventuality. The centerpiece of the European ruling class’ preparations is the European Financial Stability Facility, a $976 billion bailout fund, meant to act as a “firewall” to counter the immediate effects of a Greek bankruptcy. With this in place, there is a small but growing tendency of capitalist financiers who believe that if Greece were expelled, the eurozone would “end up stronger once the dust had settled.”
Tsipras insists that Greece can out-negotiate the international capitalists, rather than calling for the socialist reorganization of society. He raises unrealistic expectations among the oppressed in electoral and bourgeois political gamesmanship, rather than raising the possibility of a new class power.
Why revolution is necessary
By contrast, the KKE has called the “government of the left” idea a false hope that will lead to disillusionment. The KKE rejects possible participation in a left government, insisting that such a government will leave the capitalist state and the for-profit economic system intact, keep Greece bound to the imperialist institutions of the EU and NATO, and thus cannot resolve the central contradictions at the heart of the political crisis.
More broadly, they explain that the social-democratic program, which arose in the post-war period of capitalist expansion, cannot be achieved in the context of protracted capitalist crisis and neoliberal financial control. They have called the SYRIZA plan opportunist, betraying the long-term interests and political clarity of the working class in exchange for short-term gains for particular leftist parties.
This raises the age-old but still pivotal question of reform and revolution: Does the working class have the capacity to come to power, and how so? Can the capitalist system be reformed to resolve the exploitation at its center? How far can revolutionary organizations go at this time?
Several organizations in Greece—including the KKE—have made the case that the political crisis of the bourgeois class has matured to the point of a revolutionary situation, opening the possibility for the transfer of power to the working class in alliance with middle-class strata.
Revolutionaries, of course, fight for reforms that improve the conditions of the working class and facilitate the political struggle against the ruling class. But a central responsibility is to assess whether the conditions for revolution are approaching, to hasten their development and prepare for such an opportunity.
The basic contradiction in capitalist society is that the productive process is socialized, involving millions of workers, while ownership is private, concentrated in a tiny ruling class. The capitalists control the means of production and distribution, as well as countless financial mechanisms, to squeeze profits out of workers and maintain their political and economic power. The capitalist state (the police, military and courts) allows them to safeguard this system with force, while the government provides for its administration.
A change in administration, like the ascent of a government of the left, will not alter the fundamental underlying character of the state. This can only be achieved by the overthrow of the capitalist state and its replacement by a worker’s state based on independent organs of working-class power—a socialist revolution.
Elections and the revolutionary process
Some communist tendencies support the formation of a government of the left for this reason—not because it would solve the crisis, but because it would further polarize the country and hasten the development of a revolutionary situation.
There can be no doubt that the formation of a SYRIZA-KKE-Democratic Left coalition would cause considerable panic among the Greek and European ruling class, and new bouts of intense class struggle.
History has shown that revolutions can take many paths and tactical turns. In Venezuela, the election of President Hugo Chávez, a socialist presiding over a fundamentally capitalist state, undoubtedly gave a boost to the class struggle and the regroupment of revolutionary forces in the country.
In Nepal, Maoists waged a triumphant revolutionary war against the feudal king that resulted in a negotiated peace and the Maoists’ subsequent election to lead a bourgeois government. Their decision to dissolve their armed forces remains the subject of considerable debate among revolutionaries. Neither country, despite heroic advances, has established socialism.
But for a Greek left government to be a vehicle of revolution, instead of demobilization, demoralization and disillusionment, a left-wing government would need to have clear programmatic unity around the socialization of the means of production, centralized planning, workers’ political power, and so on. It would need to organize the people to take on the police and the military that their own left-unity government would be associated with and nominally leading.
Otherwise, when a revolutionary situation emerged it would only disorient the movement and contribute to the persistence of reformist illusions.
SYRIZA has been silent or worse on these critical questions. In the run-up to the elections, Tsipras said: “A government of the left is in need of industrialists and investors. It needs a healthy business climate.” In other words, his version of a government of the left would not challenge the capitalists’ right to exploit labor.
The capitalist establishment has reciprocated, and the Federation of Hellenic Enterprises (SEV), the Greek equivalent of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, has called for the formation of a national unity government including SYRIZA.
Tsipras called the election results a “peaceful revolution,” a slogan that misleadingly suggests the electoral realm, rather than continued mass struggle, can provide a way out of the crisis for working people.
The revolutionary crisis and dual power
While support for SYRIZA is likely to increase in the coming election, it is doubtful the new election will produce a clear winner or workable coalition. In the face of the increased likelihood of exiting the eurozone, which would deepen the economic and political crisis, the class struggle will intensify.
With the bourgeoisie so thoroughly discredited, and the Greek masses so clearly calling for an alternative way, the revolutionary left has an opportunity to offer a program that provides not only short-term relief, but also a longer-term vision of a new economic and political system. The question is how to mobilize the working class and broadly unite the revolutionary forces in a struggle to achieve this.
Historically, a key phase in any revolutionary crisis is that of dual power. By organizing what is essentially a second, rival state built on organs of mass struggle, revolutionaries can show concretely what working-class or people’s power looks like and offers. In the Russian Revolution, this took the form of councils of workers and soldiers (called soviets). In China, the Red Army itself functioned as a government in the areas that it liberated. Revolutionaries have also convened constituent assemblies—to rewrite the constitution—as a way to articulate, and establish the legitimacy of, a new political vision.
Clearly, there are millions in Greece who are still holding out hope that the existing capitalist government and state, perhaps with left-wing leadership, can deliver the goods. To this end, a sophisticated political struggle, backed by a concrete plan of action, must be waged against Tsipras and the social-democratic fantasies he projects. In his “April Theses,” designed to guide the Bolsheviks through Russia’s revolutionary crisis, Lenin called for “patient, systematic, and persistent explanation … especially adapted to the practical needs of the masses.”
Can the struggle in the streets break the deadlock in parliament? Will alternatives to bourgeois state power be built? The Greek working class has found itself on the frontline of the international struggle against capitalism, and the answers to these questions will resonate around the world.
For revolutionaries in the United States, our main role is not to endorse this or that organization and its tactics from afar. Our chief responsibilities are 1) to explain that the Greek crisis is a result of the contradictions of capitalism, not reckless social spending, 2) to defend the unfolding Greek revolution, especially as it could escalate and be slanderously attacked in the imperialist media and even militarily assaulted by U.S.-NATO forces, and 3) to study and learn from the complex revolutionary process that our brothers and sisters are trying to navigate.
While their process is far more advanced than our own, their struggle is ours—and we have much to learn from it.

Genital/ perigenital infection caused by the yeast-like fungus Candida albicans or occasionally by other species of Candida. Vulvovaginitis due to Candida presents with an erythema of the vaginal mucous membrane and the vulval skin, itching, soreness, and with a thick, creamy-white discharge. There may be spread on to the perineum and into the groins. In Candida balanitis, tiny papules develop on the glans penis, evolve as white pustules or vesicles and rupture, leaving a peeling edge. Involvement of groins sometimes coexists. Perianal candidiasis presents with erythema, soreness and irritation, and subsequent spread along the natal cleft is common.
Candidosis, Genital/Perigenital, Kolpitis Candidomycetica, Vulvitis Candidomycetica

Cremation to a Child
When a deceased family member or friend is cremated or already
has been cremated, your child may want to know what cremation is.
In answering your child's questions about cremation, keep your
explanation of what cremation involves simple and easy to
In explaining cremation to your child, avoid using words that
may have a frightening connotation such as "fire" and "burn."
Instead, in a straightforward manner, tell your child that the
deceased body, enclosed in a casket or container, is taken to a
place called a crematory where it goes through a special process
that reduces it to small particles resembling fine gray or white
sand. Be sure to point out that a dead body feels no pain.
Let your child know that these cremated remains are placed in a
container called an urn and returned to the family. If cremation
has already taken place and the container picked up, you may want
to show it to the child. Because children are curious, your child
may want to look at the contents.
If your child makes such a request, look at them yourself first
so that you can describe what they look like. Share this with your
child. Then let the child decide whether to proceed further.
If possible, arrange for a time when you and your child can be
with the body before cremation is carried out. If handled
correctly, this time can be a positive experience for the child. It
can provide an opportunity for the child to say "good-bye" and
accept the reality of death. However, the viewing of the body
should not be forced. Use your best judgment on whether or not this
should be done.
Depending on the age of your child, you may wish to include him
or her in the planning of what will be done with the cremated
remains. Before you do this, familiarize yourself with the many
types of cremation memorials available. Some of the many options to
consider include burying the remains in a family burial plot,
interring them in an urn garden that many cemeteries have, or
placing the urn in a columbarium niche.
Defined as a recessed compartment, the niche may be an open
front protected by glass or a closed front faced with bronze,
marble, or granite. (An arrangement of niches is called a
columbarium, which may be an entire building, a room, a bank along
a corridor, or a series of special indoor alcoves. It also may be
part of an outdoor setting such as a garden wall.)
Although your child may not completely understand these or other
options for memorialization, being involved in the planning helps
establish a sense of comfort and understanding that life goes on
even though someone loved has died.
If you incur any difficulties in explaining death or cremation
to your child, you may wish to consult a child guidance counselor
who specializes in these areas.

Australian Bureau of Statistics
6202.0 - Labour Force, Australia, Jun 2012 Quality Declaration
Previous ISSUE Released at 11:30 AM (CANBERRA TIME) 12/07/2012
|Page tools: Print Page Print All RSS Search this Product|
UNDERSTANDING THE AUSTRALIAN LABOUR FORCE USING ABS STATISTICS
In order to understand what is happening in Australian society, or our economy, it is helpful to understand people’s patterns of work, unemployment and retirement. ABS statistics can help to build this picture. Fifty years ago, the majority of Australians who worked were men working full-time. Most worked well into their 60s, sometimes beyond, and if they were not working most were out looking for work until that age. The picture now is very different. Far more people work part-time, or in temporary or casual jobs. Retirement ages vary much more, with a greater proportion of men not participating in the labour force once they are older than 55. Nowadays. 45% of working Australians are women, compared with just 30% fifty years ago. These are profound changes that have helped shape 21st Century Australia. This note explains some of the key labour force figures the ABS produces that can be used to obtain a better picture of the labour market.
Every month, the ABS runs a Labour Force Survey across Australia covering almost 30,000 homes as well as a selection of hotels, hospitals, boarding schools, colleges, prisons and Indigenous communities. Apart from the Census, the Labour Force Survey is the largest household collection undertaken by the ABS. Data are collected for about 60,000 people and these people live in a broad range of areas and have diverse backgrounds - they are a very good representation of the Australian population. From this information, the ABS produces a wide variety of statistics that paint a picture of the labour market. Most statistics are produced using established international standards, to ensure they can be easily compared with the rest of the world. The ABS has also introduced new statistics in recent years that bring to light further aspects of the labour market. It can be informative to look at all of these indicators to get a grasp of what is happening, particularly when the economy is changing quickly.
One thing to remember about the ABS labour force figures is that when a publication states that, for example, 11.4 million Australians are employed, the ABS has not actually checked with each and every one of these people. In common with most statistics produced, the ABS surveys a sample of people across Australia and then scales up the results – based on the latest population figures - to give a total for the whole country. Because the figures are from a sample, they are subject to possible error. The Labour Force Survey is a large one, so the error is minimised. The ABS provides information about the possible size of the error to help users understand how reliable the estimates are.
The above diagram shows the break down of the civilian population into the
different groups of labour force participation. Each pixel represents about
1000 people as at September 2011.
According to established international standards, everyone who works for at least one hour or more for pay or profit is considered to be employed. This includes everyone from teenagers who work part-time after school, to a partially retired grandparent helping out at the school canteen. While it is unreasonable to expect a family to survive on the income of an hour of work per week, one could also argue that all work, no matter how small, contributes to the economy. This definition of 'one hour or more' - which is an international standard - means that ABS' employment figures can be compared with the rest of the world. Now it is, of course, easy to argue that someone who works 2 or 3 hours per week is not really “employed”. But a definition is required. And any cut-off point is open to debate. Imagine if ABS defined being ‘employed’ as working 15 hours a week. Would it be reasonable to argue that someone who works 14.5 hours is unemployed, but 15 hours is not? It is also a mistake to assume that all persons who work low hours would prefer to work longer hours, and are therefore 'hidden' unemployment. Most people who work less than 15 hours a week are not seeking additional hours, although of course there are some who are. The issue of underemployment is further discussed below.
Rather than open up such discussions, the ABS prefers to use the international standard and the ABS also encourages people to consider other indicators to form a better picture of what is happening. Alongside the total employed figures, full-time and part-time estimates are provided to better inform on the different kinds of employment, and a detailed breakdown by the number of hours worked is also provided to allow for customised definitions of 'employment.'
Commentators often refer to the rise in employment as the number of new jobs created each month. This can be misleading, because the ABS doesn't actually measure the number of jobs. This might sound like semantics, but if a person in the Labour Force Survey who is employed gains a second part-time job at the same time as their main job, this would have no impact on the employment estimate - the Labour Force Survey does not count jobs, it counts people.
It is also important to bear in mind that if the relative growth in population is greater than the number of new people in employment, there might actually be an increase in the employment figure, but a lower percentage of people with jobs. It is often informative to look at the proportion of people in employment. This measure, called the employment to population ratio, is the number of employed people expressed as a percentage of the civilian population aged over 15. This removes the impact of population growth to give a better picture of labour market dynamics over time.
AGGREGATE MONTHLY HOURS WORKED
Instead of counting how many people are working, another way of looking at how much Australians are working is to count the total number of hours worked by everyone. This is measured by a statistic produced by the ABS called Aggregate monthly hours worked, and it is measured in millions of hours. This can sometimes be more revealing of what is happening in the labour market, particularly in a weakening economy where a fall in hours worked can usually be seen before any fall in the number of people employed.
PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT WORKING: THE UNEMPLOYED AND OTHERS
There are many reasons why Australians do not work. Some have retired and are not interested in going back to work. Some are staying home to look after children and plan on going back to work once the kids have grown older. Some are out canvassing for work every day while others have given up looking. The ABS separates all of these people into those who are unemployed and those who are not by asking two simple questions: If you were given a job today, could you start straight away? and Have you taken active steps to look for work? Only those who are ready to get back into work, and are taking active steps to find a job, are classed as unemployed.
Some people might like to work, but are not currently available to work - such as a parent who is busy looking after small children. Other people might want to work but have given up actively looking for work - such as a discouraged job seeker who only half-heartedly glances at the job adds in the newspaper but doesn't call or submit any applications. These people are not considered to be unemployed, but are regarded as being marginally attached to the labour force. They can be thought of as 'potentially unemployed' when, or if, their circumstances change, but are regarded as being on the fringe of labour force participation until then.
It is important to note that the ABS unemployment figures are not the same as the data that Centrelink collects on the number of people receiving unemployment benefits. The ABS bases its figures on asking people directly about their availability and steps to find work. In this way, policy decisions about, for example, the criteria for the receipt of unemployment benefits have no impact on the way that the unemployment figures are measured.
LABOUR FORCE AND PARTICIPATION RATE
The size of the labour force is a measure of the total number of people in Australia who are willing and able to work. It includes everyone who is working or actively looking for work - that is, the number of employed and unemployed together as one group. The percentage of the total population who are in the labour force is known as the participation rate.
The unemployment rate is the percentage of people in the labour force who are unemployed. This is a popular measure around the world for tracking a country’s economic health as it removes all the people who are not participating (such as those who are retired). Because the unemployment rate is expressed as a percentage, it is not directly influenced by population growth.
The underemployment rate is a useful companion to the unemployment rate. Instead of looking at the people who are unemployed, the underemployment rate captures those who are currently employed, but are willing and able to work more hours. It highlights the proportion of the the labour force who work part-time but would prefer to work full-time. This is sometimes referred to as the 'hidden' potential in the labour force.
The underemployment rate can be an important indicator of changes in the economic cycle. During an economic slow down, some people lose their jobs, become unemployed and contribute to a rising unemployment rate. But while this is happening, there might well be others who remain working but have their hours reduced; for example from full-time to part-time. As long as they want to work more hours, they are classed as underemployed, and contribute to the underemployment rate.
LABOUR FORCE UNDERUTILISATION RATE
The labour force underutilisation rate combines the unemployment rate and the underemployment rate into a single figure that represents the percentage of the labour force that is willing and able to do more work. It includes people who are not currently working and want to start, and those who are currently working but want to - and can - work more hours. It provides an alternative – and more complete - picture of labour market supply than the unemployment rate, as changes in the underutilisation rate capture both changes in unemployment and underemployment, indicating the spare capacity in the Australian labour force.
For any queries regarding these measures or any other queries regarding the Labour Force Survey estimates, contact Labour Force on Canberra 02 6252 6525, or via email at email@example.com.
These documents will be presented in a new window.
This page last updated 8 August 2012

Daily Planet's Ingram discusses prion disease 0
Discovery Channel's Daily Planet co-host Jay Ingram visits Grande Prairie today to offer behind-the-scenes details of a mysterious and contagious series of diseases.
The lecture takes place at the Grande Prairie Regional College at 7 p.m., where Ingram discusses fatal prion diseases.
"Here at this very microscopic level, strange things are happening and just now we are beginning to figure out what they are," he said.
The most well-known form of a prion disease is bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), widely known as the mad cow disease.
Prion diseases spread when malformed proteins attach themselves to healthy tissue. Unlike other infectious ailments, they are incurable.
"It is a protein that has gone wrong," said Stefanie Czub, a scientist with the University of Calgary and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency who will be present at the lecture.
"For other infectious diseases we have a cure or the body heals itself quite efficiently.prion diseases, once infected, they are invariably fatal."
A prion disease of current concern to Western Canadians is chronic wasting disease (CWD), affecting deer and elk in southern Saskatchewan and Alberta. Unlike mad cow disease, which infects the animal's brain, spinal cord and central nervous system, chronic wasting disease spreads to several parts of the animal, and is even present in urine and saliva.
Animals infected become very thin, and can carry the disease for two years before these signs become evident.
Prion diseases can only be formally diagnosed by sampling infected tissue.
"With all these diseases, it takes quite a long time for the symptoms to show," Ingram said. "You could hunt and kill a deer and eat it, and it might have the chronic wasting disease prions in it."
"The ultimate diagnosis can only be done on a piece of tissue, not in blood," Czub said.
Twenty deer have been identified in Alberta with CWD since monitoring of the disease began in 2005. While the cause of mad cow disease is generally believed to be the use of recycled beef and bone meal material in livestock feed, which became a common practice in the 1980s, CWD's cause remains unknown.
"Nobody really knows," Ingram said. "It could be that an infected deer goes to a salt lick, licks it, and the prions are in the saliva."
Ingram said that the disease is currently not an issue for the Peace Country, but infected deer and elk are bringing it into southern Alberta as they travel along the valleys of the South Saskatchewan and Red Deer Rivers.
"If chronic wasting disease spreads far enough north, especially in Saskatchewan, that it intersects with the caribou migration routes, and if caribou are susceptible, then you've got a huge problem on your hands," Ingram said.
The medical community is taking a close look at CWD due to the similarities prion diseases have with the degenerative Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's diseases.
"The way that they spread is somewhat similar," Ingram said. "In Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's disease, you get an accumulation in the brain of junk basically; they're called plaques, these sort of dark deposits if you look at brain tissue after autopsy."
"They are all part of the so-called protein-misfolding diseases," Czub said. "One might be a very good model for the other, so we need to keep that in mind. Especially with this enormous increase in Alzheimer's in the future to be expected. One in three over the age of 65 is going to develop Alzheimer's disease in the next 10 years."
Hosted by the Alberta Prion Research Institute, Ingram's lecture is open to the public free of charge in the Collins Recital Hall, room L106 today at 7 p.m.

Protect your investment
Protected cropping can be as beneficial for small fruit production as it is for vegetables. Yields of some berries may be two to three times greater in protected cultivation than outside in the field. Build customer loyalty by having fresh fruit first in the spring, long into fall, and by growing the highest quality berries.
Strawberry plants, which are damaged by temperatures below 12F/-11C, require winter mulch. Although hay and straw are the traditional mulching materials, many strawberry growers use row covers because they require less labor to install and remove. Heavier row covers, weighing 1.25 oz./sq.yd. or more, are recommended.
Fall-bearing raspberries and blackberries that normally stop producing at the first frost will continue fruiting for months longer in an unheated hoophouse. They will fruit again earlier in spring than those in the field, commanding a much higher sales price.
Strawberry transplants from runners produced over the summer can be planted in an unheated hoophouse in September. They will produce fruit in the fall, continuing until December, and then fruit again in early spring.
Strawberry plasticulture is supplanting the traditional matted row system on many farms. Plant on black plastic mulch from mid-July to September and cover with row cover in fall. Fruits are harvested the following spring.
Protect fruits from marauding birds with Johnny's bird netting which won't damage fruit or bend branches.
Getting started with fruit
By Lynn Byczynski
For many market growers, fruits are the final frontier of horticultural expertise. Growing fruit is an interesting challenge for a vegetable grower because fruits require different systems for planting, cultivating, harvesting and post-harvest handling. But there are many reasons to take up the challenge.
- The primary reason is that people love fruit. Farmers market customers flock to vendors with berries and grapes for sale. CSA members develop stronger ties to farms that can supply a wide range of fresh produce. Chefs who tout their connections to local farmers are delighted to be able to list local fruit on their dessert menus. At home, even the pickiest eaters are usually happy to snack on berries and grapes.
- Consumption of berries and grapes is rapidly increasing worldwide, thanks to recent discoveries about the health benefits of these fruits. The pigments that give berries and red or purple grapes their deep colors contain phytochemicals that help prevent cancer, cardiovascular disease, and age-related mental decline. People feel good about eating grapes and berries!
- From the farmer's and gardener's perspective, berries and grapes are easier to grow than ever before. New varieties, production practices, and products are increasing the options for growers in every region. Berries are popular crops for the hoophouse, for example, because protection from wind and rain produces extraordinary yields of high-quality fruits. Plastic and paper mulches reduce the need for year-round weeding of these perennial plants. And because Johnny's offers plants in small quantities, growers can trial numerous commercial varieties without spending a lot of money.
- Although most berry and grape plants won't produce fruit for 1 to 3 years after planting, the wait is worthwhile. Commercial growers can charge a premium for fresh, ripe fruits. And home gardeners can save money by growing their own.
- What do you need to get started with fruits? First, if you aren't sure about the suitability of your climate for small fruits, contact your state Extension service for recommendations. Some regions of the country may not have enough cold (chilling hours) for certain varieties, while others may be too cold for the plants or too hot for the fruits. Good soil preparation is essential for successful fruit production. So is an irrigation system. Most small fruits don't compete well with weeds, so a mulch of hay, straw, or wood chips is beneficial. Grapes need a strong trellis, which should be erected when the vines are planted. A living mulch in the paths between rows will help reduce weed pressure and improve soil fertility. You’ll find products and information about living mulches in the cover crops section on the web and in the catalog.
By Lynn Byczynski
Growing grapes may appear complicated to the beginner, and with good reason. Although grapes will grow anywhere, there are many kinds of training and trellising systems, and choosing the right one requires some study before planting.
Training and trellising go hand-in-hand because the kind of structure you build to hold your grape vines will affect how you prune them. The structure, in turn, depends somewhat on the type of grapes you grow because some are more vigorous and need stronger supports.
In general, a grape trellis needs to be able to support the weight of the crop and withstand high winds. It also should be designed to last 20 years, as that's how long you can expect your vines to produce.
Home gardeners planting just a few vines can use a fence that fits into the landscape or, better still, an arbor that provides shade in summer as well as support for the grape vines. To get good fruit production from an arbor planting, pruning becomes the key. Texas Extension has a nicely illustrated manual on arbor training.
Commercial growers with larger aspirations need to set up a trellis in the field. The main ingredients for a vineyard trellis are strong end posts with braces, earth anchors, or deadmen; posts along the length of the trellis to support the wires; and high-tensile galvanized steel wire to support the vines.
The most common type of trellis is the single curtain trellis with either one or two wires and posts every 16 to 24 feet apart, depending on the training system. With this type of trellis, various training styles are possible. Another popular type of trellis, especially in northern areas, is the double curtain, which allows the vines to spread horizontally across two wires.
The recommended trellis and training system varies by climate. Northern growers with shorter growing seasons usually choose training systems that expose more leaf surface to the sun, but those can be inappropriate to warm climates. To learn more about the best training and trellising system for your location, check the list below of state viticulture guides and choose the state nearest your own. Or, contact your state Extension service for recommendations.
California: Viticulture and Enology Home Page
Colorado: Grape Growers Guide
Idaho, Oregon, Washington: Northwest Berry & Grape Information Network
Iowa: Viticulture Home Page
Kansas: Commercial Grape Production
Michigan: MSU Grape Information
Missouri: Home Fruit Production: Grape Training Systems
New York: Cornell Viticulture
Ohio: Midwest Grape Production Guide
Oklahoma: Viticulture and Enology
Pennsylvania: Wine Grape Network
South Dakota: Viticulture in South Dakota
Texas: Winegrape Network
Vermont: Cold Climate Grape Production
Wisconsin: Growing Grapes
By Lynn Byczynski
Strawberries are one of the most popular fruits in American gardens and market farms. They can be grown in many places, from hanging baskets to fields to hoophouses. The trick is to match the growing system to the type of strawberry you want to grow. Some varieties need plenty of space, whereas others can be grown in containers.
June-bearing varieties initiate fruit buds in fall and blossom the following spring. They are the earliest type to fruit. They produce one crop and then spend their energy sending out runners (also called daughter plants) that will fruit the following year. June-bearing strawberries are usually grown in a matted row system, in which the mother plants are planted in spring, spaced 18-24" apart in rows that are 3-4' apart. The first year, flowers are pinched off to stimulate the plants to send out runners that fill in the spaces within the row and between the rows. Plants produce fruit the second spring. A variation of this system is to prune runners to one or two per plant so that they stay in a line and don't spread out between the rows. This obviously requires a lot more labor, but may result in better yields because of reduced competition. Matted-row systems can be renovated to keep plants producing for many years. Another system is called the ribbon row system, in which strawberry crowns are planted in fall and allowed to bloom and fruit the following spring. As runners form, they are removed to increase fruit size. Once the crop is done, runners are allowed to develop and fill in the bed to a matted row system.
Day-neutral varieties produce fruit all summer. They can be grown as annuals: plant early in spring and pinch off flowers for two months to let the plants get established, and then let them fruit the rest of the summer. Day-neutral strawberries are good for container production on a deck or patio. Some varieties, including 'Seascape', will fruit on unrooted runners so they make attractive hanging baskets, with the runner plants cascading over the sides of the basket. Day-neutral strawberries can also be grown in a hill system, with 12 inches between plants.
Alpine strawberries produce small but intensely flavorful berries. They do not send out runners and are usually grown from seed. They are a good choice for strawberry pots and other containers, or as edging in the vegetable garden. They also can be grown with less than full sun, so they are a good choice for many home gardeners.
Region-specific growing information is available from most state Extension services. ATTRA has a publication on Organic Production of Strawberries.
By Lynn Byczynski
Strawberry quality, yield, and earliness is greatly improved in a hoophouse. Penn State researchers found that in their climate, hoophouse strawberries produced fruit 3 weeks earlier in spring than those grown outside, with about a 25% yield increase.
Most commercial hoophouse strawberries are grown using an annual plasticulture system that includes raised beds, drip irrigation, plastic mulch, and floating row cover. Plugs are planted in late summer on beds covered with plastic mulch, with drip tape beneath the mulch. As the weather gets cold, the young plants are covered with floating row cover to maintain the warmer soil temperatures needed for establishment. The plants grow slowly during winter in the protected environment of the hoophouse; then, as the weather warms, they flower and produce berries for several weeks. The crop is then finished for the year. Strawberry plants can either be removed to make way for other crops; or they can be left to produce a second year if berry prices or other factors justify tying up the space for a year.
Plugs are available from outside suppliers, or they can be produced on the farm in summer. To grow your own, detach unrooted daughter plants (runners) from the mother plant in July and stick them in potting mix in 72-cell flats under intermittent mist until roots protrude from the bottom of the cell. Then place on a greenhouse bench and grow until September, when they can be planted into the hoophouse. Plants that are rooted in July are likely to flower and fruit in fall in warmer climates, but that won't affect their yield the following spring.
For more information on hoophouse strawberries:
Growing Strawberries in High Tunnels in Missouri
Production of Vegetables, Strawberries, and Cut Flowers Using Plasticulture is a book about all aspects of horticultural plastics, and includes extensive information about hoophouse strawberries.

January 11, 2012
Imagine this scenario. You have a great career and you are a star employee. You are talented, a problem solver and go out of your way to help co-workers. You do your job and make it all look easy. Despite your dedication, one day a new person is hired. They have the same education, experience, and skills that you have. There is only one difference: he gets paid more. In spite of all the progress our nation has made in civil rights over the past fifty years, men still get paid more than women for no other reason than gender. Now is the time to change that.
The Paycheck Fairness Act, a long overdue amendment to the Equal Pay Act of 1963, (S. 182) was introduced by Congress in 2011 with the support of President Obama, who in a statement called the legislation “ a common-sense bill that will help ensure that men and women who do equal work receive the equal pay that they and their families deserve.” Nearly fifty years ago, the Equal Pay Act of 1963 passed, promising that men and women would receive equal pay for equal work. However, the wage gap continues despite women’s increased education, greater level of experience, and less time spent raising children. When President John F. Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act into law, women earned, on average, 60 cents for every dollar earned by men. In the forty-eight years that have passed, the pay gap has closed by less than 20 cents. In 2010, women earned 77 cents on every dollar earned by men. Women of color fared even worse--African American women earned only 67 cents, and Latinas just 58. Seventy-seven cents on the dollar is not fair. Now is the time to take action to close the pay gap.
The Paycheck Fairness Act would close loopholes, strengthen business incentives to end pay discrimination, prohibit retaliation against workers who share wage information, and bring the Equal Pay Act in line with other civil rights laws. Passing this act does not just affect women, it affects everyone. More families are depending on women as breadwinners. The share of couples that both work rose to 66 percent in 2010, according to U.S. Census Bureau data. The number of women who were the only working spouse also rose, with an estimated 4 million families depending on mom to bring home the bacon. The number of dads who were the only working spouse dropped, and the number of stay-at-home dads rose higher.
The wage gap has long-term effects on the economic security of women and families. In 2009 a typical college educated woman earned $36,278/year for fulltime work, while a comparable educated man earned $47,127- a difference of $10,849. This amount of money can be a great help to a family struggling during a recession. With $10,849, you could buy a year's worth of groceries ($3,210), pay for a semester of college tuition ($6,548), pay three months of rent and utilities ($2,265) six months of health insurance ($1,697), or cover six months on a student loan ($1,602).
The current economic crisis is heavily affecting families, and the latest data shows that gender roles are becoming more flexible and egalitarian. Shouldn’t pay reflect this shift? The answer is a resounding yes. We can’t afford to wait another fifty years for paycheck equality. The future of our economy and the well-being of our families depend on it. When women are paid fairly, whole families win. It is our civic duty to take action by writing or calling our Senators and Representatives and urging them to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act now.

Feral cats occur right across the continent in every habitat type including deserts, forests and grasslands. Total population estimates vary from 5 million to 18 million feral cats. Each feral cat kills between 5-30 animals per day. Taking the lower figure in that range (five) – and multiplying it by a conservative population estimate of 15 million cats – gives a minimum estimate of 75 million native animals killed daily by feral cats.
It is clear that cats are playing a critical role in the decline of our native fauna. They are recognised as a primary cause of several early mammal extinctions and are identified as a factor in the current declines of at least 80 threatened species.
AWC has developed a practical strategy designed to minimise their impacts and facilitate the development of a long-term solution. This includes:
- GROUND COVER: impairing the hunting efficiency of cats in grasslands and woodlands by manipulating ground cover through:
- minimising the frequency and extent of late-season wildfires;and
- reducing the density of feral herbivores.
- DINGOES AS A BIOLOGICAL CONTROL: reducing the density of cats and affect hunting behaviour by promoting a stable Dingo population.
- FERAL CAT-FREE AREAS: establishing feral cat-free areas to protect core populations of species most vulnerable to cats. AWC’s Scotia contains the largest cat-free area on the mainland; in total, AWC manages more feral cat-free land on mainland Australia than any other organisation.
- STRATEGIC CONTROL: strategic implementation of control measures such as shooting and baiting to protect highly threatened species.
- RESEARCH: generating scientific knowledge that will help design a long-term solution enabling the control of cats and their impacts across landscapes and, ideally, the eradication of feral cats.
We need your help in the battle to save our wildlife from feral cats. Please make a tax deductible donation to support practical land management that will limit the impact of cats. Your donation will help protect native animals at risk from feral cats, such as the Bilby, the Mala and a host of our small northern mammals. To donate, please click here.
To learn more about this project, please read pages 4-7 of the Summer 2012-2013 issue of Wildlife Matters here.
Find out more at Australian Wildlife Conservancy

Vanity Top Finishes
Vanity Top Composition
Geologically speaking, rocks are classified into 3 main categories: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic. Our sinks are made of all natural stones including granite, travertine, and cream marfil. Granite is a type of igneous rock, travertine is sedimentary while cream marfil is metamorphic.
Cream Marfil is a type of marble, which is a metamorphic rock resulting from the metamorphism of limestone. Limestone is a sedimentary rock, formed mainly from the accumulation of organic remains (bones and shells of marine microorganisms and coral) from millions of years ago. The calcium in the marine remains combined with carbon dioxide in the water in turn forms calcium carbonate, which is the basic mineral structure of all limestone. When subjected to heat and pressure, the original limestone experiences a process of complete recrystallization (metamorphism), forming what we know as marble. The characteristic swirls and veins of many colored marble varieties, for example, cream marfil, are usually due to various mineral impurities. Cream marfil is formed with a medium density with pores.
Travertine is a variety of limestone, a kind of sedimentary rock, formed of massive calcium carbonate from deposition by rivers and springs, especially hot bubbly mineral rich springs. When hot water passes through limestone beds in springs or rivers, it dissolves the limestone, taking the calcium carbonate from the limestone to suspension as well as taking that solution to the surface. If enough time comes about, water evaporates and calcium carbonate is crystallized, forming what we know as travertine stone. Travertine is characterized by pores and pitted holes in the surface and takes a good polish. It is usually hard and semicrystalline. It is often beautifully colored (from ivory to golden brown) and banded as a result of the presence of iron compounds or other (e.g., organic) impurities.
Travertine is mined extensively in Italy; in the U.S., Yellowstone Mammoth Hot Springs are actively depositing travertine. It also occurs in limestone caves.
Granite is a very common type of intrusive igneous rock, mainly composed of three minerals: feldspar, quartz, and mica, with the first being the major ingredient. Granite is formed when liquid magma?molten rock material?cools beneath the earth?s crust. Due to the extreme pressure within the center of the earth and the absence of atmosphere, granite is formed very densely with no pores and has a coarse-grained structure. It is hard, firm and durable.

Thomas Nelson Publishers has a new line of biographies homeschoolers and writers are going to love, called Christian Encounters. Written at an adult level, they make a great resource for parents and excellent texts for older homeschool students.
Each biography includes an online reading guide with probing questions that can be printed, discussed and answered. These are ideal for a homeschool research project, or reading group.
Peter Leithart, biographer of Jane Austen, has taught Theology and Literature at New Saint Andrews College since 1998, and since 2003 has served as pastor of Trinity Reformed Church in Moscow, Idaho.
He writes a delightful 153-page treatise of Austen that all “Janeites” (Jane Austen fans) will appreciate. Far from clinical, Leithart’s humor and factual insights paint a well-rounded portrait of the young author that’s both entertaining and endearing. The book bursts its seams with information I had never before learned about this beloved author.
Jane Austen (16 December 1775 – 18 July 1817), is one of the most beloved and widely-read English novelists. Her realism makes her an important resource of English history. Her major works include: Sense and Sensibility (1811); Pride and Prejudice (1813); Mansfield Park (1814); Emma (1815); Northanger Abbey (1817) and Persuasion (1817).
Homeschoolers will enjoy including her life and this fine book in any well-rounded study of England during the Regency Period. Writers will enjoy visiting the astonishingly ordinary but fascinating life of one of the most popular romance novelists in the history of English literature.

A patch is a piece of software designed to fix problems.
Hot patching is a mechanism of applying the patch to an application without requiring to shutdown or restart the system or the program concerned. This addresses the problems related to unavailability of service provided by the system or the program.
We came across a situation where a DLL is loaded by one of the critical processes in a system and that process demands high availability. The DLL has exported functions that are supposed to perform the core operations within the process. We identified a critical flaw in one of the exported functions from the DLL. One constraint we had while trying to fix the problem was to avoid any down time of this critical process.
We solved this problem by using the hot patch mechanism. We used an external process to inject a DLL [Hot patch]. This DLL has the corrected version of the defective function and also a hook to
GetProcAddress function. As we know, calling
GetProcAddress returns the address of the exported function from the specified DLL. By hooking into the
GetProcAddress API, we monitored the requests to the exported function. When we find that the request was made for the flawed function, we just returned the address of the updated function which was part of the injected DLL.
By intercepting the calls of
GetProcAddress API, we redirected the requests from the flawed function to the corrected function.
We could resolve this problem by using the concepts like DLL injection and API hooking.
Hot Patch Structure
This hot patching structure has the following binaries:
- Hot Patch DLL: This DLL has only exported functions that are updated and will be used as replacement for the flawed functions. This also has the hooking logic to hook to
GetProcAddress API exported by Kernel32.DLL.
- Updater.exe: This process injects the hot patched DLL into the target process.
How to Inject DLL into a Remote Process
One method of injecting a DLL into a remote process requires a thread in the remote process to call
LoadLibray of the desired DLL. Since we can't control the threads in a process other that our own, the solution would be to create a new thread in the target process. This enables us to have full control over the code that this thread is going to execute.
We can create a thread in a remote process using the following Windows API:
HANDLE hProcess, </span /> PSECURITY_ATTRIBUTES psa,
PDWORD pdwThreadId );
After creating a new thread in the target process, we need to make sure that there is a call to
LoadLibrary API that will load the DLL into the target process.
Following is the complete set of steps for injecting a DLL into the target process:
VirtualAllocEx API to allocate memory equal to the size of DLL full file path in the remote process:
VirtualAllocEx(hProcess, NULL, dwSizeOfFilePath, MEM_COMMIT, PAGE_READWRITE);
WriteProcessMemory to copy the DLL's full file path in the allocated space [Step 1]:
(void</span />*)szDLLFilePath, dwSizeOfFilePath,NULL);
CreateRemoteThread API to create thread in the remote process passing in the address of
LoadLibary API and also the memory location of the DLL's full file path.
hProcess, </span /> NULL,
(LPTHREAD_START_ROUTINE) ::GetProcAddress(hKernel32,"</span />LoadLibraryA"</span />),
pDLLFilePath, </span /> 0</span />,
VirtualFreeEx function to free the memory allocated in step 1:
::VirtualFreeEx( hProcess, pDLLFilePath, dwSize, MEM_RELEASE );
How to Perform API Hooking using Import Section
Using module’s import section to perform hooking is quiet robust and easy to implement. To hook to a particular function, all we need to do is change the address of the flawed function in the module's import section.
We are trying to Hook to the
GetProcAddress API exported by Kernel32.dll.
Following is the complete set of steps for API hooking:
- Locate the Module’s import section by calling
- Loop through import section for the DLL which contains API that we want to hook. In this case, we would be searching for Kernel32.dll.
- Once the DLL module is located, get the address to the array of
IMAGE_THUNK_DATA structure that contains the information about the imported symbols:
pThunk = (PIMAGE_THUNK_DATA)((PBYTE)hModule + pImportDesc-></span />FirstThunk);
- Once the address of the exported is located, use the following APIs to update the address to the new function that needs to be hooked:
WriteProcessMemory(GetCurrentProcess(), ppfn, &pNewFunction,
sizeof</span />(pNewFunction), NULL);
VirtualProtect(ppfn, sizeof</span />(pNewFunction), dwOldProtect,&dwOldProtect);
When Are We Going to Perform this Hooking
Immediately after injecting the DLL into the remote process,
LoadLibary calls the
DLLMain of the injected DLL with
DllMain( HMODULE hModule, DWORD ul_reason_for_call, LPVOID lpReserved)
switch</span />( ul_reason_for_call )
case</span /> DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH:
HookTheAPI(); </span /> break</span />;
Implementing Our Own GetProcAddress
MyGetProcAddress will intercept all the calls made to
GetProcAddress APIs to monitor if there is any request for the faulting function and if so, return the address of the corrected function.
FARPROC WINAPI MyGetProcAddress(HMODULE hmod, PCSTR pszProcName)
pOldFunAdd = GetProcAddress(GetModuleHandle("</span />MySubsystem.dll"</span />), "</span />Foo"</span />);
pNewFunAdd = GetProcAddress(GetModuleHandle("</span />MySubsystem.HP.dll"</span />), "</span />"</span />Foo"</span />);
pRetFunAdd = GetProcAddress(hmod, pszProcName);
if((NULL != pOldFunAdd) && (NULL != pNewFunAdd))
// if the request is of that Faulting Function
if(pOldFunAdd == pRetFunAdd )
pRetFunAdd = pNewFunAdd; // Return address of
// corrected function
return pRetFunAdd ;
The attached binaries demo the hot patching implemented using the DLL Injection and Function Hooking. To keep the thing simple and for easy understanding, I am demonstrating with a very basic functionality. Please ignore the code optimizations for now:
- MySubsystem.DLL: This DLL exports following functions
RandomNumber: Returns a random number
SleepTime: Specifies the time to sleep before making the other call to
- MyProcess.exe: This process loads the MySubsystem.DLL and displays the
RandomNumbers in console after sleeping for the specified amount of time as returned by MySubsystem.DLL.
- Change Request: Displays the random numbers which are even. Odd number should not be displayed on the console. This has to be accomplished without restarting the process MyProcess.exe.
- MySubsystem.HP.DLL: This is a HOT Patch DLL that contains the corrected
MyRandomNumber as per the request. This also has the implementation for Hooking and Hooked function
- Updater.exe: This process injects the MySubsystem.HP.DLL into MyProcess.exe
Run MyProcess.exe to see that
RandomNumbers which are both even and odd are getting displayed. Run the updater.exe and you will see only even numbers getting displayed. All the odd numbers are skipped.
One limitation for this approach is that the functions that are exported can be hot patched.
- 6th October, 2010: Initial version

Recent medical reports suggest that ingested aluminum has a direct link to Alzheimer's, attention deficit disorder, bone degeneration, kidney dysfunction, and even Parkinson's disease. Studies have also shown that aluminum salts can be absorbed from the intestines and concentrated in various human tissues. Most baking powder products, a staple in some households, contain toxic levels of aluminum.
With all this known, you probably would wonder why aluminum is allowed in baking powder and why anyone would use it. The baking powders that contain aluminum are ‘double-acting’ indicating that although some of the leavening power is released when the mix is prepared, the greater leavening takes place when the item is baked. This produces a very fine, light texture, and is appreciated particularly in commercial baking, where mixes often sit for long periods before they go into the oven. But it isn’t necessary for your baking. For a lighter texture, just bake the mix immediately.
Also, if you've ever experienced a bitter, "tinny" flavor when biting into a muffin, that's because of the baking powder used—and often the overuse of it. Using aluminum free baking powder not only will keep you from ingesting aluminum, but will also take away that bitter flavor.
April 10, 2011 at 9:41 pm
My son is allergic to corn. There is only one brand of baking powder (that I know of) that does not have cornstarch in it. Does this have cornstarch?
January 24, 2012 at 10:35 pm
Try the Arrowroot powder. xx
April 1, 2012 at 2:33 pm
RE: Baking Powder - Make your own. It's easier to find aluminum-free baking soda than baking powder:
1 teaspoon baking soda
2 teaspoons cream of tartar
1 teaspoon corn starch (optional - can use arrowroot instead of corn starch)
Mix the baking soda and cream of tartar together until well combined. Use immediately.
Yield: One tablespoon of baking powder.
To store baking powder: Add a teaspoon of corn starch to the mixture, and stir. This will absorb any moisture from the air, and prevent the baking powder from reacting before you need it. Store in an air-tight container.

Eric Weisz, better known to the world as Harry Houdini, was born on this date in 1874. Famous for his feats as an escape artist and magician, Houdini also became one of the most crusading anti-spiritualists of the 1920s. Because of his familiarity with the illusions of stage magic and sleight of hand, Houdini was particularly adept at spotting the trickery that the so-called psychics and spirit mediums then hawking their services as conduits to the afterlife to the credulous grieving public commonly used. (Can you imagine anyone being foolish enough to fall for such predatory charlatanry today?)
That turn in Houdini’s career led him to collaborate with Scientific American on a lengthy exposé of spiritualism. Scientific American had offered a $5,000 reward to any medium who could satisfy its panel of investigators, which included Houdini, two of the magazine’s editors (J. Malcolm Bird and Austin C. Lescaboura) and others, that his or her paranormal gifts were genuine.
Unfortunately, although the magazine’s panel did reveal many frauds during the few years of its tenure, the whole episode ended very badly. The problem—which in retrospect is quite evident to anyone who has read through the Scientific American archives of that time, as I did—was that at least one of the editors, Malcolm Bird, was not so secretly a believer in the afterlife and very much wanted a psychic to succeed.
Matters came to a head in 1924 when the team was evaluating a psychic whom it called “Margery” in print, though we now know her to be Mina Crandon, the comely young wife of a Boston socialite and surgeon. You can read Houdini’s own account of the messy business that resulted, but in short: Mina Crandon’s seance tricks, perhaps aided by her personal charm, bamboozled Bird and the rest Scientific American group with the exception of Houdini, who was not initially at their meetings. They were prepared to award her the prize but Houdini protested that he needed to see for himself. At the seance, Houdini saw through the deception and called “Margery” on it, much to the annoyance of Bird, who angrily resisted exposing her con game. The arguments that followed led to the dissolution of the ghostbusting squad, and the $5,000 was never awarded.
What Houdini’s account does not say, but which I have heard as a perhaps unreliable rumor, is that the dispute between Houdini and Bird actually turned into a physical brawl. (Ahh, the two-fisted SciAm editors of yesteryear….) Also, when I attended James Randi’s The Amaz!ing Meeting in Las Vegas in 2003 and talked about these events, magician and mad debunker Penn Jillette told me that he had heard directly from Mina Cranston’s granddaughter that Mina had been sleeping with several members of the team, including Bird. (Oh, the scandal!) That just might help to account for Bird’s umbrage at Houdini’s harsh quashing of Mina’s scam.
But that is not the anti-spiritualist episode I would like to talk about today.
Rather, turn to a particular occasion when Houdini was trying to disabuse Sir Arthur Conan Doyle of his own spiritualist inclinations. Conan Doyle was not the paragon of rationality and reason that one might assume the creator of Sherlock Holmes would be: he had a soft spot for mediums. (It tends to make one think of Holmes’s famous dictum that “when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth” in a somewhat different light.) Nevertheless, because Houdini and Conan Doyle had come to be friends, Houdini wanted to open the author’s eyes to the psychic frauds, and so he staged a demonstration that he hoped would do the trick.
Michael Shermer recently described what happened in his February “Skeptic” column for Scientific American:
In the spring of 1922 Conan Doyle visited Houdini in his New York City home, whereupon the magician set out to demonstrate that slate writing—a favorite method among mediums for receiving messages from the dead, who allegedly moved a piece of chalk across a slate—could be done by perfectly prosaic means. Houdini had Conan Doyle hang a slate from anywhere in the room so that it was free to swing in space. He presented the author with four cork balls, asking him to pick one and cut it open to prove that it had not been altered. He then had Conan Doyle pick another ball and dip it into a well of white ink. While it was soaking, Houdini asked his visitor to go down the street in any direction, take out a piece of paper and pencil, write a question or a sentence, put it back in his pocket and return to the house. Conan Doyle complied, scribbling, “Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin,” a riddle from the Bible’s book of Daniel, meaning, “It has been counted and counted, weighed and divided.”
How appropriate, for what happened next defied explanation, at least in Conan Doyle’s mind. Houdini had him scoop up the ink-soaked ball in a spoon and place it against the slate, where it momentarily stuck before slowly rolling across the face, spelling out “M,” “e,” “n,” “e,” and so forth until the entire phrase was completed, at which point the ball dropped to the ground.
Houdini then explained that he had done the whole thing through simple trickery and implored Conan Doyle to give up his spiritualist beliefs. Alas, he failed: not only did Conan Doyle continue to believe in mediums but he suspected that Houdini knowingly or unknowingly used his own supernatural gifts in the performance of his escape acts.
Here is my question for the hive mind: How did Houdini do it? Magicians are of course famously reluctant to reveal how they do their tricks, and it’s not clear that Houdini showed the secret to Conan Doyle. (Perhaps that’s why Conan Doyle refused to be convinced.) Rather than ask a magician to break his professional code, I thought I would ask you readers to suggest how Houdini accomplished his “ghostly” slate writing.
Here are my own uninformed guesses about elements of the trick, which still probably don’t quite cohere into a full explanation.
- My sense is that the slate hung from wherever it was placed by wires attached to its four corners so that it could swing freely but also hang level. I suspect that a marionette-like arrangement of those wires could in theory allow a ball to be rolled across the slate’s surface as required.
- Conan Doyle’s cutting into one of the cork balls to prove it had not been tampered with does not preclude his selected ball from being tampered with or replaced subsequently, when he is not looking.
- Sending Conan Doyle down the street to write his secret message would give him a sense of privacy, but of course it also would allow Houdini (and unknown cronies?) a chance to reset the slate and the balls as they chose.
- Any good pickpocket could probably remove that page with Conan Doyle’s message from his pocket, look at it and return it without him being the wiser.
That’s my best hypothesis about how Houdini did it. What’s yours?
Update (added 3/25, 8:23 a.m.): Via Twitter, P. Kerim Friedman tells me that these two books (here and here) may hold the answer, although those explanations aren’t immediately available online. So I’d still like to hear your theories.
The How Did Houdini Trick Conan Doyle? by Retort, unless otherwise expressly stated, is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License.

Bullying Among Elementary Schoolchildren
- New Studies on Bullying. // Techniques: Connecting Education & Careers;May2005, Vol. 80 Issue 5, p15
Reports on a study focusing on bullying among school children by the Committee for Children (CFC) in the U.S. Initiatives undertaken by school administrators to reduce aggressive student behavior; Proposition for the integration of anti-bullying and social and emotional skills into classrooms;...
- Bullying Prevention. Feldman, Sandra // Teaching Pre K-8;Mar2004, Vol. 34 Issue 6, p6
Discusses information on handling bullying among children in a school environment. Importance of parents' cooperation in handling bullying among their children in schools; Strategies in helping students deal with bullying among peers.
- A Bully's Tale. // Education Canada;Summer2005, Vol. 45 Issue 3, p43
The article presents a personal narrative of experiences of being bullied when the author was a student. She relates how she was bullied, both physically and psychologically, during her elementary years. She relates how she was able to stop the bullying only after she herself used violence. She...
- trying to fit in. Brodkin, Adele M. // Scholastic Parent & Child;Sep2008, Vol. 16 Issue 1, p48
The article offers tips on how parents and teachers can help a child not to be neglected in school. A six-year-old boy who is not as ease with physical activities, experienced being left out by other boys. An expert explains that young children exhaust their own fears of being an outsider by...
- Free State educators' experiences and recognition of bullying at schools. de Wet, Corene // South African Journal of Education;Feb2006, Vol. 26 Issue 1, p61
In South Africa little research has been conducted into bullying and particularly into South African educators' experiences of school bullying. In an attempt to address this hiatus in the literature on bullying, I report on an investigation into Free State educators' experiences and recognition...
- BULLYING. Scarpaci, Richard T. // Kappa Delta Pi Record;Summer2006, Vol. 42 Issue 4, p170
This article discusses the prevalence of bullying among school children in the U.S. in 2006. In approaching this problem, research has suggested that reduction of bullying is best accomplished through a school-wide effort. The role of teachers in addressing this problem is indicated. In...
- BULLYING HURTS. Feltes, Kimberly // Scholastic Action;3/16/2009, Vol. 32 Issue 11, p16
The article addresses the growing problem of bullying in schools and offers tips on how to deal with it.
- sticky SITUATION. // Scholastic News -- Edition 5/6;5/7/2007, Vol. 75 Issue 23/24, p14
A hypothetical situation about a boy being bullied by his classmates is presented.
- Next in the Teachers' Lounge …. Leete, Patricia // Teaching Young Children;Apr/May2012, Vol. 5 Issue 4, p31
The article presents the author's insights regarding the issue of bullying in school.

Green Power is electricity generated from renewable energy sources that are environmentally friendly such as solar, wind, biomass, and hydro power. New York State and the Public Service Commission have made a commitment to promote the use of Green Power and foster the development of renewable energy generation resources.
GREEN POWER IN NEW YORK
Electricity comes from a variety of sources such as natural gas, oil, coal, nuclear, hydro power, biomass, wind, solar, and solid waste. Green Power is electricity generated from renewable energy sources such as:
Solar: Solar energy systems convert sunlight directly into electricity.
Biomass: Organic wastes such as wood, other plant materials and landfill gases are used to generate electricity.
Wind: Modern wind turbines use large blades to catch the wind, spin turbines, and generate electricity
Hydropower: Small installations on rivers and streams use running or falling water to drive turbines that generate electricity.
NY’s ENERGY MIX
|The pie chart below shows the mix of energy sources that was used to generate New York’s electricity in 2003. Buying Green Power will help to increase the percentage of electricity that is produced using cleaner energy sources.|
You have the power to make a difference For only a few pennies more a day, you can choose Green Power and make a world of difference for generations to come.
- Produces fewer environmental impacts than fossil fuel energy.
- Helps to diversify the fuel supply, increasing the reliability of the NY State electric system and contributing to more stable energy prices.
- Reduces use of imported fossil fuels, keeping dollars spent on energy in the State’s economy.
- Creates jobs and helps the economy by spurring investments in environmentally-friendly facilities.
- Creates healthier air quality and helps to reduce respiratory illness.
If just 10% of New York’s households choose Green Power for their electricity supply, it would prevent nearly 3 billion pounds of carbon dioxide, 10 million pounds of sulfur dioxide, and nearly 4 million pounds of nitrogen oxides from getting into our air each year. Green Power helps us all breathe a little easier.
Your Energy…Your Choice
Your electric service is made up of two parts, supply and delivery. In New York’s competitive electric market, you can now shop for your electric supply. You can support cleaner, sustainable energy solutions by selecting Green Power for some or all of your supply. No matter what electric supply you choose,your utility is still responsible for delivering your electricity safely and reliably, and will provide you with customer service and respond to emergencies.
What happens when you choose to buy Green Power?
The Green Power you buy is supplied to the power grid that delivers the electricity to all customers in your region. Your Green Power purchase supports the development of more environmentally-friendly electricity generation. You are helping to create a cleaner, brighter New York for future generations. You will continue to receive the safe, reliable power you’ve come to depend on.
Switching to Green Power is as easy as:
1. Use the list below to contact the Green Power service providers in your area.
2. Compare the Green Power programs.
3. Choose the Green Energy Service Company program that is right for you.
Using New York’s power to change the future Energy conservation, energy efficiency and renewable energy are critical elements in New York’s economic, security and energy policies. New York State is committed to ensuring that we all have access to reliable electricity by helping consumers use and choose energy wisely. Recently, the state launched two initiatives – one designed to educate the public about the environmental impacts of energy production, and one to encourage the development of Green Power programs.
The Environmental Disclosure Label
NY RENEWABLE ENERGY SERVICE INITIATIVES
The New York State Public Service Commission is supporting development of renewable energy service programs in utility service territories across the state. These programs are spurring the development of new sources ofrenewable energy and the sale of Green Power to New York consumers. As a result, Green Power service providers are now offering a variety of renewable energy service options. Most New York consumers now have the opportunity to choose Green Power.
Suppliers Offering Green Energy Products
Green Power can be arranged through the following suppliers (may not operate in all utility territories.) PSC has created the following list of providers and does not recommend particular companies or products.
|Agway Energy Services||1-888-982-4929||www.agwayenergy.com|
|Amerada Hess||1-800-HessUSA (437-7872)||www.hess.com
(Commercial and Industrial only)
|Community Energy, Inc.||1-866-Wind-123
|Constellation New Energy||1-866-237-7693||www.integrysenergy.com
(Commercial and Industrial only)
|Energy Cooperative of New York||1-800-422-1475||www.ecny.org|
|Green Mountain Energy Company||1-800-810-7300||www.greenmountain.com|
|Integrys Energy NY||1-518-482-4615
|Juice Energy, Inc||1-888-925-8423||www.juice-inc.com|
|NYSEG Solutions, Inc.||1-800-567-6520||www.nysegsolutions.com|
|Pepco Energy Services, Inc.
(NYC commercial and industrial only)
|Just Energy (GeoPower – Con Ed territory)||1-866-587-8674||www.justenergy.com|
|Just Energy (GeoGas – Con Ed, KeySpan, NFG territories)||1-866-587-8674||www.justenergy.com|
|Central Hudson Gas and Electric||1-800-527-2714||www.centralhudson.com|
|National Grid||1-800-642-4272 (upstate)
1-800-930-5003 (Long Island)
|New York State Electric and Gas||1-800-356-9734||www.nyseg.com|
|Orange and Rockland||1-877-434-4100||www.oru.com|
|Rochester Gas and Electric||1-877-743-9463||www.rge.com|
|Long Island Power Authority(LIPA)||1-800-490-0025||www.lipower.org|

All About Canada: he Canada Site is the primary Internet portal for information on the Government of Canada, its programs, services, new initiatives and products, and for information about Canada.
Canadian Health: Healthy living means making positive choices that enhance your personal physical, mental and spiritual health. You make these choices when you:
Eat nutritiously, choosing a variety of foods from all of the food groups as suggested by Canada’s Food Guide;
Canadian Fitness: Current estimates from the 2000/01 Canadian Community Health Survey indicate that 33% of Canadians aged 20 + have a body mass index over 25 and are thus considered overweight. The trend is toward increased overweight: 26% of women aged 20-64 were considered overweight in 2000, compared with 14% in 1985.
General Nutrition: Providing science-based dietary guidance is critical to enhance the public’s ability to make healthy choices in the effort to reduce obesity and other food related diseases. Since dietary needs change throughout the lifespan, specialized nutrition information is provided about infants, children, teens, adult women and men, and seniors.

- About LENS
- About Neurofeedback
- LENS Treated Disorders
- David Dubin
- LENS Videos
- Contact Us
Archive for author David Dubin
Los Angeles based LENS Neurofeedback provider and blogger.
More posts by David Dubin
Dr. David Dubin
After Einstein’s death, his brain was preserved for future study. Scientists were naturally curious to see how the brain of this genius compared with the brain of a person of ordinary intelligence. Would there be an abundance of neurons (grey matter) or some unusual wiring of the neurons that distinguished his brain? When the brain was dissected, however, the only difference was that the numbers of cells that were not neurons (white matter) was dramatically increased. It is also true that, from evolutionary point of view, as brains became larger and “smarter”, what increased was not the percentage of neurons but of white matter. What does this mean?
When most of us--scientists and lay people alike—imagine the brain, we think of neurons, those cells carrying information in the form of electrical impulses. Neurons are ‘brains of the brain’, so to speak, and the rest of the cells were thought to be there only for support. But neurons account for only 15 percent of the brain, while these so-called ‘support’ cells occupy 85 percent.
The group name for white matter cells, glia—derived from the world ‘glue’—reflects their lowly status. First seen clearly by anatomists in the late 1800’s, Glia were initially thought to be little more than structural support for neurons, because, like scaffolding, glial cells literally hold neurons in place.
It was later found that glia can speed transmission of electrical signals and also deliver energy to neurons and remove neuronal waste products. While appearing to be a little more interesting than originally thought, glia still seemed about as sexy as wire insulation, food delivery and waste management devices.
Unlike neurons, there is no electrical activity within glia to send messages and information. It was therefore assumed that glia were deaf and dumb, incapable of communicating with either neurons or other glia, and therefore not particularly compelling as a focus of research. A good analogue would be the under-appreciated dark matter in astronomy. Dark matter is undetectable because it emits no electromagnetic radiation as the matter in the “visible” universe does. The existence of dark matter was eventually inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter. While we had believed that the visible universe is the universe, the ordinary matter of our visible universe accounts for less than five percent of the total; dark matter accounts for more than 20 percent.
Today, the pace of knowledge about glia has begun to accelerate, as outlined in an exciting new book, The Other Brain, by Dr. R. Douglas Fields[i] (the title refers to the 85 percent of the brain that is glial). Fields is a neuroscientist specializing in glial cell research, and the information in his book is so new that it isn’t found in standard medical textbooks. Two review articles in the May, 2010 issue of the research journal Nature Neuroscience attest to how much still needs to be learned, and how potentially revolutionary are the implications.
So, are glial cells really dumb as a doorknob? First, we are just now learning that glial cells do communicate, not through synapses but through “gap junctions”. These gap junctions are protein channels connecting one cell to another, like a spaceship docking at the mother station. Glia can pass messages among themselves by using calcium as a chemical messenger instead of sending an electric signal as neurons do. In his research, Fields showed that after a 15-second delay, changes in response to a neuronal firing were seen in the surrounding glial cells. As Fields puts it, glial cells are “listening in” on what neurons are doing, something virtually no one in neuroscience thought possible.
Contrary to all established dogma, it is now known that glia not only communicate directly from one cell to an adjacent one, but also with cells very far away. Glia are even able to “jump” over barriers like a ping pong ball going over a net. And whereas neurons transmit their signals in linear lines, like telephone wires, glia communicate, as Fields puts it, by “broadcasting signals widely, like cell phones.”
Glia are also critical to the growth of neurons. Neuron cells grown in the lab without accompanying glial cells were found to have many fewer synapses than neurons grown with glial cells. Glia seem to play a central role in the number of synapses a neuron develops.
Contrary to what scientists thought, glia also have neurotransmitters; in fact, the same ones that neurons do. And there are receptors for these neurotransmitters both inside and on the outer surface of glial cells. Glial cells have receptors for glutamate, the principal stimulating neurotransmitter in the cortex, and GABA, which acts as a “brake” to calm down neurons. In other words, glia can excite or depress neurons and stimulate or calm the brain, just like medications.
And, unlike neurons, glia can move. They have enormous cellular “fingers” like the elastic Mr. Fantastic of comic book fame, and can move between and on neurons. This constantly changes the circuitry of the brain. These glial fingers also form around synapses. They secrete substances that remodel tissue or stimulate neuron growth during development and repair of the brain making it likely that they function in a similar role during learning in the healthy brain.
Glia repair injury, defend against disease, nurse neurons back to health and act as guide dogs for the re-growth of injured nerve fibers. Glia detect and react to bacteria and viruses, “gobble up” pathogens and release toxic chemicals to kill bacteria. And new research suggests that immature glial cells can act like stem cells and mature glia can stimulate stem cells dormant in the adult brain to form replacement neurons and glia. This could have implications for repair of the nervous system, including new possibilities for treating spinal cord injuries.
This is about as far removed from mere insulation, food delivery and waste management services as can be imagined. Glia are a lot smarter than we thought they were. A 2005 study shows a correlation between organization of fibers made of glial cells and IQ. Finding a greater proportion of glial cells in Einstein’s brain is not so surprising after all.
We still know very little about glia—even the basics such as how many kinds of glial cells there are and what they look like in detail. Their discovery, however, broadens our appreciation of the complexity of the brain. The brain, with its 100 billion neurons and an average of 10,000 synapses per neuron, has more potential connections than the atoms of our galaxy!
We don’t know yet if diet, exercise, supplements and other factors affect glial cells. However, the implications for health and illness—seizures, infections, cancer, addictions, mental illness and diseases such as Parkinson’s and multiple sclerosis may be far-reaching and profound.
As Fields says near the end of his book, “Here are cells that can build the brain of a fetus, direct the connection of its growing axons to wire up the nervous system, repair it after it is injured, sense impulses crackling through axons and hear synapses speaking, control the signals neurons use to communicate with one another at synapses, provide the energy source and substrates for neurotransmitters to neurons, couple large areas of synapses and neurons into functional groups, integrate and propagate the information they receive from neurons through their own private network, release neurotoxic or neuroprotective factors, plug and unplug synapses, move themselves in and out of the synaptic cleft, give birth to new neurons, communicate with the vascular and immune systems, insulate the neuronal lines of communication, and control the speed of impulse traffic through them. And some people ask, ‘Could these cells have anything to do with higher brain function?’ How could they possibly not?”
[i] FIELDS, R. Douglas, The Other Brain, Simon & Schuster, December 2009, 384 p.
People with obsessive-compulsive disorder, or OCD, have recurrent thoughts and behaviors that can be crippling. What follows is a discussion of the biology of the disorder and several aspects of treatment.
Obsessive compulsive disorder is not a single disorder; rather, it’s of a cluster of conditions. In OCD, sufferers might obsess and be anxious and compulsive about hoarding, cleaning, ordering and checking. Patients can also exhibit body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), where they imagine possessing a defect in physical appearance. Other diseases that overlap with OCD include Tourette’s syndrome and hypochondria. OCD also has a genetic component and runs in families; relatives of someone with OCD are 8 times more likely to present symptoms.
The areas of the brain that appears involved with OCD are the orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), a center for decision-making, and the thalamus, which filters and relays information. In these brain regions, the neurotransmitter glutamate is responsible for neuronal signaling. It’s thought that the deficit of glutamate production and function might contribute to the condition of OCD and other counter-productive behavior, including making decisions based on inappropriately perceived danger.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Treatment
The neurotransmitter serotonin may play an important role in whether someone gets obsessive compulsive disorder. Researchers have found a defect in the gene that makes a protein that “mops up” serotonin from between neurons. When there’s too much of this protein there is not enough serotonin, and that’s what is found in some with OCD. This is why Serotonin Re-uptake Inhibitors (SRIs) such as Prozac, which makes serotonin more available to the brain, are perhaps the most popular OCD treatment.
Another commonly used OCD treatment is exposure and response prevention (ERP), where the patient is exposed to stimuli that trigger the repetitive behavior but do not allow the patient to actually perform the compulsive behavior. Eventually the patient can learn that nothing bad happens when they don’t act out their compulsion.
Unfortunately, ERP is a stressful treatment for patients to endure. And significant numbers of patients drop out of treatment. Various drugs, such as the SRIs, are now being used in conjunction with ERP.
Anxiety usually is significant part of obsessive compulsive disorder. While anxiety does not appear to be the actual cause of OCD, anxiety can drive persistent thoughts and behaviors. A reduction in anxiety can be important in the treatment of OCD. Various modalities for treating anxiety include medication, neurofeedback (both traditional and LENS Neurofeedback), and/or behavioral approaches.
When anxiety is successfully brought under control, there are not only fewer obsessive thoughts, but those obsessive thoughts that do persist become less prominent. Instead being the dominant focus, compulsive become background music as opposed to a loud concert. These thoughts demand less attention and this makes it easier to control compulsive behavior.

Managing the Generations
By Kerry L. Roberts and Pauline M. Sampson
Generational differences are common in schools; after all, for the most part students and their teachers have always come from different generations. We’d like to call attention to another kind of generational difference in districts: those among school board members, administrators, and teachers.
For many reasons, including economics and changing demographics, many districts have three or even four generations working for it. We note this because people born in different generations see and perceive situations, values, and work differently, and they communicate differently. This is a broad generalization, of course, but the era in which you grow up does influence your outlook, philosophy, and work habits.
Understanding generational differences can help school board members and superintendents lead more effectively. They can make the differences work to the advantage of the district and to improve student achievement.
Subscribers please click here to continue reading. If you are not a subscriber, please click here to purchase this article or to obtain a subscription to ASBJ.

Earth System Science Partnership (ESSP)
The ESSP is a partnership for the integrated study of the Earth System, the ways that it is changing, and the implications for global and regional sustainability.
The urgency of the challenge is great: In the present era, global environmental changes are both accelerating and moving the earth system into a state with no analogue in previous history.
To learn more about the ESSP, clink on links to access Strategy Paper, brochure and a video presentation by the Chair of the ESSP Scientific Committee, Prof. Dr. Rik Leemans of Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
The Earth System is the unified set of physical, chemical, biological and social components, processes and interactions that together determine the state and dynamics of Planet Earth, including its biota and its human occupants.
Earth System Science is the study of the Earth System, with an emphasis on observing, understanding and predicting global environmental changes involving interactions between land, atmosphere, water, ice, biosphere, societies, technologies and economies.
ESSP Transitions into 'Future Earth' (31/12/2012)
On 31st December 2012, the ESSP will close and transition into 'Future Earth' as it develops over the next few years. During this period, the four global environmental Change research programmes (DIVERSITAS, IGBP, IHDP, WCRP) will continue close collaboration with each other. 'Future Earth' is currently being planned as a ten-year international research initiative for global sustainability (www.icsu.org/future-earth) that will build on decades of scientific excellence of the four GEC research programmes and their scientific partnership.
Click here to read more.
Global Carbon Budget 2012
Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel burning and cement production increased by 3 percent in 2011, with a total of 34.7 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide emitted to the atmosphere. These emissions were the highest in human history and 54 percent higher than in 1990 (the Kyoto Protocol reference year). In 2011, coal burning was responsible for 43 percent of the total emissions, 34 percent for oil, 18 percent for gas and 5 percent for cement.
For the complete 2012 carbon budget and trends, access the Global Carbon Project website.
GWSP International Conference - CALL for ABSTRACTS
The GWSP Conference on "Water in the Anthropocene: Challenges for Science and Governance" will convene in Bonn, Germany, 21 - 24 May 2014.
The focus of the conference is to address the global dimensions of water system changes due to anthropogenic as well as natural influences. The Conference will provide a platform to present global and regional perspectives on the responses of water management to global change in order to address issues such as variability in supply, increasing demands for water, environmental flows, and land use change. The Conference will help build links between science and policy and practice in the area of water resources management and governance, related institutional and technological innovations and identify ways that research can support policy and practice in the field of sustainable freshwater management.
Learn more about the Conference here.
Global Carbon Project (GCP) Employment Opportunity - Executive Director
The Global Carbon Project (GCP) is seeking to employ a highly motivated and independent person as Executive Director of the International Project Office (IPO) in Tsukuba, Japan, located at the Centre for Global Environmental Research at the National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES). The successful candidate will work with the GCP Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) and other GCP offices to implement the science framework of the GCP. The GCP is seeking a person with excellent working knowledge of the policy-relevant objectives of the GCP and a keen interest in devising methods to integrate social and policy sciences into the understanding of the carbon-climate system as a coupled human/natural system. Read More.
Inclusive Wealth Report
The International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP) announces the launch of the Inclusive Wealth Report 2012 (IWR 2012) at the Rio +20 Conference in Brazil. The report presents a framework that offers a long-term perspective on human well-being and sustainability, based on a comprehensive analysis of nations' productive base and their link to economic development. The IWR 2012 was developed on the notion that current economic indicators such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and the Human Development Index (HDI) are insufficient, as they fail to reflect the state of natural resources or ecological conditions, and focus exclusively on the short-term, without indicating whether national policies are sustainable.
Future Earth: Global platform for sustainability research launched at Rio +20
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (14 June 2012) - An alliance of international partners from global science, research funding and UN bodies launched a new 10-year initiative on global environmental change research for sustainability at the Forum on Science and Technology and Innovation for Sustainable Development. Future Earth - research for global sustainability, will provide a cutting-edge platform to coordinate scientific research which is designed and produced in partnership with governments, business and, more broadly, society. More details.
APN's 2012 Call for Proposals
The Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research (APN) announces the call for proposals for funding from April 2013. The proposals can be submitted under two separate programmes: regional global change research and scientific capacity development. More details.
State of the Planet Declaration
Planet Under Pressure 2012 was the largest gathering of global change scientists leading up to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio +20) with over 3,000 delegates at the conference venue and over 3,500 that attended virtually via live web streaming. The plenary sessions and the Daily Planet news show continue to draw audiences worldwide as they are available On Demand. An additional number of organisations, including 150 Science and Technology Centres worldwide streamed the plenary sessions at Planet Under Pressure-related events reaching an additional 12,000 viewers.
The first State of the Planet Declaration was issued at the conference.
Global Carbon Budget 2010
Global carbon dioxide emissions increased by a record 5.9 per cent in 2010 following the dampening effect of the 2008-2009 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), according to scientists working with the Global Carbon Project (GCP). The GCP annual analysis reports that the impact of the GFC on emissions has been short-lived owing to strong emissions growth in emerging economies and a return to emissions growth in developed economies.
Planet Under Pressure 2012 Debategraph
Debategraph and Planet Under Pressure Conference participants and organisers are collaborating to distill the main arguments and evidence, risks and policy options facing humanity into a dynamic knowledge map to help convey and inform the global deliberation at United Nations Rio +20 and beyond.
Join the debate! (http://debategraph.org/planet)
Integrated Global Change Research
The ESSP and partners - the German National Committee on Global Change Research (NKGCF), International Council for Science (ICSU) and the International Social Science Council (ISSC) is conducting a new study on 'Integrated Global Change Research: Co-designing knowledge across scientific fields, national borders and user groups'. An international workshop (funded by the German Research Foundation) convened in Berlin, 7 - 9 March 2012, designed to elucidate the dimensions of integration, to identify and analyse best practice examples, to exchange ideas about new concepts of integration, to discuss emerging challenges for science, and to begin discussions about balancing academic research and stakeholder involvement.
The Future of the World's Climate
The Future of the World's Climate (edited by Ann Henderson-Sellers and Kendal McGuffie) offers a state-of-the-art overview - based on the latest climate science modelling data and projections available - of our understanding of future climates. The book is dedicated to Stephen H Schneider, a world leader in climate interpretation and communication. The Future of the World's Climate summarizes our current understanding of climatic prediction and examines how that understanding depends on a keen grasp of integrated Earth system models and human interaction with climate. This book brings climate science up to date beyond the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report. More details.
Social Scientists Call for More Research on Human Dimensions of Global Change
Scientists across all disciplines share great concern that our planet is in the process of crossing dangerous biophysical tipping points. The results of a new large-scale global survey among 1,276 scholars from the social sciences and the humanities demonstrates that the human dimensions of the problem are equally important but severely under-addressed.
The survey conducted by the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP-UNU) Secretariat in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the International Social Science Council (ISSC), identifies the following as highest research priority areas:
1) Equity/equality and wealth/resource distribution;
2) Policy, political systems/governance, and political economy;
3) Economic systems, economic costs and incentives;
4) Globalization, social and cultural transitions.
Food Security and Global Environmental Change
Food security and global environmental change, a synthesis book edited by John Ingram, Polly Ericksen and Diana Liverman of GECAFS has just been published. The book provides a major, accessible synthesis of the current state of knowledge and thinking on the relationship between GEC and food security. Click here for further information.
GECAFS is featured in the latest UNESCO-SCOPE-UNEP Policy Brief - No. 12 entitled Global Environmental Change and Food Security. The brief reviews current knowledge, highlights trends and controversies, and is a useful reference for policy planners, decision makers and stakeholders in the community.
GWSP Digital Water Atlas
The Global Water System Project (GWSP) has launched its Digital Water Atlas. The purpose and intent of the Digital Water Atlas is to describe the basic elements of the Global Water System, the interlinkages of the elements and changes in the state of the Global Water System by creating a consistent set of annotated maps. The project will especially promote the collection, analysis and consideration of social science data on the global basis. Click here to access the GWSP Digital Water Atlas.
The ESSP office was carbon neutral in its office operations and travel in 2011. The ESSP supported the Gujarat wind project in India. More details.
The Global Carbon Project has published an ESSP commissioned report, "carbon reductions and offsets" with a number of recommendations for individuals and institutions who want to participate in this voluntary market. Click here to learn more and to download the report from the GCP website.
The ESSP is a joint initiative of four global environmental change programmes:

Tips for helping children behave
(especially in public)
I thought it was time to write down some of the tips I’ve acquired that concern children and behavior, as I’ve learned what I have about the brain and how it works. What I learned is that while you are thinking about something, you feel as you do about it. If you want to change how you feel, changing your thoughts helps us do that immediately. Just as I say, “ Imagine the tip of your left pinky finger… where the nail meets the skin…” Do you think of it? Did you think of your pinky because I mentioned it? You did that because that is how quickly our brain responds.
Tip 1. Keep a picture or small item (from a special time or event) that represents something special to the child with you.
Yes. Helping a child regain composure during a meltdown may be painful and embarrassing, not to mention the discomfort your child perceives at that time. There seems to be great debate over how to handle a situation like a meltdown like let them ride it out or leave immediately or yell or whatever… if you have tried these techniques I’d like you to pause and ask yourself how helpful your response was in the moment.
Keeping a picture of a grandparent or a party or a vacation or an item or toy that they really want for their birthday or special holiday… (Big breath…) you get the picture… it helps take your child’s thoughts to a more pleasant place. You can make this even more effective by asking them questions about it, even if you know the answers ; )
Ask questions like, “Hey remember this? Where/who is this again? Do you remember that thing in the picture…? What do you think happened right before this? What is your favorite thing about this? Can you make up a sentence/song/rhyme/or draw a picture about the picture? Can you spell something in the picture?
These questions will take their focus to something better. Once they’ve calmed down and appear to be past the issue, ask them what happened and explain why that behavior isn’t helpful or necessary.
Tip 2. A simple game of ‘I spy’ with extra OMG
This tip is great if you find yourself out and are caught empty handed without anything handy to keep your kids busy. Look around you and spot something ANYTHING that either you don’t see often or haven’t seen in awhile (not a person) and get excited while smiling and saying, “OMG you are never going to find what I am looking at! It is soooo _____________” This usually leads to a game of I spy which can be changed as your child develops I spy colors… I spy words that start with ___... I spy numbers …
Tip 3. Text Message back and forth
I noticed a long time ago how technology has changed the interpersonal dynamic. Being more of a “find the solution girl”, I established some rules like no cell phone at the table for meals. Please know my daughter was 4 when I did this knowing that when she is grown she will have a phone and I probably will want to use our dining times to connect. I figured our meals are relatively short and whatever needed me could wait the 30 minutes. Also, it was a perfect opportunity to demonstrate the behavior I hope to create.
This is what led me to texting with my child. I remember when she was beginning to read that I looked for every practical experience for her to do so… signs, menus, airport terminals… everything. But sometimes there is nothing to read and nowhere to go as you get stuck waiting in line or for an appointment or for whatever presents a time where you can text and you need to keep kids busy and have fun… text them. Hand them your phone and say here… and let them read your message for them. Then let them respond to you via text. Hand the phone back and forth…after a few texts you may be happy to learn what you do… and you will both have fun while doing it.
Tip 4. Start them on a story.
This is one I use all the time and changes just as much as I use it. I simply start a story using something that I see for example… “Once there was this really cool girl who sat down to write some really helpful stuff for parents…” then they have to look around and continue the story using something they see. Example “But that girl decided to step away from her desk and go play with the fairies living in her backyard…”
Start stories about the cars you see driving or the foods you see in the market or the stars in the sky… about the waves in the ocean and the mermaids that live deep below.
When you run out of time for your part and you’ve got them interested, tell them to draw a picture of it or write a story about it.
How smart and well behaved your children are now. Thanks for reading. You do make a difference in your child’s life. Much Love.

Ten common myths about teaching
Educators discuss the nation’s biggest misconceptions about teachers and their profession
It seems everyone has an opinion about teachers and their profession these days … and most of them aren’t teachers.
Perhaps it would be a different matter if the conceptions of teaching were like those of NASA engineers: smart, genius! Or maybe like those of firefighters: brave, self-sacrificing! However, in our nation’s current climate, saying the word “teacher” is like Forrest Gump opening a box of chocolates: you never know what you’re going to get, as teachers too often are seen as a convenient scapegoat for the perceived problems that are plaguing public education.
eSchool News recently asked readers: “If you could clear up one misconception about teachers and/or teaching, what would it be?” Our goal was not only to help others understand these misconceptions, but also to learn how teachers feel they are perceived by others.
Here are 10 misconceptions about teachers and teaching that emerged from readers (responses edited for brevity):
1. Those who can’t do, teach.
“The one misconception I would like to clarify is around the phrase, ‘Those who can cannot do, teach.’ While many educators are active contributors to the particular area in which they have domain expertise (i.e. Science, Language Arts, History), K-12 educators … have committed themselves to developing skills in how to engage and foster growth of young people around the content and processes that comprise that area of expertise. It is the very special practitioner [who] makes a good educator; however, good educators need to have enough knowledge of their areas of expertise to cultivate excitement, curiosity, and spark the passion to commit to a vocation or avocation. Maybe a better phrase is, ‘Those who teach create those who do.’” —Michael Jay
“One of my favorites is, ‘Those who can’t, teach.’ Teachers must be well educated in their field of study, of course, but that is only the beginning. Teachers need much pedagogical preparation on topics including educational psychology, classroom management, assessment, curriculum instruction, communication skills, and budgeting. And that is all before a teacher steps into a classroom. The requirements for a qualified teacher include all of the skills needed for the 21st-century workplace.” —Mary Montag, teacher, St. Teresa’s Academy

Vienna Philharmonic asks historians to look into alleged Nazi past
Historian says orchestra demonstrated sympathy for Austria's Nazi leadership during Holocaust.
The Vienna Philharmonic has asked three historians to research the orchestra's alleged Nazi past.
The announcement on January 22 came after Harald Walser, a historian and Parliament member for the Austrian Greens, said in an interview that the orchestra demonstrated sympathy for the country’s Nazi leadership during World War Two.
Historians Fritz Truempi, Oliver Rathkolb and Bernadette Mayrhofer will look into the "politicization" of the Vienna Philharmonic from 1938 to 1945, the fate of its Jewish musicians during that time and its relations with Nazis afterward, according to an orchestra statement, the French news agency AFP reported.
Their report is due in March.
Walser has called for forming a committee of inquiry into the role of the philharmonic during those years and said the orchestra has not released all its documents from the Nazi era or has destroyed some of them.
He cited a listing on the philharmonic’s official website that describes a concert delivered on New Year’s Day of 1939 as a “sublime homage to Austria,” when it actually was a celebration of the country's unification with Nazi Germany in 1938.
The New Year's Concert of the Vienna Philharmonic takes place each year on the morning of January 1 in Vienna and is broadcast to an estimated audience of 50 million in 73 countries.
Walser claims that after the war, an emissary of the Vienna Philharmonic gave a new copy of its honor ring in 1966 to Nazi war criminal Baldur von Schirach, who was responsible for the deportation of tens of thousands of Austrian Jews to death camps, following his release from Berlin’s Spandau Prison for war criminals. Von Schirach had received the original ring in 1942.
Six Jewish musicians from the philharmonic were murdered by the Nazis in Austria and 11 were deported to death camps, according to reports.

Kidney Disease of Diabetes
On this page:
- The Burden of Kidney Failure
- The Course of Kidney Disease
- Diagnosis of CKD
- Effects of High Blood Pressure
- Preventing and Slowing Kidney Disease
- Dialysis and Transplantation
- Good Care Makes a Difference
- Points to Remember
- Hope through Research
- For More Information
The Burden of Kidney Failure
Each year in the United States, more than 100,000 people are diagnosed with kidney failure, a serious condition in which the kidneys fail to rid the body of wastes.1 Kidney failure is the final stage of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Diabetes is the most common cause of kidney failure, accounting for nearly 44 percent of new cases.1 Even when diabetes is controlled, the disease can lead to CKD and kidney failure. Most people with diabetes do not develop CKD that is severe enough to progress to kidney failure. Nearly 24 million people in the United States have diabetes, 2 and nearly 180,000 people are living with kidney failure as a result of diabetes.1
People with kidney failure undergo either dialysis, an artificial blood-cleaning process, or transplantation to receive a healthy kidney from a donor. Most U.S. citizens who develop kidney failure are eligible for federally funded care. In 2005, care for patients with kidney failure cost the United States nearly $32 billion.1
African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanics/Latinos develop diabetes, CKD, and kidney failure at rates higher than Caucasians. Scientists have not been able to explain these higher rates. Nor can they explain fully the interplay of factors leading to kidney disease of diabetes—factors including heredity, diet, and other medical conditions, such as high blood pressure. They have found that high blood pressure and high levels of blood glucose increase the risk that a person with diabetes will progress to kidney failure.
1United States Renal Data System. USRDS 2007 Annual Data Report. Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2007.
2National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. National Diabetes Statistics, 2007. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008.
The Course of Kidney Disease
Diabetic kidney disease takes many years to develop. In some people, the filtering function of the kidneys is actually higher than normal in the first few years of their diabetes.
Over several years, people who are developing kidney disease will have small amounts of the blood protein albumin begin to leak into their urine. This first stage of CKD is called microalbuminuria. The kidney's filtration function usually remains normal during this period.
As the disease progresses, more albumin leaks into the urine. This stage may be called macroalbuminuria or proteinuria. As the amount of albumin in the urine increases, the kidneys' filtering function usually begins to drop. The body retains various wastes as filtration falls. As kidney damage develops, blood pressure often rises as well.
Overall, kidney damage rarely occurs in the first 10 years of diabetes, and usually 15 to 25 years will pass before kidney failure occurs. For people who live with diabetes for more than 25 years without any signs of kidney failure, the risk of ever developing it decreases.
Diagnosis of CKD
People with diabetes should be screened regularly for kidney disease. The two key markers for kidney disease are eGFR and urine albumin.
eGFR. eGFR stands for estimated glomerular filtration rate. Each kidney contains about 1 million tiny filters made up of blood vessels. These filters are called glomeruli. Kidney function can be checked by estimating how much blood the glomeruli filter in a minute. The calculation of eGFR is based on the amount of creatinine, a waste product, found in a blood sample. As the level of creatinine goes up, the eGFR goes down.
Kidney disease is present when eGFR is less than 60 milliliters per minute.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) recommend that eGFR be calculated from serum creatinine at least once a year in all people with diabetes.
Urine albumin. Urine albumin is measured by comparing the amount of albumin to the amount of creatinine in a single urine sample. When the kidneys are healthy, the urine will contain large amounts of creatinine but almost no albumin. Even a small increase in the ratio of albumin to creatinine is a sign of kidney damage.
Kidney disease is present when urine contains more than 30 milligrams of albumin per gram of creatinine, with or without decreased eGFR.
The ADA and the NIH recommend annual assessment of urine albumin excretion to assess kidney damage in all people with type 2 diabetes and people who have had type 1 diabetes for 5 years or more.
If kidney disease is detected, it should be addressed as part of a comprehensive approach to the treatment of diabetes.
Effects of High Blood Pressure
High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a major factor in the development of kidney problems in people with diabetes. Both a family history of hypertension and the presence of hypertension appear to increase chances of developing kidney disease. Hypertension also accelerates the progress of kidney disease when it already exists.
Blood pressure is recorded using two numbers. The first number is called the systolic pressure, and it represents the pressure in the arteries as the heart beats. The second number is called the diastolic pressure, and it represents the pressure between heartbeats. In the past, hypertension was defined as blood pressure higher than 140/90, said as "140 over 90."
The ADA and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute recommend that people with diabetes keep their blood pressure below 130/80.
Hypertension can be seen not only as a cause of kidney disease but also as a result of damage created by the disease. As kidney disease progresses, physical changes in the kidneys lead to increased blood pressure. Therefore, a dangerous spiral, involving rising blood pressure and factors that raise blood pressure, occurs. Early detection and treatment of even mild hypertension are essential for people with diabetes.
Preventing and Slowing Kidney Disease
Blood Pressure Medicines
Scientists have made great progress in developing methods that slow the onset and progression of kidney disease in people with diabetes. Drugs used to lower blood pressure can slow the progression of kidney disease significantly. Two types of drugs, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), have proven effective in slowing the progression of kidney disease. Many people require two or more drugs to control their blood pressure. In addition to an ACE inhibitor or an ARB, a diuretic can also be useful. Beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and other blood pressure drugs may also be needed.
An example of an effective ACE inhibitor is lisinopril (Prinivil, Zestril), which doctors commonly prescribe for treating kidney disease of diabetes. The benefits of lisinopril extend beyond its ability to lower blood pressure: it may directly protect the kidneys' glomeruli. ACE inhibitors have lowered proteinuria and slowed deterioration even in people with diabetes who did not have high blood pressure.
An example of an effective ARB is losartan (Cozaar), which has also been shown to protect kidney function and lower the risk of cardiovascular events.
Any medicine that helps patients achieve a blood pressure target of 130/80 or lower provides benefits. Patients with even mild hypertension or persistent microalbuminuria should consult a health care provider about the use of antihypertensive medicines.
In people with diabetes, excessive consumption of protein may be harmful. Experts recommend that people with kidney disease of diabetes consume the recommended dietary allowance for protein, but avoid high-protein diets. For people with greatly reduced kidney function, a diet containing reduced amounts of protein may help delay the onset of kidney failure. Anyone following a reduced-protein diet should work with a dietitian to ensure adequate nutrition.
Intensive Management of Blood Glucose
Antihypertensive drugs and low-protein diets can slow CKD. A third treatment, known as intensive management of blood glucose or glycemic control, has shown great promise for people with diabetes, especially for those in the early stages of CKD.
The human body normally converts food to glucose, the simple sugar that is the main source of energy for the body's cells. To enter cells, glucose needs the help of insulin, a hormone produced by the pancreas. When a person does not make enough insulin, or the body does not respond to the insulin that is present, the body cannot process glucose, and it builds up in the bloodstream. High levels of glucose in the blood lead to a diagnosis of diabetes.
Intensive management of blood glucose is a treatment regimen that aims to keep blood glucose levels close to normal. The regimen includes testing blood glucose frequently, administering insulin throughout the day on the basis of food intake and physical activity, following a diet and activity plan, and consulting a health care team regularly. Some people use an insulin pump to supply insulin throughout the day.
A number of studies have pointed to the beneficial effects of intensive management of blood glucose. In the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), researchers found a 50 percent decrease in both development and progression of early diabetic kidney disease in participants who followed an intensive regimen for controlling blood glucose levels. The intensively managed patients had average blood glucose levels of 150 milligrams per deciliter-about 80 milligrams per deciliter lower than the levels observed in the conventionally managed patients. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study, conducted from 1976 to 1997, showed conclusively that, in people with improved blood glucose control, the risk of early kidney disease was reduced by a third. Additional studies conducted over the past decades have clearly established that any program resulting in sustained lowering of blood glucose levels will be beneficial to patients in the early stages of CKD.
Dialysis and Transplantation
When people with diabetes experience kidney failure, they must undergo either dialysis or a kidney transplant. As recently as the 1970s, medical experts commonly excluded people with diabetes from dialysis and transplantation, in part because the experts felt damage caused by diabetes would offset benefits of the treatments. Today, because of better control of diabetes and improved rates of survival following treatment, doctors do not hesitate to offer dialysis and kidney transplantation to people with diabetes.
Currently, the survival of kidneys transplanted into people with diabetes is about the same as the survival of transplants in people without diabetes. Dialysis for people with diabetes also works well in the short run. Even so, people with diabetes who receive transplants or dialysis experience higher morbidity and mortality because of coexisting complications of diabetes-such as damage to the heart, eyes, and nerves.
Good Care Makes a Difference
People with diabetes should
- have their health care provider measure their A1C level at least twice a year. The test provides a weighted average of their blood glucose level for the previous 3 months. They should aim to keep it at less than 7 percent.
- work with their health care provider regarding insulin injections, medicines, meal planning, physical activity, and blood glucose monitoring.
- have their blood pressure checked several times a year. If blood pressure is high, they should follow their health care provider's plan for keeping it near normal levels. They should aim to keep it at less than 130/80.
- ask their health care provider whether they might benefit from taking an ACE inhibitor or ARB.
- ask their health care provider to measure their eGFR at least once a year to learn how well their kidneys are working.
- ask their health care provider to measure the amount of protein in their urine at least once a year to check for kidney damage.
- ask their health care provider whether they should reduce the amount of protein in their diet and ask for a referral to see a registered dietitian to help with meal planning.
Points to Remember
- Diabetes is the leading cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney failure in the United States.
- People with diabetes should be screened regularly for kidney disease. The two key markers for kidney disease are estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and urine albumin.
- Drugs used to lower blood pressure can slow the progression of kidney disease significantly. Two types of drugs, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), have proven effective in slowing the progression of kidney disease.
- In people with diabetes, excessive consumption of protein may be harmful.
- Intensive management of blood glucose has shown great promise for people with diabetes, especially for those in the early stages of CKD.
Hope through Research
The number of people with diabetes is growing. As a result, the number of people with kidney failure caused by diabetes is also growing. Some experts predict that diabetes soon might account for half the cases of kidney failure. In light of the increasing illness and death related to diabetes and kidney failure, patients, researchers, and health care professionals will continue to benefit by addressing the relationship between the two diseases. The NIDDK is a leader in supporting research in this area.
Several areas of research supported by the NIDDK hold great potential. Discovery of ways to predict who will develop kidney disease may lead to greater prevention, as people with diabetes who learn they are at risk institute strategies such as intensive management of blood glucose and blood pressure control.
Participants in clinical trials can play a more active role in their own health care, gain access to new research treatments before they are widely available, and help others by contributing to medical research. For information about current studies, visit www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
For More Information
National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse
1 Information Way
Bethesda, MD 20892-3560
National Kidney Foundation
30 East 33rd Street
New York, NY 10016
Phone: 1-800-622-9010 or 212-889-2210
National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse
The National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NKUDIC) is a service of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). The NIDDK is part of the National Institutes of Health of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Established in 1987, the Clearinghouse provides information about diseases of the kidneys and urologic system to people with kidney and urologic disorders and to their families, health care professionals, and the public. The NKUDIC answers inquiries, develops and distributes publications, and works closely with professional and patient organizations and Government agencies to coordinate resources about kidney and urologic diseases.
Publications produced by the Clearinghouse are carefully reviewed by both NIDDK scientists and outside experts.
This publication is not copyrighted. The Clearinghouse encourages users of this publication to duplicate and distribute as many copies as desired.
NIH Publication No. 08-3925
Page last updated: September 2, 2010

Deep Vein Thrombosis
Exams and Tests
When you first see the doctor, he or she will do a physical exam and ask questions about your medical history. These help your doctor decide what tests you need based on your risk for deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Your doctor will check:
- Your heart and lungs.
- Your legs for warmth, swelling, bulging veins, or changes in skin color.
Your doctor may ask:
- Do you have any swelling or pain in your legs?
- Have you had a blood clot before?
- What medicines do you take?
- Have you had surgery recently or have you been on any long trips lately?
Reference Ultrasound is the main test used to help diagnose DVT. It creates a picture of the flow of blood through the veins.
If your doctor thinks you should have more tests, you might have two or three more ultrasounds over the next 7 to 10 days.
More tests may be used when ultrasound results are unclear. These tests often aren't needed, but they may help diagnose or exclude a blood clot in the leg. These tests may include:
Blood thinner testing
If you are treated with anticoagulant medicines, you may need periodic blood tests to monitor the effects of the anticoagulant on the blood. Blood tests include:
- Reference Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) to monitor treatment with heparin.
- Reference Prothrombin time (PT), also referred to as INR, to monitor treatment with warfarin (Coumadin).
Tests for clotting problems
Special blood tests may help identify Reference inherited blood-clotting problems that can increase your risk of forming blood clots or help explain why you got a blood clot. These tests check for genetic conditions or specific proteins in your blood.
Testing might be done if you have or had one or more of the following:
- A blood clot in a vein that has no clear cause
- A blood clot at age 45 or younger
- A blood clot in a vein at an unusual location, such as the gastrointestinal region, the brain, or the arms
- A first-degree family member (mother, father, brother, or sister) who has had a blood clot in a vein before age 45 or has had problems with blood clotting
Screening for these problems in the general population is not routinely done.
|By:||Reference Healthwise Staff||Last Revised: Reference August 17, 2012|
|Medical Review:||Reference E. Gregory Thompson, MD - Internal Medicine
Reference Jeffrey S. Ginsberg, MD - Hematology

To preserve our planet, scientists tell us we must reduce the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere from its current level of 392 parts per million ("ppm")to below 350 ppm. But 350 is more than a number—it's a symbol of where we need to head as a planet.
At 350.org, we're building a global grassroots movement to solve the climate crisis and push for policies that will put the world on track to get to 350 ppm.
Scientists say that 350 parts per million CO2 in the atmosphere is the safe limit for humanity. Learn more about 350—what it means, where it came from, and how to get there. Read More »
Submit your success story from your work in the climate movement and we'll share the best ones on our blog and social networks! Stories from people like you are crucial tools in growing the climate movement.
Help spread the word and look good while doing it—check out the 350 Store for t-shirts, buttons, stickers, and more.

Since many ancestors of Americans were foreign born, naturalization records
are another a source of genealogical information that you might want to
investigate. Naturalization is the process through which a foreign born
person becomes a citizen of the United States and is eligible to vote.
Not all immigrants became citizens as it is not required. Many obtained
their citizenship because of pride in their new country and a desire to
participate in democratic elections, a privilege perhaps not accorded
to them in their country of birth. Others became citizens for more materialistic
reasons, such as the right to acquire free land through homesteading.
During times of war, there was often hostility towards people from the
enemy country and immigrants may have obtained citizenship to show their
loyalty to the U.S., especially if they had children serving in the U.S.
Was Your Ancestor Naturalized?
Before beginning a search for a naturalization record, it may save hours
of futile research if you try to determine if there is evidence that the
individual you are researching did become a citizen. There are several
ways to do this:
Even with the above information, keep in mind the following caveats:
- Location of Birth Was the person foreign born? Usually
there's no need to be naturalized if born in the U.S.
- Census The 1900 and 1910 censuses ask if a person is
naturalized and 1920 further asks the year of naturalization. Indirectly,
the 1820 and 1830 census provide a clue with the question "number of
foreigners in each household not naturalized."
- Homesteading Land The person had to have initiated the
naturalization process to be eligible for free land through homesteading.
- Voter Registration Lists Is he/she listed as a voter?
- Occupation Did this person hold a job that required
- Not all foreign born individuals applied for citizenship and a child
born abroad is still a U.S. citizen if his/her parents are. During much
of our history, the wife and children automatically became citizens
when the husband/father took out citizenship papers.
- Naturalization was one of many census questions. The person who provided
the answer may not have known in fact if someone else had been naturalized.
An individual may have said yes because he felt it was the right thing
to say or he intended to begin the process.
- A Declaration of Intent, not final papers, was all that was required
- Not everyone who became a citizen registered to vote. Also, some states
allowed people who had filed a Declaration of Intent to vote even if
they had not received their final papers.
What Is the Procedure?
By now you might be getting the idea that naturalization documents are
not necessarily as easy to use as some other records, such as the census.
Generally, for most of our history there are two rules that apply to naturalizations:
- It was a legal process handled through the courts.
- It was usually a two-part procedure, the first being a Declaration
of Intent indicating that the person intended to become a citizen (voluntary
after 1952). This may have included as part of the document or as a
separate certificate or record information on the individual's date
and place of arrival into the United States. After a required period
of residency (five years, with some exceptions) the individual would
then file a Petition for Naturalization and, if granted, would receive
a Certificate of Naturalization. Both or either the Declaration and/or
the Petition may contain valuable genealogical information.
The procedures and requirements differed greatly depending on the location
and the time period. The first important information the researcher needs
to establish is whether the naturalization was before 1906 or afterwards.
In 1906 the naturalization process was simplified and taken over by the
federal government. It is much easier to find out where to look and what
to expect if it took place after 1906.
Where are Records Located?
Prior to 1906, naturalization could take place in any court having common
law jurisdiction. The court could be federal, state, or local and be called
by many names circuit, supreme, civil, equity, district, common
pleas, chancery, superior. In some cases a municipal, police, criminal,
or probate court did not actually have the right to handle naturalization
but they issued certificates anyway. Prior to 1905, over 5,000 courts
had been handling naturalization. By 1908 that number was reduced to just
over 2,000 courts and the Department of Labor began issuing A Directory
of Courts Having Jurisdiction in Naturalization Proceedings. This
directory, available on microfilm through the Family History Library,
can help you determine which court your ancestor may have used. Naturalizations
can now be handled in either federal or local courts. Since 1929, most
naturalizations have been at federal courts, but earlier records are more
likely to be at a local court because it was closer to the individual.
Prior to 1906, the biggest problem confronting a researcher is where
to find the record. The two procedures did not have to take place in the
same court so the immigrant could have filed a Declaration soon after
his arrival in New York, or perhaps he lived in Ohio for a while and filed
his Declaration there, hoping to qualify for free land. Then, after settling
on land in South Dakota, he may have submitted his Petition to a local
court. The Family History Library has microfilm copies of many pre-1930
records. If your ancestor lived in an urban area, there are many rolls
of films relating to Chicago (1871-1930), New York (1792-1906), Philadelphia
(1793-1911) and New England (1791-1906).
The good news is that copies of all naturalization records from 1906
to 1956 are at the Immigration and Naturalization Service in Washington,
DC. This does not guarantee success though. Since you are dealing with
a government agency, be prepared for a long wait. I had a copy of one
certificate of citizenship which gave the court, location, date, and name
of the immigrant, but the INS was never able to locate the file. You may
also be able to obtain copies of the file from the court, but some courts
will refer you to INS in Washington.
Naturalizations after 1956 are kept at the local INS office. Some records
are being transferred to National Archives branches or state archives.
See their page "Naturalization
Records" for information about records at the National Archives.
What Do the Records Contain?
In 1906, the process was standardized and uniform forms were issued.
The forms have been revised periodically, but generally contain at least
the following information:
- Declaration of Intention The court date and location;
the individual's name, age, occupation, personal description, birth
date and location, and residence; their date and vessel of arrival and
last foreign residence. From 1929 to 1941, it asked for the spouse's
name, marriage date and place, and birth information, plus names, dates,
and places of birth and residence of each child. It also includes a
picture of the applicant. After 1941, it requests the spouse's name
(no details on birth) and doesn't mention children. After 1929, the
last foreign residence is omitted. A separate Certificate of Arrival
giving details of arrival was required for arrivals after 1906, with
- Petition for Naturalization The court date and location;
name, residence, occupation, birth date and place; immigration departure
date and place; U.S. arrival port, date, and ship; date and place of
Declaration of Intention; spouse's name, birth date and place; children's
names, dates and places of birth; residence, witnesses, and oath of
allegiance. From 1929 to 1941 it also asked race, marriage date and
place, date of spouse's entry into the U.S. and naturalization information,
last foreign residence, and name used on arrival. After 1941, a personal
description was added, as well as details of any trips longer than six
months out of the U.S.
- The actual certificate This is the document given to
the new citizen and the one a researcher is most likely to find in old
family papers. It contains little information: court, date. and name
of new citizen. It may contain other information, but the Declaration
and Petition are the papers the researcher should try to locate.
Prior to 1906
There is no predicting what you might find in naturalization papers prior
to 1906. Until 1828, the immigrant had to report to a court to register.
This report was supposed to contain information on the birthplace, age,
and nationality. These alien registry books were separate volumes in many
areas, especially in the northeast. The registry may be found in later
records combined with the Declaration. After 1911, the immigrant was issued
a certificate of arrival.
A Declaration of Intention was usually required, again with exceptions.
It may contain little more than the name of the immigrant, but may also
have some of the details incorporated in the post-1906 form described
above. These are also called "first papers."
Early Petitions are part of the court record and may even be recorded
in separate ledgers called "second papers" or "final record." Information
varies greatly. Certificates of Naturalization were given to the new citizen.
The information was recorded but duplicates of the certificate were not
kept on file.
Spouses and children may derive their citizenship from their husband/father
and not have to go through the procedure themselves. Up until 1922, a
foreign born woman who married an American citizen became naturalized
upon marriage or, if her husband was foreign born, when he became a citizen.
No separate filings were required. Prior to 1906, they usually were not
even mentioned in the husband's petition.
After 1922, a woman had to be naturalized on her own. However, from 1907
to 1922, if a woman married an unnaturalized alien, she took his citizenship.
This created one particularly bizarre situation for a woman who was born
in Poland in September 1901. In November of that same year she came to
the U.S. with her parents. Her father obtained citizenship in 1906 and
she automatically became a citizen as well. In 1918 she married a man
who had immigrated from Russia in 1913, but was not yet a citizen. She
lost her citizenship because of this rule. In November 1922, her husband
became a citizen. This did not help her because on September 22, 1922,
the law was changed to say that any alien woman who married an American
does not become a U.S. citizen automatically. She applied on her own and
again became a U.S. citizen in 1942!
Children under the age of 21 automatically become citizens by the naturalization
of a parent. However, there are many exceptions to this law regarding
residence, whether or not a Declaration is required, what happens if the
parent dies or becomes insane, adopted children, illegitimate children,
step-children, and children born abroad.
Obtaining citizenship generally has been made easier for aliens who served
in the U.S. military. Filing of the Declaration of Intention was often
not required and the period of residency eliminated or reduced. However,
in 1894 the law was changed and during times of peace no one (except Indians)
could serve in the military unless he or she was a U.S. citizen or had
filed a Declaration of Intention. Aliens were allowed to serve during
times of war and to become naturalized.
Some states had laws forbidding aliens from owning land unless they had
filed a declaration. Homesteaders were able to qualify for free public
land after filing the declaration. The National Archives has homestead
records prior to May 1, 1908 and Bureau of Land Management after that
date. BLM can be accessed at http://www.blm.gov/nhp/index.htm.
Obstacles to Research
Besides identifying the court (or courts) that handled the various steps
in the procedure, there are other pitfalls. Some immigrants filed the
Declaration, perhaps for homesteading, but did not follow through with
the final papers. If they could vote and obtain land with the Declaration
only, they had no need to complete the process. Others were allowed to
skip the declaration and only had to file the final petition. In addition,
fraud occurred on a large scale. Thousands of fraudulent certificates
were issued in 1868 in New York because votes were needed in an election.
These certificates had no court records documenting the citizenship. If
you cannot locate the naturalization record in the court where it was
supposed to have occurred, your ancestor may have had a fraudulent certificate.
For further information, see the National Archives and Records Administration
Records" page; the LDS Research Outline on the U.S. (p. 38-41)
and the excellent 43-page booklet American Naturalization Processes
and Procedures 1790-1985 by John J. Newman (Indianapolis: Family History
Section, Indiana Historical Society 1985).

This WebQuest was designed to meet the 3rd grade TEKS for TEXAS in the
Writing 3.1(C) revise selected drafts for varied purposes, including to
achieve a sense of audience, precise word choices, and vivid images.
Science 3.9(A) observe and identify characteristics among species that allow
each to survive and reproduce.
Social Studies 3.16(D & E) use various parts of a source, including the
table of contents, glossary, and index, as well as keyword computer
searches, to locate information;(E) interpret and create visuals including
graphs, charts, tables, timelines, illustrations, and maps.
Art 3.2(C) produce drawings, paintings, prints, constructions, ceramics, and
fiberart, using a variety of art materials appropriately.

The Syrian Flag :
color in the Syrian flag refers to a definite meaning or a period as follows:
1. Red Color: The blood of the martyrs.
2. Black Color: The Abbasids.
3. White Color: The Umayyad.
4. The Green: The Rashidun or the Fatimid.
5. The two stars represent the previous union
between Egypt and Syria.
Syrian flag is also found as a Shield in the middle of the Syrian Eagle's heart
which is derived from the Arabic history, which referred to the flag of "Khaled
Bin Al Waleed" that was held
at when he conquered Damascus in 635 AD. At the
bottom of the Shield , there are two wheat spikes to represent the country's first
crop and its agricultural nature. The eagle grabs in his claws a stripe that
has the words "Syrian Arab Republic" written on it in Kufic (an
Arabic type of writing).
Syrian National Anthem:
"Homat el Diyar"
(translated Guardians of the Homeland) is the national anthem of Syria, with
lyrics written by "Khalil Mardam Bey" and the music by "Mohammed Flayfel", who
also composed the national anthem of the Palestinian National Authority, as
well as many other Arab folk songs.
was adopted in 1936 and temporarily fell from use when Syria joined the United
Arab Republic with Egypt in 1958. It was decided that the national anthem of
the UAR would be a combination of the then-Egyptian anthem and "Homat elDiyar" When Syria seceded from the union in 1961, the
anthem was completely restored.
Translation of Syrian National Anthem:
Defenders of our home,
Peace be upon you;
The proud spirits had
refused to subdue.
The lion-abode of Arabism,
A hallowed sanctuary;
The seat of the stars,
An inviolable preserve.
Our hopes and our hearts,
Are entwined with the flag,
Which unites our country...
Listen Syrian National Anthem...Click Here

RIVERSIDE, Calif. – Biologists at the University of California, Riverside have found that voluntary activity, such as daily exercise, is a highly heritable trait that can be passed down genetically to successive generations.
Working on mice in the lab, they found that activity level can be enhanced with "selective breeding" – the process of breeding plants and animals for particular genetic traits. Their experiments showed that mice that were bred to be high runners produced high-running offspring, indicating that the offspring had inherited the trait for activity.
"Our findings have implications for human health," said Theodore Garland Jr., a professor of biology, whose laboratory conducted the multi-year research. "Down the road people could be treated pharmacologically for low activity levels through drugs that targeted specific genes that promote activity. Pharmacological interventions in the future could make it more pleasurable for people to engage in voluntary exercise. Such interventions could also make it less comfortable for people to sit still for long periods of time."
In humans, activity levels vary widely from couch-potato-style inactivity to highly active athletic endeavors.
"We have a huge epidemic of obesity in Western society, and yet we have little understanding of what determines variation among individuals for voluntary exercise levels," Garland said.
Study results appear online Sept. 1 in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
The researchers began their experiments in 1993 with 224 mice whose levels of genetic variation bore similarity to those seen in wild mouse populations. The researchers randomly divided the base population of mice into eight separate lines – four lines bred for high levels of daily running, with the remaining four used as controls – and measured how much distance the mice voluntarily ran per day on wheels attached to their cages.
With a thousand mice born every generation and four generations of mice each year, the researchers were able to breed highly active mice in the four high-runner lines by selecting the highest running males and females from every generation to be the parents of the next generation. In the control lines, breeders were chosen with no selection imposed, meaning that the mice either changed or did not change over time purely as a result of random genetic drift.
By studying the differences among the replicate lines, the researchers found that mice in the four high-runner lines ran 2.5-3-fold more revolutions per day as compared with mice in the four control lines. They also found that female and male mice evolved differently: females increased their daily running distance almost entirely by speed; males, on the other hand, increased speed but they also ran more minutes per day.
The study is an example of an "experimental evolution" approach applied rigorously to a problem of biomedical relevance. Although this approach is common with microbial systems and fruit flies, it has rarely been applied to vertebrates due to their longer generation times and greater costs of maintenance. The results of such studies can inform biologists about fundamental evolutionary processes as well as "how organisms work" in a way that may lead to new therapeutic strategies.
"This study of experimental evolution confirms some previous observations and raises new questions," said Douglas Futuyma, a distinguished professor of ecology and evolution at Stony Brook University, New York, who was not involved in the research. "It shows that 'there are many ways to skin a cat': different ways in which a species may evolve a similar adaptive characteristic – running activity, in this case. Garland and coauthors go further by beginning to explore the detailed ways in which an adaptive feature, such as muscle size or metabolic rate, may be realized and by showing sex differences in the response to selection. It would be fascinating to know, and challenging to find out, if any one of these different responses is adaptively better than others."
Garland was joined in the research by Scott Kelly, Jessica Malisch, Erik Kolb, Robert Hannon, Brooke Keeney, Shana Van Cleave and Kevin Middleton, all of whom work in his lab.
The study was supported primarily by a grant to Garland from the National Science Foundation.
Details of the experimental set-up
The mice run on wheels attached to their cages. Wheel running is a completely voluntary behavior for the mice. They can sit in their cages and not run at all. If they do run, they can get off the wheels at any time. For the experiments, each mouse was given access to the wheels for only six days of their lives. A computer recorded every minute how much distance (revolutions) the mice ran for the six days. The researchers selected breeders depending on how much distance the mice ran on days 5 and 6.
About Theodore Garland Jr.
Garland received his doctoral degree in biological sciences from UC Irvine. Before joining UCR in 2001, he was a faculty member at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is trained in comparative physiology and evolutionary biology, as well as quantitative genetics with emphasis on exercise physiology. He is co-editor of Experimental evolution: concepts, methods, and applications of selection experiments (University of California Press, 2009). On the editorial boards of several scientific journals, he is the author/coauthor of nearly 200 peer-reviewed publications.
The University of California, Riverside (www.ucr.edu) is a doctoral research university, a living laboratory for groundbreaking exploration of issues critical to Inland Southern California, the state and communities around the world. Reflecting California's diverse culture, UCR's enrollment of about 18,000 is expected to grow to 21,000 students by 2020. The campus is planning a medical school and has reached the heart of the Coachella Valley by way of the UCR Palm Desert Graduate Center. The campus has an annual statewide economic impact of more than $1 billion.
A broadcast studio with fiber cable to the AT&T Hollywood hub is available for live or taped interviews. To learn more, call (951) UCR-NEWS.
AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert! system.

by George Heymann | @techeadlines
Google has started a new page on Google Plus to share their vision of what its augmented reality glasses could be. They are soliciting suggestions from users on what they would like to see from Project Glass.
“We think technology should work for you—to be there when you need it and get out of your way when you don’t.
A group of us from Google[x] started Project Glass to build this kind of technology, one that helps you explore and share your world, putting you back in the moment. We’re sharing this information now because we want to start a conversation and learn from your valuable input. So we took a few design photos to show what this technology could look like and created a video to demonstrate what it might enable you to do.”
Video after the break.
Read the rest of this entry »
Filed under: Android, General technology, Google, Media, Services, Augmented reality, eyeglasses, feature, featured, glasses, Google, Google Plus, Google Project Gass, google virtual reality glasses, New York Times, Project Glass, technology, turn by turn directions, UI, User interface, video chat, Virtual reality, Virtual reality glasses
January 18, 2012 • 11:07 am
$3 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will fund development
by Eric Klopfer
MIT Education Arcade
With a new $3 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the MIT Education Arcade is about to design, build and research a massively multiplayer online game (MMOG) to help high school students learn math and biology.
In contrast to the way that Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) are currently taught in secondary schools — which often results in students becoming disengaged and disinterested in the subjects at an early age — educational games such as the one to be developed give students the chance to explore STEM topics in a way that deepens their knowledge while also developing 21st-century skills.
Read the rest of this entry »
Filed under: Gaming, Services, Software, 3 million dollar grant, Associate Professor, Augmented reality, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Common Core, Common Core standards, Education, education arcade, education program, Eric Klopfer, Filament Games, game to help teach math and science, High school, Math, mit, MIT education arcade, MMOG, Next generation science, StarLogo TNG, STEM, Washington, Washington D.C.
by George Heymann
Blackberry no sooner made its official Blackberry Bold 9900 announcement and then T-mobile tweeted that it would be carrying the device. The 9900 will be T-mobile’s first 4G capable Blackberry. It is rumored to be available on T-Mobile in the June/July timeframe.
The Blackberry Bold 9900/9930 will be a touch screen device with a 1.2 GHz processor, 8 GB of onboard memory, expandable to 32GB, HSPA+ 14.4 capable, 5 megapixel camera with flash, 720p HD video recording, dual-band WiFi, a built-in compass (magnetometer) and Near Field Communication (NFC) technology featuring the new Blackberry 7 OS.
Press release after the break
Filed under: Blackberry, Hardware, 4G, Augmented reality, BlackBerry, Blackberry Bold 9900, Blackberry Bold 9930, Evolution-Data Optimized, Evolved HSPA, Hertz, High-definition video, HSPA+, Research In Motion, T-Mobile, Touchscreen, Wi-Fi

Skip to content
Skip to navigation menu
24 August 2007
Cardiff scientists exploring the safe storage of hydrogen to power vehicles as an environmentally friendly alternative to petrol have made a promising new discovery.
Having already developed an organic polymer capable of storing 1.7 per cent hydrogen by weight, Professors Neil McKeown from the School of Chemistry together with Peter Budd of the University of Manchester and David Book from the University of Birmingham can now report the creation of an organic polymer able to store around three per cent hydrogen by weight.
The figure is almost double the amount of hydrogen the group’s preliminary polymers could store last year, and offers hope of producing an organic polymer in the future capable of storing enough hydrogen to successfully power a vehicle.
Commenting on the development, Professor McKeown said: "We are excited to report this recent discovery by our research team of a polymer which can hold around three per cent hydrogen by weight. Although we still have a long way to go, it is clear that we are moving in the right direction, especially as we also have a number of promising new polymers to test. "
In order to make hydrogen a viable alternative to petrol, a material which can store hydrogen at a weight of over six per cent is required. This figure is estimated by the American Department of Energy as the minimum required to make a fuel tank for hydrogen to power a vehicle for 300 miles.
"In order to obtain a polymer that can store useful quantities of hydrogen we need to make a much more porous material," said Professor McKeown, "but one in which the holes are very small so as to fit snugly the small hydrogen molecules."
Professor McKeown and his team are investigating a number of promising methods to enhance pororosity as they attempt to build on their current success and produce a material that can store and release hydrogen safely and effectively. They are also collaborating with Professor Kenneth Harris within the School of Chemistry to develop other types of hydrogen storage materials.
Cardiff is the lead University in the research project, which is funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
The EU: What’s in it for Wales?
New treatment for eczema trialled
New drugs in development for treatment of osteoarthritis
This is an externally hosted beta service offered by Google.

Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) occurs most often in infants who are born too early. RDS can cause breathing difficulty in newborns. If it is not properly treated, RDS can result in complications. This may include pneumonia, respiratory failure, chronic lung problems, and possibly asthma. In severe cases, RDS can lead to convulsions and death.
RDS occurs when infant's lungs have not developed enough. Immature lungs lack a fluid called surfactant. This is a foamy liquid that helps the lungs open wide and take in air. When there is not enough surfactant, the lungs do not open well. This will make it difficult for the infant to breathe.
The chance of developing RDS decreases as the fetus grows. Babies born after 36 weeks rarely develop this condition.
A risk factor is something that increases your chance of getting a disease or condition. Factors that increase your baby's risk of RDS include:
- Birth before 37 weeks; increased risk and severity of condition with earlier prematurity
- Mother with insulin dependent diabetes
- Multiple birth
- Cesarean section delivery
- Cold stress
- Precipitous delivery
- Previously affected infant
- Being male
- Hypertension (high blood pressure) during pregnancy
The following symptoms usually start immediately or within a few hours after birth and include:
- Difficulty breathing, apnea
- Rapid, shallow breathing
- Delayed or weak cry
- Grunting noise with every breath
- Flaring of the nostrils
- Frothing at the lips
- Blue color around the lips
- Swelling of the extremities
- Decreased urine output
The doctor will ask about the mother's medical history and pregnancy. The baby will also be evaluated, as outlined here:
Amniotic fluid is fluid that surrounds the fetus. It may be tested for indicators of well-developed lungs such as:
- Lecithin:sphingomyelin ratio
- Phosphatidyl glycerol
- Laboratory studies—done to rule out infection
- Physical exam—includes checking the baby's breathing and looking for bluish color around the lips or on trunk
- Testing for blood gases—to check the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood
- Chest x-ray —a test that uses radiation to take a picture of structures inside the body, in this case the heart and lungs
Treatment for a baby with RDS usually includes oxygen therapy and may also include:
A mechanical respirator is a breathing machine. It is used to keep the lungs from collapsing and support the baby's breathing. The respirator also improves the exchange of oxygen and other gases in the lungs. A respirator is almost always needed for infants with severe RDS.
Surfactant can be given to help the lungs open. Wider lungs will allow the infant to take in more oxygen and breathe normally. One type of surfactant comes from cows and the other is synthetic. Both options are delivered directly into the infant's windpipe.
Inhaled Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide is a gas that is inhaled. It can make it easier for oxygen to pass into the blood. The gas is often delivered during mechanical ventilation.
Newborns with RDS may be given food and water by the following means:
- Tube feeding—a tube is inserted through the baby's mouth and into the stomach
- Parenteral feeding—nutrients are delivered directly into a vein
Preventing a premature birth is the best way to avoid RDS. To reduce your chance of having a premature baby:
- Get good prenatal care. Start as early as possible in pregnancy.
- Eat a healthful diet. Take vitamins as suggested by your doctor.
- Do not smoke. Avoid alcohol or drug use.
- Only take medicines that your doctor has approved.
If you are at high risk of giving birth to a premature baby:
- You may be given steroids about 24 hours before delivery. Steroids can help your baby's lungs develop faster.
- Your doctor may do an amniocentesis. This test will check the maturity of your baby's lungs. The results will help determine the best time for delivery.
- Reviewer: Michael Woods
- Review Date: 09/2012 -
- Update Date: 00/91/2012 -

Communities in Kenya have adopted one another’s food preferences and recipes. With the exception of the Coast and Indian communities for whom food preparation is an elaborate process, nearly all other communities garnish their food by frying it. They also boil, bake in hot ashes and roast. Common foods include:
It is a sticky mixture of flour and water and is accompanied by vegetables, meat, milk or milk mixed with blood especially for pastoralist communities. Traditionally, it is made from millet or cassava. But maize flour has increasingly taken pride of place.
lt is used to prepare sauces and stews. Communities have different ways of preparing meat, but roast meat is widely eaten as a delicacy especially in urban areas. Animals slaughtered for meat depend on the location, with beef and mutton the most common. Camel and game are the preserve of communities with access to the animals.
In the last quarter ofthe 20th century, maize replaced sorghum as the most important cereal in Kenya. lt is roasted and eaten as a snack and sold on the streets and in markets.
Green boiled maize, often garnished with salt, is also common. Among the Somali, fresh maize (galeey) is
fried in oil and eaten as a snack. Dry maize is also fried to make popcorn, popular with children.
A mixture of green or dry maize and beans, cowpeas, pigeon peas or even groundnuts is also popular. lt is eaten as a main course or snack. Sometimes, it is pounded with Irish or sweet potatoes, bananas and green vegetables.
A wide range of traditional and exotic fruits are consumed in Kenya, usually as snacks. Mango, citrus fruits, banana, jackfruit, papaya, melons, guava, passion fruit, custard apple and avocado pear are common. Many traditional fruits such as baobab, wild custard apple, carissa, dialium, flacourtia (Indian plum), marula, vangueria, tamarind, vitex and ‘jujube’ are picked in the wild.
They are used as accompaniments for starchy food such as ugali. Common traditional vegetables include
baobab, cowpeas, amaranth, vine spinach, Ethiopian kale, pumpkin leaves, spider plant and hibiscus.
Kale (sukuma wiki) is now the most common vegetable in Kenya.

When someone tells that there was no successful French tank, especially in WWI - don't you believe him!
The Renault FT or Automitrailleuse à chenilles Renault FT modèle 1917, inexactly known as the FT-17 or FT17, was a French light tank; it is among the most revolutionary and influential tank designs in history. The FT was the first operational tank with an armament in a fully rotating turret, and its configuration with the turret on top, engine in the back and the driver in front became the conventional one, repeated in most tanks until today; at the time it was a revolutionary innovation, causing armour historian Steven Zaloga to describe the type as "the world's first modern tank".
Studies on the production of a new light tank were started in May 1916 by the famous car producer Louis Renault. The evidence strongly suggests that Renault himself drew up the preliminary design, being unconvinced that a sufficient power/weight ratio could be achieved for the medium tanks requested by the military. One of his most talented designers, Rodolphe Ernst-Metzmaier, prepared the final drawings.
Though the project was far more advanced than the two first French tanks about to enter production, the Schneider CA1 and the heavy St. Chamond, Renault had at first great trouble getting it accepted. Even after the first British use of tanks, on 15 September 1916, when the French people called for the deployment of their own chars, the production of the light tank was almost cancelled in favour of that of a superheavy tank (the later Char 2C). However, with the unwavering support of Brigadier General Jean-Baptiste Eugène Estienne (1860–1936), the "Father of the Tanks", and the successive French Commanders in Chief, who saw light tanks as a more feasible and realistic option, Renault was at last able to proceed with the design. However, competition with the Char 2C was to last until the very end of the war.
The prototype was slowly refined during the first half of 1917. Early production FTs were often plagued by radiator fan belt and cooling system problems, a characteristic that persisted throughout World War I. Only 84 were produced in 1917 but 2,697 were delivered before the end of the war. At least 3,177 were produced in total, perhaps more; some estimates go as high as 4,000 for all versions combined. However, 3,177 is the delivery total to the French Army; 514 were perhaps directly delivered to the U.S. Army and three to Italy - giving a probable total production number of 3,694.
The tanks had at first a round cast turret; later either an octagonal turret or an even later rounded turret of bent steel plate (called Berliet turret after one of the many coproducing factories). The latter two could carry a Puteaux SA 18 gun, or a 7.92 mm Hotchkiss machine gun. In the U.S., this tank was built on a licence as the Six Ton Tank Model 1917 (950 built, 64 before the end of the war).
There is a most persistent myth about the name of the tank: "FT" is often supposed to have meant Faible Tonnage, or, even more fanciful: Franchisseur de Tranchées (trench crosser). In reality, every Renault prototype was given a combination code; it just so happened it was the turn of "FT".
Another mythical name is "FT-18" for the guntank. A 1918 maintenance manual describes the FT as the Char d'Assault 18HP, a reference to the horsepower of the engine.
FTs captured and re-used by the Germans in World War II were re-designated Panzerkampfwagen FT 18. Either of these might have led to the confusion. Also in "FT 75 BS", the "BS" does not mean Batterie de Support but "Blockhaus Schneider", a reference to the short 75mm Schneider gun with which it was fitted.
The FT was widely used by the French and the US in the later stages of World War I, after 31 May 1918. It was cheap and well-suited for mass production. It reflected an emphasis on quantity, both on a tactical level: Estienne proposed to overwhelm the enemy defences by a "swarm" of light tanks, and on a geostrategic level: the Entente was thought to be able to gain the upper hand by outproducing the Central Powers. A goal was set of 12,260 to be manufactured (4,440 of which in the USA) before the end of 1919.
After the war, FTs were exported to many countries (Poland, Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, Romania, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Switzerland, Belgium, Netherlands, Spain, Brazil, Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan and Japan). As a result, FT tanks were used by most nations having armoured forces, invariably as their first tank type, including the United States. They took part in many later conflicts, such as the Russian Civil War, Polish-Soviet War, Chinese Civil War, Rif War and Spanish Civil War.
FT tanks were also used in the Second World War, among others in Poland, Finland, France and Kingdom of Yugoslavia, although they were completely obsolete by then. In 1940 the French army still had eight battalions equipped with 63 FTs each and three independent companies with ten each, for a total organic strength of 534, all with machine guns.
Many smaller units, partially raised after the invasion, also used the tank. This has given rise to the popular myth that the French had no modern equipment at all; in fact they had more modern tanks than the Germans; the French suffered from tactical and strategic weaknesses rather than from equipment deficiencies. When the German drive to the Channel cut off the best French units, as an expediency measure the complete French materiel reserve was sent to the front; this included 575 FTs. Earlier 115 sections of FT had been formed for airbase-defence. The Wehrmacht captured 1,704 FTs. A hundred were again used for airfield defence, about 650 for patrolling occupied Europe. Some of the tanks were also used by the Germans in 1944 for street-fighting in Paris. By this time they were hopelessly out of date.
The FT was the ancestor of a long line of French tanks: the FT Kégresse, the NC1, the NC2, the Char D1 and the Char D2. The Italians produced as their standard tank the FIAT 3000, a moderately close copy of the FT:
The Soviet Red Army captured fourteen burnt-out Renaults from White Russian forces, and rebuilt them at the Krasnoye Sormovo Factory in 1920. The Soviets claimed to have originally manufactured these Russkiy Reno tanks, but they actually produced only one exact copy, named 'Freedom Fighter Comrade Lenin'. When Stalin began the arms race of the Thirties, the first completely Soviet-designed tank was the T-18, a derivation of the Renault with sprung suspension:
In all, the FT was used by Afghanistan, Belgium, Brazil, the Republic of China, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Finland, France, Nazi Germany, Iran, Japan, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, the Russian White movement, the Soviet Union, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Norway, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
Two interesting variants:

According to Wikipedia, the definition of Earth Day is “a day early each year on which events are held worldwide to increase awareness and appreciation of the Earth’s natural environment.” Earth Day, started in 1970, and is celebrated nationally and in over 175 countries world wide. Do you celebrate Earth Day in your home?
My family and I love to celebrate our mother earth not only on Earth Day, but everyday. Each step we make in our home to become a greener family means we are doing that much more to reduce our carbon footprint. Cox Communications, my local cable company, wanted a way to reduce their carbon footprint as well so they started Cox Conserves in 2007.
Launched in 2007, Cox Conserves is the company’s national sustainability program that is designed to reduce Cox Enterprises’ carbon footprint by 20 percent. Cox Conserves seeks to reduce Cox Enterprises’ energy consumption by embracing alternative energy, conserving natural resources and inspiring eco-friendly behavior. The program engages each of the company’s major subsidiaries (Cox Communications, Manheim, Cox Media Group and AutoTrader.com) and encourages Cox Enterprises’ more than 50,000 employees and their families to engage in eco-friendly practices. For more information, visit: http://www.coxconserves.com/
How does Cox Conserves make a difference right here in Las Vegas?
How does Cox Conserves make a difference nationally?
Alternative Energy – Cox actively identifies opportunities to harness solar energy and employ fuel cell technology, annually preventing more than 17,400 tons of greenhouse gases from entering the environment through its alternative energy projects.
Energy Conservation- Across Cox Enterprises, programs are in place to conserve energy, including producing alternative energy, constructing eco-friendly buildings, greening the company fleet, conserving resources and recycling materials.
Waste Management- Cox Enterprises employs a holistic approach to waste management including waste reduction, strategic partnerships for e-waste and customer engagement.
Water Conservation- Cox’s water conservation efforts save more than 20 million gallons of water annually and return high-quality reusable water to the community.
How can you celebrate Earth Day everyday? 5 Tips for a Green Home!
- Reduce your junk mail stream by joining a no-send list. This is where my family is listed.
- Use compact fluorescent light (CFL) bulbs. They use 2/3 less energy than standard incandescent light bulbs and last up to 10 times longer. If every household in the U.S. replaced one light bulb with a CFL, it would prevent enough pollution equal to taking more than 800,000 cars off the road for an entire year. This was one of the first things we did when we moved into a new home.
- Buy bulk items. A family of four can save $2,000/year in the supermarket by choosing large sizes instead of individual serving sizes. This also reduces production of plastic wrappers and boxes. We love shopping our local super store.
- Avoid using non-native plants that may be invasive in your area. We have desert landscaping to help reduce our use of water.
- Skip pre-packaged items for school lunches and cut up your own cheese, meats and veggies to cut down on wasteful packaging.
Treat the Earth well. It was not given to you by your parents, it was loaned to you by your children.”
~ Kenyan proverb
Disclosure: This post was written on behalf of Cox Communications. All my thoughts and opinions are my own.
Latest posts by Lolo (Posts)
- A Chat With Rosita and Sesame Street’s Newest Neighbor Mando - May 15, 2013
- Favorite Moments from the Week | Wordless Wednesday Linky - May 14, 2013
- Arm & Hammer Tooth Tunes Toothbrush Review #ToothTunes1D - May 12, 2013

Copyright (c) Arvin S. Quist
INTRODUCTION TO CLASSIFICATION
THE NEED FOR CLASSIFICATION
A government is responsible for the survival of the nation and its people. To ensure that survival, a government must sometimes stringently control certain information that (1) gives the nation a significant advantage over adversaries or (2) prevents adversaries from having an advantage that could significantly damage the nation. Governments protect that special information by classifying it; that is, by giving it a special designation, such as "Secret," and then restricting access to it (e.g., by need-to-know requirements and physical security measures).
This right of a government to keep certain information concerning national security (secrets) from most of the nation's citizens is nearly universally accepted. Since antiquity, governments have protected information that gave them an advantage over adversaries. In wartime, when a nation's survival is at stake, the reasons for secrecy are most apparent, the secrecy restrictions imposed by the government are most widespread,[*] and acceptance of those restrictions by the citizens is broadest.[†] In peacetime, there are fewer reasons for secrecy in government, generally the government classifies less information, and citizens are less willing to accept security restrictions on information.
MAJOR AREAS OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
The information that is classified by most democracies, whether in peacetime or wartime, is usually limited to information that concerns the nation's defense or its foreign relations--military and diplomatic information. Most of that information falls within five major areas: (1) military operations, (2) weapons technology, (3) diplomatic activities, (4) intelligence activities, and (5) cryptology. The latter two areas might be considered to be special parts of the first three areas. That is, intelligence and cryptology are "service" functions for the primary areas--military operations, weapons technology, and diplomatic activities. From a historical perspective, the classification of weapons technology became widespread only in the 20th century. Classification of information about military operations and diplomatic activities has been practiced for millennia.
Examples of military-operations information that is frequently classified include information concerning the strength and deployment of forces, troop movements, ship sailings, the location and timing of planned attacks, tactics and strategy, and supply logistics. Obviously, if an enemy learned the major details of an impending attack, that attack would be less successful than if it came as a surprise to the enemy.* Information possessed by a government about an adversary's military activities or capabilities must be protected to preserve the ability to predict those activities or to neutralize those capabilities. If the adversary knew that the government had this information, the adversary would change those plans or capabilities. Military-operations information is usually classified for only a limited time. After an operation is over, most of the important information is known to the enemy.
Weapons technology is classified to preserve the advantage of surprise in the first use of a new weapon,† to prevent an adversary from developing effective countermeasures against a new weapon,‡ or to prevent an adversary from using that technology against its originator (by developing a similar weapon). A major factor in that latter reason for classifying weapons technology is "lead time." Classifying advanced weapons-technology information prevents an adversary from using that information to shorten the time required to produce similar weapons systems for its own use. Consequently, assuming continued advancements in a weapons technology by the initial developer of that technology, the adversary's weapons systems will not be as effective as those of the nation that initially developed that technology, and the adversary will be at a disadvantage.
With respect to lead time, when weapons systems can be significantly improved, then information on "obsolete" weapons is much less sensitive than information on newer weapons. Thus, information on muzzle-loading rifle technology was not as sensitive as that on breech-loading rifle technology, which was not as sensitive as information on lever-action rifle technology, . . . semiautomatic rifle . . . automatic rifle . . . machine gun. However, with respect to nuclear weapons, a "rogue" nation or terrorist group can probably achieve its objectives just as easily with "crude" kiloton nuclear weapons that might require a ship or truck to transport as with sophisticated megaton nuclear weapons that might fit into a (large) suitcase. Thus, "obsolete" nuclear-weapons technology should be continue to be protected, especially with respect to technologies concerning production of highly enriched uranium or other nuclear-weapon materials.
Weapons technology includes scientific and technical information related to that technology. World War I marked the start of the "modern" period when science and technology affected the development of weapons systems to a greater degree than any time previously. That interrelationship became even more pronounced in World War II, with notable scientific and technological successes: the atomic bomb, radar, and the proximity fuse. World War II, particularly with respect to the atomic bomb, marked the first time that the progress of military technology was significantly influenced by scientists, as contrasted to advances by engineers or by scientists working as engineers.
With respect to classification, the more that applied scientific or technical information is uniquely applicable to weapons, the more likely that this information will be classified. Generally, basic research is not classified unless it represents a major breakthrough leading to a completely new weapons system. An example of that circumstance was the rigid classification during World War II, and for several years thereafter, of much basic scientific research related to atomic energy (nuclear weapons).
The need for secrecy in diplomatic negotiations and relations has long been recognized. A nation's ability to obtain favorable terms in negotiations with other countries would be diminished if its negotiating strategy and goals were known in advance to the other countries.* The effectiveness of military-assistance agreements between nations would be impaired if an adversary knew of them and could plan to neutralize them. In New York Times v. United States, the "Pentagon Papers" case, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Stewart recognized the importance of secrecy in foreign policy and national defense matters:
It is elementary that the successful conduct of international diplomacy and the maintenance of an effective national defense requires both confidentiality and secrecy. Other nations can hardly deal with this Nation in an atmosphere of mutual trust unless they know that their confidences will be kept . . .. In the area of basic national defense the frequent need for absolute secrecy is, of course, self evident.
During the term of the first
president, it was established that some need for secrecy in diplomatic matters would remain even after negotiations were completed. President Washington, in 1796, refused a request by the House of Representatives for documents prepared for treaty negotiations with U.S. and gave the following as one reason for refusal: England
The nature of foreign negotiations requires caution, and their success must often depend on secrecy; and even when brought to a conclusion a full disclosure of all the measures, demands, or eventual concessions which may have been proposed or contemplated would be extremely impolitic; for this might have a pernicious influence on future negotiations, or produce immediate inconvenience, perhaps danger and mischief, in relation to other powers.
It has been said that President Nixon initially was not going to attempt to stop the New York Times and other newspapers from publishing the "Pentagon Papers." However, the executive branch was then in secret diplomatic negotiations with
, and Henry Kissinger "is said to have persuaded the president that the Chinese wouldn't continue their secret parleys if they saw that China couldn't keep its secrets." Washington
Intelligence information includes information gathering and covert operations. Collecting military and diplomatic information about other nations involves the use of photoreconnaissance airplanes and satellites, communication intercepts, the review of documents obtained openly, and other overt methods. However, information gathering also includes the use of undercover agents, confidential sources, and other covert methods. For those covert activities, secrecy is usually imposed on the identity of agents or sources, on information about intelligence methods and capabilities, and on much of the information received from the covert sources. Few clandestine agents could be recruited (or, in some instances, would live long) if their identity were not a closely guarded secret. Information provided by a clandestine agent must frequently be classified because, if a government knew that some of its information was compromised, it might be able to determine the identity of the person (agent) who provided the information to its adversary. Successful intelligence-gathering methods must be protected so that the adversary does not know the degree of their success and is not stimulated to develop countermeasures to stop the flow of information. Intelligence information from friendly nations is generally classified by the recipient country. Allies would be less willing to share intelligence information if they knew that it would not be protected against disclosure.
Cryptology encompasses methods to code and transmit secret messages and methods to intercept and decode messages. Writing messages in code, or cryptography,* has been practiced for thousands of years. One of the earliest preserved texts of a coded message is an inscription carved on an Egyptian tomb in about 1900 B.C. The earliest known pottery glaze formula was written in code on a Mesopotamian cuneiform tablet in about 1500 B.C. The Spartans established a system of military cryptography by the 5th century B.C. Persia later used cryptography for political purposes. Cryptography began its steady development in western civilization starting about the 13th century, primarily in
. By the early 16th century, Italy 's ruling Council of Ten had an elaborate organization for enciphering and deciphering messages. Venice
Restrictions on cryptologic information are necessary to protect
communications. Diplomatic negotiations could not successfully be conducted at locations other than the seat of government if safe communications could not be established. Cryptologic information must also be protected to prevent an adversary from learning of a nation's capabilities to intercept and decode messages. If an adversary learns that its communications are not secure, it will use another method, which will require additional time and effort to defeat.[‡] The Allies' World War II success in breaking the German codes contributed to shortening that war. That success was kept secret until 1974, about 34 years after the German code had been broken and about 29 years after World War II had ended. The U.S. Army's success in breaking a World War II U.S.S.R. code (the Venona project, which began in 1943 and continued until 1980) was not made public until about 1995. That was about 50 years after the first such message had been deciphered (and about 45 years after the U.S.S.R. had learned through espionage of the Army's success). U.S.
BASIS FOR CLASSIFICATION IN THE UNITED STATES
The need for governmental secrecy was directly recognized in the U.S. Constitution. Article I, Sect. 5, of the Constitution explicitly authorizes secrecy in government by stating that "Each House shall keep a Journal of its Proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such Parts as in their Judgment require Secrecy." Also included in the Constitution, in Article I, Sect. 9, is a statement that "a regular Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time." A U.S. Court of Appeals has determined that the phrase "from time to time" was intended to authorize expenditures for certain military or foreign relations matters that were intended to be kept secret for a time.
The Constitution does not explicitly provide for secrecy by the Executive Branch of the U.S. Government. However, the authority of that Executive Branch to keep certain information secret from most
citizens is implicit in its executive responsibilities, which include the national defense and foreign relations. This presidential authority has been upheld by the Supreme Court in a number of cases. Judicial decisions have also relied on a common-law privilege for a government to withhold information concerning national defense and foreign relations. Congress, by two statutes, the Freedom of Information Act and the Internal Security Act of 1950, has implicitly recognized the president's authority to classify information (see Chapter 3). U.S.
At this time in the
, information is classified either by presidential authority, currently Executive Order 12958, or by statute, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (Atomic Energy Act). Classification under Executive Orders and under the Atomic Energy Act is extensively discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, respectively. United States
CLASSIFICATION AND SECURITY
Classification has been variously described as the "cornerstone" of national security, the "mother" of security, and the "kingpin" of an information security system.,,, Classification identifies the information that must be protected against unauthorized disclosure. Security determines how to protect information after it is classified. Security includes both personnel security and physical security.
The initial classification determination, establishing what should not be disclosed to adversaries and the level of protection required, is probably the most important single factor in the security of all classified projects and programs., None of the expensive personnel-clearance and information-control provisions (physical security aspects) of an information security system comes into effect until information has been classified; classification is the pivot on which the whole subsequent security system turns (excluding security for other reasons, such as to prevent theft of materials). 19 Therefore, it is important to classify only information that truly warrants protection in the interest of national security.
Since the mid 1970s, several classification experts have remarked on the increasing emphasis by some government agencies on physical-security matters, which has been accompanied by a decreased emphasis on the classification function. One of the founders (and the first chairman) of the National Classification Management Society (NCMS), who was also an Atomic Energy Commission Contractor Classification Officer, has expressed concern about the tendency to emphasize the word "security" at the expense of the word "classification" with respect to security classification of information.17 In the mid 1980s another charter member of the NCMS pointed out that, although the status of classification still remained high in the Department of Energy (DOE), the situation had changed within the Department of Defense, where Classification Management had been organizationally placed under Security. Even the NCMS, founded as a classification organization, appears to be changing to become increasingly oriented towards security matters rather than classification matters. It is noteworthy that the marked emphasis by the U.S. Government in recent years on physical-security measures has not been accompanied by any significant increased emphasis on classification matters.
The previous paragraph was written in 1989, and the trend described in that paragraph has continued. The classification function at DOE headquarters is now a part of the security organization as is the classification function at many DOE operations offices and DOE-contractor organizations. That function generally used to be part of a technical or other non-security organization. The NCMS has also continued to become more security-oriented.
With respect to classification as a profession (or lack of recognition thereof), it is interesting to note some comments and a recommendation in the Report of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy. In this 1997 report, that Commission noted the "all-important initial decision of whether to classify at all," and that "this first step of the classification management process . . . tends to be the weakest link in the process of identifying, marking, and then protecting the information." The Commission further stated that "the importance of the initial decision to classify cannot be overstated." However, the Commission then stated that "classification and declassification policy and oversight . . . should be viewed primarily as information management issues which require personnel with subject matter and records management expertise." Although recommending that "The Federal Government . . . [should] create, support, and promote an information systems security career field within the Government," the Commission made no similar recommendation for security classification of information as a profession or career. Res ipsa loquitur.
[*] "When a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace are such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long as men fight and that no Court could regard them as protected by any constitutional right" [Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52 (1919) (J. Holmes)].
[†] Since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks against the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon, the United States considers itself to be in a war against terrorism. One consequence has been a significant shift in opinion, not only of the general public but also of some strong supporters of freedom-of-information matters, towards favoring more control of information that might aid terrorists. This increased control, especially pertaining to weapons of mass destruction, includes (1) establishing broader criteria for identifying information that is classified or "sensitive"; (2) permitting reclassification of declassified information, and (3) restricting further governmental distribution of documents already released to the public.
*However, during the Greek and Roman eras in the Mediterranean, when the infantry was paramount and both sides were approximately equally equipped with respect to weapons, many battles were fought without attempts to maintain secrecy of troop movements or with respect to surprise attacks (B. and F. M. Brodie, From Crossbow to H-Bomb, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind., 1973, p. 17).
†"Secret" weapons have proven decisive in warfare. One example of the decisive impact of a new weapon was at the battle of Crecy in 1346. At this battle, the English used their "secret" weapon, the longbow, to defeat the French decisively. Although the French had a two-to-one superiority in numbers (about 40,000 to 20,000), the French lost about 11,500 men, while the English lost only about 100 men (W. S. Churchill, A History of the English-Speaking Peoples, Vol. 1, Dodd, Mead and Co., New York, 1961, pp. 332-351; B. and F. M. Brodie, From Crossbow to H-Bomb, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind., 1973, pp. 37-40).
‡In World War II, the Germans developed an acoustic torpedo designed to home in on a ship's propellers. However, the Allies obtained advance information about this torpedo so that when it was first used by the Germans, countermeasures were already in place (B. and F. M. Brodie, From Crossbows to H-Bombs, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind., 1973, p. 222).
*In 1921, the United States, Britain, France, Italy, and Japan held a conference to limit their naval armaments. The United States had broken Japan's diplomatic code and thereby knew the lowest naval armaments that Japan would accept. Therefore, U.S. negotiators had merely to wait out Japan's negotiators to reach terms favorable to the United States (J. Bamford, The Puzzle Palace, Houghton, Mifflin Co., Boston, 1982, pp. 9-10).
*The breaking of codes is termed cryptanalysis.
[‡] Even "friendly" nations get upset if they know that one of their codes has been broken. As noted earlier in this chapter, the United States deciphered Japan's diplomatic code in 1921. Herbert O. Yardley, who was principally responsible for breaking this code, wrote a book, The American Black Chamber, published in 1931, which included information on this matter. Yardley's book did not contribute to developing friendly United States-Japanese relations. A consequence of this revelation was enactment of a U.S. statute that made it a crime for anyone who, by virtue of his employment by the United States, obtained access to a diplomatic code or a message in such code and published or furnished to another such code or message, "or any matter which was obtained while in the process of transmission between any foreign government and its diplomatic mission in the United States" (48 Stat. 122, June 10, 1933, codified at 18 U.S.C. Sect. 952.)
 B. and F. M. Brodie, From Crossbow to H-Bomb, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind., 1973, p. 172. Hereafter this book is cited as "Brodie."
 Brodie, p. 233.
 New York Times v. United States, 403 U.S. 713, 728 (1971).
 J. D. Richardson, A Compilation of Messages and Papers of the Presidents. 1789-1897, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., Vol. I, at 194-195 (1896).
 Richard Gid Powers, "Introduction," in Secrecy--The American Experience, by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 1998, p. 32.
 D. Kahn, The Codebreakers, MacMillan, Inc., New York, 1967, p. 71. Hereafter cited as "Kahn."
 Kahn, p. 75.
 Kahn, p. 82.
 Kahn, p. 86.
 Kahn, p. 106.
 Kahn, p. 109.
 See, for example, F. W. Winterbotham, The Ultra Secret, Harper & Row, New York, 1974.
 Halperin v. CIA, 629 F.2d 144, 154-162 (D.C. Cir., 1980).
 U.S. Constitution, Article II, sect. 2.
 See, for example, Totten v. United States, 92 U.S. 105 (1875); United States v. Reynolds, 345 U.S. 1 (1952); Weinberger v. Catholic Action of Hawaii, 454 U.S. 139 (1981).
 F. E. Rourke, Secrecy and Publicity: Dilemmas of Democracy, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1961, pp. 63-64.
 D. B. Woodbridge, "Footnotes," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 12 (2), 120-124 (1977), p.122.
 R. J. Boberg, "Panel--Classification Management Today," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 5 (2), 56-60 (1969), p. 57.
 E. J. Suto, "History of Classification," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 12 (1), 9-17 (1976), p.13.
 James J. Bagley, "NCMS - Now and the Future," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 25, 20-29 (1989), p. 28.
 T. S. Church, "Panel--Science and Technology, and Classification Management," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 2, 39-45 (1966), p. 40.
 W. N. Thompson, "Security Classification Management Coordination Between Industry and DOD," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 4 (2), 121-128 (1969), p. 121.
 W. N. Thompson, "User Agency Security Classification Management and Program Security," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 8, 52-53 (1972), p. 52.
 Department of Defense Handbook for Writing Security Classification Guidance, DoD 5200.1-H, U.S. Department of Defense, Mar. 1986, p. 1-1.
 F. J. Daigle, "Woodbridge Award Acceptance Remarks," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 21, 110-112 (1985), p. 111.
 D. C. Richardson, "Management or Enforcement," J. Natl. Class. Mgmt. Soc. 23, 13-20 (1987).
 Report of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy, S. Doc. 105-2, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Chairman; Larry Combest, Vice Chairman, Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1997. Hereafter cited as the "Moynihan Report."
 Moynihan Report, p. 19.
 Moynihan Report, p. 35.
 Moynihan Report, p. 44.
 Moynihan Report, p. 111.

Between the years 900 and 1100, Chinese painters created visions of landscape that depicted the sublimity of creation. Viewers are meant to identify with the human figures in these paintings. In Summer Mountains, travelers make their way toward a temple retreat. The central mountain sits in commanding majesty, like an emperor among his subjects, the culmination of nature’s hierarchy. The advanced use of texture strokes and ink wash suggests that Summer Mountains is by a master working about 1050, a date corroborated by collectors’ seals belonging to the Song emperor Huizong (r. 1101–25), whose paintings catalogue records three works entitled Summer Scenery by the otherwise unknown artist Qu Ding.

By Allison Lichter
Young children who can sit still and focus are more likely to graduate from college than children who are easily distracted, according to a new study from Oregon State University.
Researchers made use of data that spanned 25 years, tracking a group of 430 preschool-age children through age 21. Parents were asked to rate their children on such behaviors as “playing with a single toy for long periods of time,” or “gives up easily” when a task or games gets hard.
“We were interested in identifying early predictors of later success,” said Megan McClelland, early childhood research core director at OSU’s Hallie E. Ford Center for Healthy Children and Families, and a lead author on the study.
“We know that early academic skills predict later academic stills,” she said. “But the ability to pay attention and focus are foundational skills that help kids persist through difficult tasks when they need to.”
She was quick to add that academic skills are critical, and that “aptitude part is part of the equation.”
Still, she said, “There are a lot of very smart people who have difficulty finishing tasks.”
Of course, a lot transpires in a person’s life between age 4 and age 21. While researchers couldn’t control for all variables, McClelland said, they were able to control for some of the most important predictors of academic success: including parents’ education level, the child’s cognitive ability, and childhood vocabulary.
Teachers and parents can help young children develop the qualities of persistence and self-discipline by adding new rules to some familiar games. For example, McClelland suggested playing “Red Light, Green Light,” but changing the rules so that “red” means go, and “green” means stop.
“Kids ask me all the time, ‘Are you trying to trick me?’ I tell them, ‘No, we want you stop and think about what you’re doing first.’”
Another simple activity to help build the concentration muscle is a dance game in which children are told they have to dance slowly when the music is fast, and dance quickly when the music is slow.
“When kids have to control their bodies, it’s more challenging for them,” McClelland said. “They actually have to stop their movements and do something different. It requires a lot of thinking.”
McClelland is also the mother of a 3-year-old son. She acknowledges it takes time to help kids practice ways to focus and get engaged in things they are interested in.
“He will sit there for 15 or 20 minutes doing a Thomas the Train puzzle.” While putting it together, McClelland will sometimes ask ‘How many pieces have we used?’ to build her son’s aptitude for counting.
But she says, “I’m also helping him focus and persist.”

"Chatter": Language and History in Kierkegaard
Stanford University Press (1993)
|Abstract||'Chatter' cannot always be taken lightly, for its insignificance and insubstantiality challenge the very notions of substance and significance through which rational discourses seek justification. This book shows that in 'chatter' Kierkegaard uncovered a specifically linguistic mode of negativity. The author examines in detail those writings of Kierkegaard in which he undertook complex negotiations with the threat - and also the promise - of 'chatter', which cuts across the distinctions in which the relation of language to reality - and above all, the reality of 'existence' - is stabilized, and it therefore releases historical understanding from its established conventions. Chatter situates as well as takes the measure of the seminal importance of Kierkegaard for many of today's unresolved debates about the relation of language and philosophy to history.|
|Keywords||Language and languages Philosophy History Philosophy|
|Buy the book||$13.00 used (48% off) $227.35 new Amazon page|
|Call number||B4378.L35.F46 1993|
|External links||This entry has no external links. Add one.|
|Through your library||Configure|
Similar books and articles
Jon Stewart (2003). Kierkegaard's Relations to Hegel Reconsidered. Cambridge University Press.
Johann Georg Hamann (2007). Writings on Philosophy and Language. Cambridge University Press.
Angelo Mazzocco (1993). Linguistic Theories in Dante and the Humanists: Studies of Language and Intellectual History in Late Medieval and Early Renaissance Italy. E.J. Brill.
Matthew Lauzon (2010). Signs of Light: French and British Theories of Linguistic Communication, 1648-1789. Cornell University Press.
Michael Losonsky (2006). Linguistic Turns in Modern Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
David Emery Mercer (2001). Kierkegaard's Living-Room: The Relation Between Faith and History in Philosophical Fragments. Mcgill-Queen's University Press.
Michael N. Forster (2011). German Philosophy of Language: From Schlegel to Hegel and Beyond. Oxford University Press.
Antony Aumann (2011). The ‘Death of the Author’ in Hegel and Kierkegaard: On Berthold’s 'The Ethics of Authorship'. Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 32 (2):435-447.
Sorry, there are not enough data points to plot this chart.
Added to index2009-01-28
Recent downloads (6 months)0
How can I increase my downloads?

Using the same pool of data, the researchers identified a significant drop in overall daily calorie consumption as people got older. The median energy intake among men age 81 and older was 1,733 calories a day, compared to 2,668 calories per day ingested by men in the age group 19 to 30. For women, median energy intake showed a 28 percent reduction from the youngest to the oldest age group, from 1,844 calories a day to 1,325 calories daily.
Based on the results, the scientists concluded that “new approaches to increasing the frequency and level of calcium supplement use to enhance calcium density may be necessary to reduce osteoporosis risks among older Americans.”
Jane E. Kerstetter, a professor of allied health sciences at UConn and a co-investigator on the study, says that calcium plays a fundamental role in promoting bone health and forestalling osteoporosis. In light of evidence that energy (food) intake declines with aging, calcium-dense foods and calcium supplements become vital factors in maintaining adequate calcium intake across the lifespan.
In November 2010, the Institute of Medicine issued new guidelines for daily calcium intake. The current guidelines recommend that men and women ages 19 to 50 consume 1,000 mg of calcium a day; however, after age 51 men are recommended to continue to consume 1,000 mg daily, while women are recommended to increase consumption to 1,200 mg daily.
Kerstetter adds that calcium intake from the diet should come first and foremost.
Typically, one serving of dairy (1 cup of milk, 6 ounces of yogurt, or 1.5 ounces of cheese) provides 300 milligrams of calcium. If a person consumes three servings of dairy daily they will ingest 900 milligrams of calcium, which is often supplemented by an additional 300 milligrams from a variety of other non-dairy foods if the person is on a well-rounded diet. A total of 1,200 milligrams of daily calcium is sufficient to meet recommended guidelines for most people, says Kerstetter.
Those who can’t tolerate dairy products should consider calcium-fortified foods, such as orange juice or over-the-counter nutrition supplements containing calcium, which are best absorbed during meals due to increased acid production in the stomach. Or, dietitians also suggest choosing low-fat or fat-free lactose-free milk and drinking smaller amounts of milk at a time as key strategies to obtain dairy nutrients.
However, individuals should consult a medical professional before starting a new calcium supplementation regimen.
The lead author for the study was Kelsey Mangano, a registered dietitian and UConn doctoral student in the Department of Nutritional Sciences in the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. Anne M. Kenny, a geriatrician at the University of Connecticut Health Center who studies osteoporosis, served as a co-investigator. Karl Insogna, a professor of internal medicine in the Department of Internal Medicine at Yale University and an endocrinologist specializing in bone diseases, also participated in the research.

Become a fan of h2g2
We should remember that... of the 6,000 stars [that] the average human eye could see in the entire sky, probably not more than thirty – or one-half of one percent – are less luminous than the Sun; that probably, of the 700-odd stars nearer than ten parsecs, at least 96% are less luminous than the Sun. There is not even ONE real yellow giant – such as Capella, Pollux, or Arcturus – nearer than ten parsecs1 and only about four main sequence A stars.
– Dutch astronomer Willem Jacob Luyten (1899 - 1994)
The closest star to us is, of course, our own Sun. It's unusual because it's a solitary yellow dwarf, while most of the stars nearby are in binary or even multiple systems. What makes our star really special though, is that it provides the energy for the only life in the Universe that we know of.
Less Than Ten Light Years
The nearest star to the Sun is Proxima Centauri (also known as alpha Centauri C), which is a red dwarf, and is 4.2 light years2 distant. It has two stellar companions, the yellow dwarf Rigil Kentaurus (alpha Centauri A) and an orange dwarf, alpha Centauri B. They take up joint second place in our list, at 4.35 light years.
Barnard's Star, a red dwarf, is just under six light years away. Next comes Wolf 359, another red dwarf. Yet another red dwarf, Lalande 21185, was thought to be the fourth-closest star when its co-ordinates were published by Joseph-Jérôme Lefrançais de Lalande (1732 - 1807) in 1801. This was before Barnard's Star and Wolf 359 were discovered. Lalande 21185 cannot be seen by the naked eye because at 7th magnitude it is too dim; however, it counts as sixth-closest to the Sun at 8.3 light years.
The seventh-closest is a star most denizens of Earth would recognise: Sirius (alpha Canis Majoris), with eighth place taken by its companion Sirius B, sometimes referred to as 'the Pup'. Sirius B is classified as a white dwarf, but it is one of the biggest known: in fact, its mass is comparable to that of our own Sun.
Completing the top ten stellar neighbours are BL Ceti, a red dwarf flare star, and its binary partner UV Ceti3, which are 8.7 light years away from our Sun. Flare stars unleash bright flashes of light as well as streams of charged particles. Some of the stars studied have flares of such enormous intensity that they can increase the brightness of the star by up to 10%. The flares are only brief, like a camera flash, but would be detrimental to any nearby planets.
Next in line is Ross 154, one of many discovered in 1925 by American astronomer Frank Elmore Ross (1874 - 1960). Ross 154 is a UV Ceti-type flare star 9.7 light years distant, and is the last of the stars within ten light years of our Solar System.
|Star||Other Name or |
|#1||Proxima Centauri||alpha Centauri C||Red dwarf||Centaurus||4.2|
|#2||Rigil Kentaurus||alpha Centauri A||Yellow dwarf||Centaurus||4.35|
|#2||alpha Centauri B||HD 128621||Orange dwarf||Centaurus||4.35|
|#4||Barnard's Star||Proxima Ophiuchi||Red dwarf||Ophiuchus||5.98|
|#5||Wolf 359||CN Leonis||Red dwarf||Leo||7.7|
|#6||Lalande 21185||HD 95735||Red dwarf||Ursa Major||8.3|
|#7||Sirius||alpha Canis Majoris||Blue-white|
|#7||Sirius B||alpha Canis Majoris B||White dwarf||Canis Major||8.5|
|#9||BL Ceti||Luyten 726-8 A||Red dwarf|
|#9||UV Ceti||Luyten 726-8 B||Red dwarf|
|#11||Ross 154||V1216 Sgr||Red dwarf|
Between Ten and Twelve Light Years
At 10.3 light years is another one on the Ross catalogue: Ross 248, a red dwarf flare star. Due to the wide variety of periods that this star flares (4.2 years, 120 days, and five other catalogued outbursts between 60 and 291 days apart), astronomers suspect that Ross 248 has an undetected companion which is causing the erratic flaring. Next on is Epsilon Eridani, which has a dust disc4 and a suspected extrasolar planet system, the closest detected up to the time of writing, 2012. The two candidate planets are not thought to be hospitable to life (as we know it) because their proposed orbits are so far from the star. If the planets do exist, they are likely to be frigid worlds like our outermost planet Neptune5.
The French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille (1713 - 62) went on a 1751-4 expedition to the Cape of Good Hope, effectively a blank canvas sky for him to map. Using the planet Mars as a point of reference, his observations were the foundations for working out the lunar and solar parallax. Finding himself somewhat of a celebrity upon his return to Paris, de Lacaille hid from public attention in Mazarin College, writing up his findings. Barely taking care of himself, de Lacaille suffered from gout and was prone to over-working to the point of exhaustion. Unfortunately his catalogue, Coelum Australe Stelliferum, which described 14 new constellations and 42 nebulous objects among almost 10,000 southern stars, wasn't published until after he died at the age of just 49 years. One of those stars, Lacaille 9352, ranks as the 14th-closest to our Sun at 10.7 light years distance.
EZ Aquarii is a triple star system situated at 11.3 light years away. EZ Aquarii A, B and C are all red dwarfs, and they may all be flare stars; however, not much is known about the smallest component (B). They are so dim (magnitude +13) that specialist equipment is required to view them. The system was labelled Luyten 789-6 by Dutch astronomer Willem Jacob Luyten, whose interest in astronomy had been sparked by viewing the predicted return of Halley's Comet in 1910, as an 11-year old schoolboy. In 1925 Luyten lost an eye in an accident but this tragedy did not wreck his chosen career. He was already working at the Harvard College Observatory, having been offered a post by the new director Harlow Shapley, whose own profile had been raised due to his participation in the Shapley-Curtis Debate of 1920. Luyten 'observed and measured more stellar images than anyone else', according to his biography at the National Academy of Sciences. He took up teaching at the University of Minnesota in 1931, and when he retired in 1967 he was given the title of Astronomer Emeritus which he held until his death at the ripe old age of 95.
Procyon is a binary system which registers at +0.3 magnitude. The system consists of a yellow-white main sequence subgiant star, Procyon A, and a white dwarf companion, Procyon B, which was detected by Arthur von Auwers in 1862.
|Star||Other Name or |
|#12||Ross 248||HH Andromedae||Red dwarf|
|#13||Epsilon Eridani||Sadira||Orange dwarf||Eridanus||10.5|
|#14||Lacaille 9352||HD 217987||Red dwarf||Piscis Austrinus||10.7|
|#15||Ross 128||FI Virginis||Red dwarf|
|#16||EZ Aquarii A||Luyten 789-6 A||Red dwarf|
|#16||EZ Aquarii B||Luyten 789-6 B||Red dwarf||Aquarius||11.3|
|#16||EZ Aquarii C||Luyten 789-6 C||Red dwarf|
|#19||Procyon A||alpha Canis Minoris||Yellow-white|
|#19||Procyon B||alpha2 Canis Minoris||White dwarf||Canis Minor||11.4|
The binary system 61 Cygni has two orange dwarf components of 6th magnitude at 11.41 light years away. Its distance was the first to be measured of any star. These two stars claim joint 21st place in our list of close stellar neighbours. Another pair of red dwarf stars, Struve 2398 A and B, positioned at just 11.5 light years distant, are the next nearest. They were studied by Russian-German astronomer Prof Friedrich von Struve (1793 - 1864), director of the Dorpat Observatory (now the Tartu Observatory) in Estonia, who listed them in his Catalogus novus stellarum duplicium (Double Star Catalogue) of 1827.
Groombridge 34 are twin variable red dwarfs. Newly-discovered variable stars are given upper case capital letters, so Groombridge 34 A and B are also known as GX Andromedae and GQ Andromedae respectively. The Epsilon Indi system is fascinating because it contains the closest-known brown dwarfs. Brown dwarfs are approximately the same size as Jupiter6, but their mass is at least ten times greater, possibly up to 50×. These bodies are neither star nor planet, but 'failed' stars. Other titles have been proposed, as it's hardly encouraging to keep referring to them as 'failed stars'. Suggestions so far include planetar (which sounds like something from the science fiction genre) and substar (that 'sub' prefix isn't much of an improvement). Since 2004, planets have been discovered orbiting brown dwarfs, (although not, as yet, in the Epsilon Indi system), so their profile has been raised. Hopefully they are in line for a better class in the future.
DX Cancri is a solo red dwarf flare star which expands to five times its usual brightness during flare activity. It is thought by some astronomers that DX Cancri is a member of the Castor Moving Group which was suggested in 1990 by JP Anosova and VV Orlov at the Astronomical Observatory in Leningrad State University, Russia. A moving group is the term for a collection of stars which share the same origin. Although they are not gravitationally bound to each other they are on the same path on their journey through the galaxy, like an unravelled, stretched-out cluster. The Castor Moving Group is named after the luminary of Gemini, and includes the stars Alderamin (alpha Cephei), Fomalhaut, Vega, psi Velorum and Zubenelgenubi (alpha Librae).
Tau Ceti is one of the few nearby stars which are visible to the naked eye, albeit in the dim constellation Cetus, the Whale. Tau Ceti shot to fame in 1960, when Frank Drake launched Project Ozma, aiming to detect non-natural signals from space. Drake chose two stars which were similar to our Sun, Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani, for his project, which evolved to become SETI, the Search for Extra-terrestrial Intelligence. In December 2012, it was announced that five planets had been discovered orbiting Tau Ceti, with one of them possibly residing in the system's habitable zone.
Red dwarf GJ 1061 in the southern constellation Horologium is the last of the stars within 12 light years. GJ 1061 is really small, even on the dwarf star scale: it registers just over ten percent of the Sun's mass. It is so dim (+13 mag) that you'd need a decent-sized telescope to view it, but just in case you ever get the opportunity, its co-ordinates are 03h 36m RA, −44° 30' 46" Dec.
|Star||Other Name or |
|#21||61 Cygni A||V1803 Cyg A||Orange dwarf||Cygnus||11.41|
|#21||61 Cygni B||V1803 Cyg B||Orange dwarf||Cygnus||11.41|
|#23||Struve 2398 A||NSV 11288||Red dwarf||Draco||11.5|
|#23||Struve 2398 B||Gliese 725 B||Red dwarf|
|#25||Groombridge 34 A||GX Andromedae||Red dwarf||Andromeda||11.6|
|#25||Groombridge 34 B||GQ Andromedae||Red dwarf||Andromeda||11.6|
|#27||Epsilon Indi||HD 209100||Orange dwarf +|
two Brown dwarfs
|#28||DX Cancri||LHS 248||Red dwarf|
|#29||Tau Ceti||HD 10700||Yellow dwarf||Cetus||11.88|
|#30||GJ 1061||LHS 1565||Red dwarf||Horologium||11.99|
Nearby Stars in Fantasy and Science Fiction
Stars which are close to our own Solar System have inspired imaginative writers going back hundreds of years. Here is just a sample:
Proxima Centauri: the 1990s TV series Babylon 5 featured the planet Proxima III, which hosts an Earth Alliance colony.
Alpha Centauri A: prolific author Isaac Asimov wrote about the water world Alpha of the Alpha Centauri A system in the Foundation and Earth book of his Foundation series.
Alpha Centauri B: Witburg is a rocky planet orbiting Alpha Centauri B in the 2002 online role-playing game Earth & Beyond.
Barnard's Star: Timemaster, a 1992 novel by Robert L Forward, bases its plot in the Barnard's Star system.
Wolf 359: Star Trek fans will recognise Wolf 359 as the system where Starfleet's armada was practically wiped out by the hive-minded Borg.
Lalande 21185: in the 1951 novel Rogue Queen penned by L Sprague de Camp, the planet Ormazd which orbits Lalande 21185 is investigated by Earth's space authority.
Sirius: Micromégas is one of the earliest known science fiction stories, it was written in 1752 by François-Marie Arouet (better known by his pen name Voltaire). The Micromégas of the story was an extremely tall7 alien visitor to Earth who hailed from one of the planets in the Sirius system.
Sirius B: in Seed of Light, a 1959 novel by Edmund Cooper, the Sirius A star is barren but Sirius B has a hospitable planet, Sirius B III, out of its five attendant worlds. The plot revolves around the people sent there to save the human race after the Earth has been devastated.
BL Ceti: Larry Niven wrote A Gift From Earth in 1968, a part of his Known Space collection of multiple works. The plot involves the twin red dwarf stars BL Ceti and UV Ceti, which are important signposts for the eventual destination.
UV Ceti: a space station called Eldorado, part of the 'Great Circle' route, is based at UV Ceti in the 1981 story Downbelow Station by CJ Cherryh.
Ross 154: the planet Tei Tenga in the Ross 154 system is where the United Aerospace Armed Forces (UAFF) had a couple of military research bases in the video game Doom.
Ross 248: Diadem is an icy world in orbit around Ross 248 in Alastair Reynolds's story Glacial. Following a failed attempt at human colonisation, an investigation a century later reveals that the planet is sentient and it uses cold-blooded annelids, burrowing through its ice-mantle, to 'think'.
Epsilon Eridani: Les Grognards d'Éridan (The Napoleons Of Eridanus), written by French author Claude Avice in 1970, features a detachment of soldiers from the Napoleonic era who are abducted by aliens and transported to the Epsilon Eridani system to fight their battles for them. Also, Epsilon Eridani was the parent star of the planet Reach in the extremely successful Xbox game Halo: Reach.
Lacaille 9352: in the fictional universe of the Hyperion Cantos dreamed up by Dan Simmons, the inhospitable planet Sibiatu's Bitterness orbits the star Lacaille 9352.
Ross 128: Across the Sea of Suns, written in 1984 by Gregory Benford, features a race of alien aquatic creatures which live under the ice-mantle of the frozen world Pocks, a member of the Ross 128 system.
EZ Aquarii A, B and C: the character Sheldon in The Big Bang Theory regularly lists 'the closest stars to me' when ascending and descending stairs. Once, in disguise, he spoke the words 'EZ Aquarii B, EZ Aquarii C,' while passing Amy on the stairs, and was dismayed that she recognised him.
Procyon A/B: His Master's Voice was written by Polish author Stanislaw Lem in 1968. This book focuses on the attempts by highly intelligent Earthlings to understand a message from the Procyon system.
61 Cygni: The region surrounding 61 Cygni is known as the 'Darkling Zone' in the popular TV series Blake's 7.
Groombridge 34: The Groombridge 34 system features in the Halo series of Xbox games.
Epsilon Indi: New New York on Epsilon Indi III has a portal to the Earth, via a created wormhole, in the 1996 Starplex book by Robert J Sawyer.
Tau Ceti: Time for the Stars, written in 1956 by Robert A Heinlein, explores the telepathic bond between twins over the vastness of space. Tau Ceti III, in the Star Trek universe, is a hospitable M-class planet. One of the bountiful fruits which grows there is the Kaferian apple. While they can be eaten raw, they are much more tasty stewed with Talaxian spices and served in a pie, as recommended in the vegetarian options at Quark's Bar on the space station Deep Space Nine.

Some people love them and some people hate them, but whatever your tastes you should probably know a little about the vignette effect in photography. A vignette photo has edges that fade to either white or black, typically gradually, although it can be an effect that is used dramatically as well. This effect can be created in camera with certain lenses that are known to produce it, sometimes undesirably. Vignettes can also be created in the darkroom during the printing process. However, in this day and age the most common way to create a vignette is during the post-processing phase in a photo editing program such as Photoshop.
Generally in spite of our very wide field of view, our eyes don’t see with perfect focus at all points in a scene. We see the center of a scene with ideal light sensitivity and perfect focus and then focus and brightness will fall off increasingly toward the periphery. Therefore, a vignette more or less mimics the way our eyes actually see a scene. Although a photograph with precise focus and exposure throughout may be desirable in some scenarios, it can also seem very boring, artificial and even too contrived in others.
Vignetting can act as a way to frame the intended subject in a photo in either a subtle or dramatic way and really make it stand out to great creative effect. By causing the periphery to gradually fade away, not only will the photo be more like actual vision, it can immediately draw the eye to the main subject and away from unimportant elements in the background or periphery. It can also be used as a finishing touch on a photo once the exposure and composition are perfect.
Typically a vignette, as previously mentioned, is used in a gradual or subtle way since our eyes don’t actually make the borders of our vision very dark and fuzzy. When used in this way, a vignette will generally not be consciously detectable by the untrained eye. However, there are times when a more dramatic vignette is a useful effect, such as in a black and white landscape to add a touch of drama or in an intense portrait to create a darker mood.
Older cheaper cameras such as Holgas often had poor optics, so many old photos have vignetting that was created in-camera unintentionally. This vintage look, which was previously not desirable, is now often intentionally recreated during post-processing with software like Photoshop.
How to Create a Vignette in Photoshop
There are a few ways to create a vignette in Photoshop but there are a few bits of information that are important to know first. A vignette should always be the very last step in the editing process. Deciding to crop the image post-vignette, for example, can cause the end result to be not desirable since a vignette is used to highlight the subject. If you are not completely sure that you are absolutely done editing your photo in other ways, you can choose to duplicate the original image layer so that you can go back to it if needed.
The easiest way to create a vignette in Photoshop is to first create a new layer and select the elliptical marquee tool. Create a circle or oval shape in the desired area on your photo.
Next you will need to choose to feather your selection anywhere from 50 to 80 pixels by going to Select>Modify>Feather.
You can also choose the square marquee or even use the lasso tool to create a custom and creative shape. At this point you will go to Select>Inverse and fill the center of the selection with black or white depending on the look you ultimately want to achieve. If it is too dark at this point then you can easily lighten it by lowering the layer opacity.
Another easy and quick way to add vignetting to your photos in Photoshop involves the use of the Lens Correction filter.
First you need to open your photo and as previously mentioned, be sure to finish all photo edits prior to adding the vignetting. Open the Lens Correction filter via the following path Filters>Distort>Lens Correction. You will see various options within the Lens Correction menu but we are going to focus on the Vignette sliders. The Amount slider will make the vignette darker or lighter and the Midpoint slider will adjust the mid-point of the vignette.
The first method of vignetting in Photoshop is definitely preferable if you want to place the vignetting in a custom place on the photo for creative effect, meaning not oval and dead center. However, the second method is great for a very precision vignette much like what would be created naturally with a lens.
A Quick Note About Opinions on Vignettes
One thing to be aware of is that there are photographers that “object” to the use of vignetting. Many see it as a form of cheating and as a way to make a bad photograph better. They argue that the composition itself should be what creates all of the emphasis on the subject and not a post-processing technique. However, the viewer of the photo, unless they possess a critical and trained eye, really doesn’t care about why they like a photo. They just do. Ultimately photography is indeed an art form and artists are as varied art itself. The most important thing is to produce the images that you want to produce.
Rachael Towne is a photographer, digital artist and creator of photoluminary.com

In December 1992, Toutatis made a close approach to Earth. At the time, it was an average of about 4 million kilometers (2.5 million miles) from Earth. Images of Toutatis were acquired using radar carried out at the Goldstone Deep Space Communications Complex in California's Mojave desert. For most of the work, a 400,000-watt coded radio transmission was beamed at Toutatis from the Goldstone main 70-meter (230-foot) antenna. The echoes, which took as little as 24 seconds to travel to Toutatis and back, were received by the new 34-meter (112-foot) antenna and relayed back to the 70-meter (230-foot) station, where they were decoded and processed into images.
The images of Toutatis reveal two irregularly shaped, cratered objects about 4 and 2.5 kilometers (2.5 and 1.6 miles) in average diameter which are probably in contact with each other. These "contact binaries" may be fairly common since another one, 4769 Castalia, was observed in 1989 when it passed near the Earth. Numerous surface features on Toutatis, including a pair of half-mile-wide craters, side by side, and a series of three prominent ridges -- a type of asteroid mountain range -- are presumed to result from a complex history of impacts.
Toutatis is one of the strangest objects in the solar system, with a highly irregular shape and an extraordinarily complex "tumbling" rotation. Both its shape and rotation are thought to be the outcome of a history of violent collisions. "The vast majority of asteroids, and all the planets, spin about a single axis, like a football thrown in a perfect spiral, but Toutatis tumbles like a flubbed pass," said Dr. Scott Hudson of Washington State University. One consequence of this strange rotation is that Toutatis does not have a fixed north pole like the Earth. Instead, its north pole wanders along a curve on the asteroid about every 5.4 days. "The stars viewed from Toutatis wouldn't repeatedly follow circular paths, but would crisscross the sky, never following the same path twice," Hudson said.
"The motion of the Sun during a Toutatis year, which is about four Earth years, would be even more complex," he continued. "In fact, Toutatis doesn't have anything you could call a 'day.' Its rotation is the result of two different types of motion with periods of 5.4 and 7.3 Earth days, that combine in such a way that Toutatis's orientation with respect to the solar system never repeats."
The rotations of hundreds of asteroids have been studied with optical telescopes. The vast majority of them appear to be in simple rotation with a fixed pole and periods typically between one hour and one day, the scientists said, even though the violent collisions these objects are thought to have experienced would mean that every one of them, at some time in the past, should have been tumbling like Toutatis.
Internal friction has caused asteroids to change into simple rotational patterns in relatively brief amounts of time. However, Toutatis rotates so slowly that this "dampening" process would take much longer than the age of the solar system. This means that the rotation of Toutatis is a remarkable, well-preserved relic of the collision-related evolution of an asteroid.
On September 29, 2004, Toutatis will pass by Earth at a range of four times the distance between the Earth and the Moon, the closest approach of any known asteroid or comet between now and 2060. One consequence of the asteroid's frequent close approaches to Earth is that its trajectory more than several centuries from now cannot be predicted accurately. In fact, of all the Earth-crossing asteroids, the orbit of Toutatis is thought to be one of the most chaotic.
High Resolution Goldstone Images
These are 8 of the "high resolution" Goldstone images that are being used to produce a higher-resolution 3D model of Toutatis. (From Ostro et al., Science 270:80-83, 1995--© Copyright 1995 by the AAAS)
High Resolution Image
This is a close up of one of the high-resolution images of Toutatis. (From Ostro et al., Science 270:80-83, 1995--© Copyright 1995 by the AAAS)
Topographic Map of Toutatis
This is a topographic map of Toutatis. It is based upon the shape model of Phil Stooke which he produced using rendered images of the shape model by R.S. Hudson and S.J. Ostro and modified by him to fit the radar images. As with all maps, it is the cartographer's interpretation; not all features are necessarily certain given the limited data available. This interpretation stretches the data as far as possible. (Courtesy A. Tayfun Oner)
Shaded Relief Map of Asteroid 4179 Toutatis
This is a shaded relief map of asteroid 4179 Toutatis. As with all maps, it is the cartographer's interpretation and not all features are necessarily certain given the limited data available. This interpretation stretches the data as far as is feasible. (Courtesy Phil Stooke, NSSDC, and NASA)
4 Views of Toutatis
This image shows four frames of asteroid Toutatis that were obtained on December 8-10 and 13, 1992. On each day, the asteroid was in a different orientation with respect to Earth. One large crater can be seen in the December 9 image (upper right) that measures about 700 meters (2,300 feet) in diameter. (Courtesy JPL/NASA)
Computer Model of Toutatis
These images show a computer model of the Earth-orbit-crossing asteroid Toutatis. These views of the asteroid show shallow craters, linear ridges, and a deep topographic "neck" whose geologic origin is not known. It may have been sculpted by impacts into a single, coherent body, or Toutatis might actually consist of two separate objects that came together in a gentle collision. (Courtesy Scott Hudson, Washington State University)
Spin State of Toutatis
This image shows the shape and non-principal-axis spin state of asteroid 4179 Toutatis rendered at a particular instant. The red, green, and blue axes are the principal axes of inertia; the magenta axis is the angular momentum vector; the yellow axis is the spin vector. If a flashlamp was attached to the short axis of inertia (the red axis) and flashed it every 15 minutes for a month, it would trace out the intricate path indicated by the small spheres stacked end-to-end. If this process was continued forever the path would never repeat. Toutatis's spin state differs radically from those of the vast majority of solar system bodies that have been studied. (© Copyright 1995 by the AAAS)
Spin State of Toutatis on Nine Successive Days
This image shows the non-principal-axis spin state of asteroid 4179 Toutatis at one-day intervals (from left to right, top to bottom). The red, green, and blue axes are the principal axes of inertia; the magenta axis is the angular momentum vector; the yellow axis is the spin vector. Toutatis does not spin about a single axis. Instead, its spin vector traces a curve around the asteroid's surface once every 5.41 days. During this time the object rotates once about its long axis, and every 7.35 days, on average, the long axis precesses about the angular momentum vector. The combination of these two motions with different periods give Toutatis its bizarre "tumbling" rotation. (Courtesy Scott Hudson, Washington State University)

|Skip Navigation Links|
|Exit Print View|
|Creating and Administering Oracle Solaris 11 Boot Environments Oracle Solaris 11 Information Library|
A boot environment is a bootable instance of the Oracle Solaris operating system image plus any other application software packages installed into that image. System administrators can maintain multiple boot environments on their systems, and each boot environment can have different software versions installed.
Upon the initial installation of the Oracle Solaris release onto a system, a boot environment is created. You can use the beadm(1M) utility to create and administer additional boot environments on your system.
Note - In addition, the Package Manager GUI provides some options for managing boot environments.
Note the following distinctions relevant to boot environment administration:
A boot environment is a bootable Oracle Solaris environment consisting of a root dataset and, optionally, other datasets mounted underneath it. Exactly one boot environment can be active at a time.
A dataset is a generic name for ZFS entities such as clones, file systems, or snapshots. In the context of boot environment administration, the dataset more specifically refers to the file system specifications for a particular boot environment or snapshot.
A snapshot is a read-only image of a dataset or boot environment at a given point in time. A snapshot is not bootable.
A clone of a boot environment is created by copying another boot environment. A clone is bootable.
Shared datasets are user-defined directories, such as /export, that contain the same mount point in both the active and inactive boot environments. Shared datasets are located outside the root dataset area of each boot environment.
Note - A clone of the boot environment includes everything hierarchically under the main root dataset of the original boot environment. Shared datasets are not under the root dataset and are not cloned. Instead, the boot environment accesses the original, shared dataset.
A boot environment's critical datasets are included within the root dataset area for that environment.

||This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.
||This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information. (July 2012)
||This article needs additional citations for verification. (July 2012)
||An editor has expressed a concern that this article lends undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, controversies or matters relative to the article subject as a whole. (July 2012)
Culinary arts is the art of preparing and cooking foods. The word "culinary" is defined as something related to, or connected with, cooking. A culinarian is a person working in the culinary arts. A culinarian working in restaurants is commonly known as a cook or a chef. Culinary artists are responsible for skilfully preparing meals that are as pleasing to the palate as to the eye. They are required to have a knowledge of the science of food and an understanding of diet and nutrition. They work primarily in restaurants, delicatessens, hospitals and other institutions. Kitchen conditions vary depending on the type of business, restaurant, nursing home, etc. The Table arts or the art of having food can also be called as "Culinary arts".
Careers in culinary arts 
Related careers 
Below is a list of the wide variety of culinary arts occupations.
- Consulting and Design Specialists – Work with restaurant owners in developing menus, the layout and design of dining rooms, and service protocols.
- Dining Room Service – Manage a restaurant, cafeterias, clubs, etc. Diplomas and degree programs are offered in restaurant management by colleges around the world.
- Food and Beverage Controller – Purchase and source ingredients in large hotels as well as manage the stores and stock control.
- Entrepreneurship – Deepen and invest in businesses, such as bakeries, restaurants, or specialty foods (such as chocolates, cheese, etc.).
- Food and Beverage Managers – Manage all food and beverage outlets in hotels and other large establishments.
- Food Stylists and Photographers – Work with magazines, books, catalogs and other media to make food visually appealing.
- Food Writers and Food Critics – Communicate with the public on food trends, chefs and restaurants though newspapers, magazines, blogs, and books. Notables in this field include Julia Child, Craig Claiborne and James Beard.
- Research and Development Kitchens – Develop new products for commercial manufacturers and may also work in test kitchens for publications, restaurant chains, grocery chains, or others.
- Sales – Introduce chefs and business owners to new products and equipment relevant to food production and service.
- Instructors – Teach aspects of culinary arts in high school, vocational schools, colleges, recreational programs, and for specialty businesses (for example, the professional and recreational courses in baking at King Arthur Flour).
Occupational outlook 
The occupation outlook for chefs, restaurant managers, dietitians, and nutritionists is fairly good, with "as fast as the average" growth. Increasingly a college education with formal qualifications is required for success in this field. The culinary industry continues to be male-dominated, with the latest statistics showing only 19% of all 'chefs and head cooks' being female.
Notable culinary colleges around the world 
- JaganNath Institute of Management Sciences, Rohini, Delhi, India
- College of Tourism & Hotel Management, Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan
- Culinary Academy of India, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India
- Culinary Academy of India, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India
- ITM School of Culinary Arts, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
- Welcomgroup Graduate School of Hotel Administration, Manipal, Karnataka, India
- Institute of Technical Education (College West) – School of Hospitality, Singapore
- ITM (Institute of Technology and Management) – Institute of Hotel Management, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
- Apicius International School of Hospitality, Florence, Italy
- Le Cordon Bleu, Paris, France
- École des trois gourmandes, Paris, France
- HRC Culinary Academy, Bulgaria
- Institut Paul Bocuse, Ecully, France
- Mutfak Sanatlari Akademisi, Istanbul, Turkey
- School of Culinary Arts and Food Technology, DIT, Dublin, Ireland
- Scuola di Arte Culinaria Cordon Bleu, Florence, Italy
- Westminster Kingsway College (London)
- University of West London (London)
- School of Restaurant and Culinary Arts, Umeå University (Sweden)
- Camosun College (Victoria, BC)
- Canadore College (North Bay, ON)
- The Culinary Institute of Canada (Charlottetown, PE)
- Georgian College (Owen Sound, ON)
- George Brown College (Toronto, ON)
- Humber College (Toronto, ON)
- Institut de tourisme et d'hôtellerie du Québec (Montreal, QC)
- Niagara Culinary Institute (Niagara College, Niagara-on-the-Lake, ON)
- Northwest Culinary Academy of Vancouver (Vancouver, BC)
- Nova Scotia Community College (Nova Scotia)
- Pacific Institute of Culinary Arts (Vancouver, BC)
- Vancouver Community College (Vancouver, BC)
- Culinary Institute of Vancouver Island (Nanaimo, BC)
- Sault College (Sault Ste. Marie, ON)
- Baltimore International College, Baltimore, Maryland
- California Culinary Academy, San Francisco, California
- California School of Culinary Arts, Pasadena, California
- California State, Pomona, California
- California State University Hospitality Management Education Initiative
- Chattahoochee Technical College in Marietta, Georgia
- Cooking and Hospitality Institute of Chicago
- Coosa Valley Technical College, Rome, Georgia
- Culinard, the Culinary Institute of Virginia College
- Cypress Community College Hotel, Restaurant Management, & Culinary Arts Program in Anaheim
- Classic Cooking Academy, Scottsdale, Arizona
- Center for Kosher Culinary Arts, Brooklyn, New York
- Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York
- Culinary Institute of America at Greystone in St. Helena, California
- The Culinary Institute of Charleston, South Carolina
- L'Ecole Culinaire in Saint Louis, Missouri and Memphis, Tennessee
- Glendale Community College (California)
- International Culinary Centers in NY and CA which include:
- Institute for the Culinary Arts at Metropolitan Community College, Omaha, Nebraska
- Johnson & Wales University, College of Culinary Arts
- Kendall College in Chicago, Illinois
- Lincoln College of Technology
- Manchester Community College in Connecticut
- New England Culinary Institute in Vermont
- Orlando Culinary Academy
- Pennsylvania Culinary Institute
- The Restaurant School at Walnut Hill College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
- Scottsdale Culinary Institute
- Secchia Institute for Culinary Education: Grand Rapids Community College, Grand Rapids, MI
- The Southeast Culinary and Hospitality College in Bristol, Virginia
- Sullivan University Louisville, Kentucky
- Los Angeles Trade–Technical College
- Texas Culinary Academy
- Central New Mexico Community College, Albuquerque, NM
- AUT University (Auckland University of Technology)
- MIT (Manukau Institute of Technology)
- Wintec, Waikato Institute of Technology
See also 
- McBride, Kate, ed. The Professional Chef/ the Culinary Institute of America, 8th ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, INC, 2006.
Further reading 
- Beal, Eileen. Choosing a career in the restaurant industry. New York: Rosen Pub. Group, 1997.
- Institute for Research. Careers and jobs in the restaurant business: jobs, management, ownership. Chicago: The Institute, 1977.
External links

Consider this article on why white rice would actually be better for you than brown. One of the USRDA "My Plate" and food pyramid biggest fallacies is the over-reliance on grain. However, if you are going to have grain, have a grain that isn't going to hurt you as bad.
As far as eating for health, look at your macro-nutrients first.
- Protein: Unless you have renal problems, protein should be one of the higher proportions of food in your diet. Minimum is 1g per kg of lean weight if you do no exercise. If you do exercise, you will be better served by 1g per pound of lean weight or more. NOTE: 4 Calories per gram of protein.
- Fat: There are several fat soluble vitamins you need--not the least of which is Vitamin D. If you stay with monounsaturated and saturated fats you will do well. You just want to make sure you balance of Omega-3 to Omega-6 fats are favorable. NOTE: 9 Calories per gram of fat.
- Carbohydrates: Way to over-emphasized in modern diets, but still very necessary. These usually contain the water-soluble vitamins we need. NOTE: 4 Calories per gram of carbohydrates.
A diet that consists of an even split 33% of Calories from each macronutrient is actually a pretty well balanced diet. Another good split is 30/30/40 (protein/fat/carbs). As far as carbohydrates go, the more you de-emphasize grains and emphasize green vegetables the better your diet will be.
Meat is not bad. Fish is probably one of the best choices, usually anti-inflammatory (which reduces blood cholesterol), but prefer a filet over fish balls. Fruits are also good in moderation. Eggs are also good. To put things in perspective, most sources of meat include about 20g of protein per 4oz (closed fist portion) of meat.
As far as meat selection goes, if you favor grass-fed (or natural diet) sources of meat, the fats will have a more favorable balance of Omega-3 to Omega-6 fats. This will improve your health overall.
The biggest thing I see in your diet, is it seems to emphasize carb sources over protein sources, and possibly not enough fat.
As to your exercise, you will need to do something more than just upper body if your goal is to lose fat and gain muscle. You want to stimulate your whole body. You can do that with body-weight exercises. Burpees, squat-stands, etc. engage your lower half, and can help improve on the work you are doing with the upper half.

With the arrival of cold weather, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration is reminding employers to take necessary precautions to protect workers from the serious, and sometimes fatal, effects of carbon monoxide exposure.
Recently, a worker in a New England warehouse was found unconscious and seizing, suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning. Several other workers at the site also became sick. All of the windows and doors were closed to conserve heat, there was no exhaust ventilation in the facility, and very high levels of carbon monoxide were measured at the site.
Every year, workers die from carbon monoxide poisoning, usually while using fuel-burning equipment and tools in buildings or semi-enclosed spaces without adequate ventilation. This can be especially true during the winter months when employees use this type of equipment in indoor spaces that have been sealed tightly to block out cold temperatures and wind. Symptoms of carbon monoxide exposure can include everything from headaches, dizziness and drowsiness to nausea, vomiting or tightness across the chest. Severe carbon monoxide poisoning can cause neurological damage, coma and death.
Sources of carbon monoxide can include anything that uses combustion to operate, such as gas generators, power tools, compressors, pumps, welding equipment, space heaters and furnaces.
To reduce the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning in the workplace, employers should install an effective ventilation system, avoid the use of fuel-burning equipment in enclosed or partially-enclosed spaces, use carbon monoxide detectors in areas where the hazard is a concern and take other precautions outlined in OSHA's Carbon Monoxide Fact Sheet. For additional information on carbon monoxide poisoning and preventing exposure in the workplace, see OSHA's Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Quick Cards (in English and Spanish).
Under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, employers are responsible for providing safe and healthful workplaces for their employees. OSHA's role is to ensure these conditions for America's working men and women by setting and enforcing standards, and providing training, education and assistance. For more information, visit www.osha.gov.

Sitting around a table at Meyers Center BOCES in Saratoga, students, teaching assistants, and teachers were busy crocheting. They weren’t making afghans or shawls– but rather, they were turning plastic into possibility. Little did they know they were also making history.
Profiles of 17 human rights defenders from around the globe, with links to accompanying lesson plans.
Browse the curriculum. Download the complete 158-page guide or individual lesson plans.
Speak Truth to Power: Voices from Beyond the Dark brings the voices of human rights defenders into your classroom.
Find out how you can support your students in their efforts to defend human rights.
The Speak Truth to Power project will enter the video documentary world with a contest challenging middle and high school students in New York to create a film based on the experience of courageous human rights defenders around the world.
It is with great sadness that the family of Professor Wangari Maathai announces her passing away on 25th September, 2011, at the Nairobi Hospital, after a prolonged and bravely borne struggle with cancer.
New to the STTP site this month is a lesson plan based on the work of Congressman John Lewis, who has dedicated his life to protecting human rights, securing civil liberties, and building what he described as “The Beloved Community” in America.

How many times did you hear that today? Probably a lot. But why are adults so hung up on hand washing? Why are they so in love with lather?
Washing your hands is the best way to stop germs from spreading. Think about all of the things that you touched today — from the telephone to the toilet. Maybe you blew your nose in a tissue and then went outside to dig around the dirt.
Whatever you did today, you came into contact with germs. It's easy for a germ on your hand to end up in your mouth. Think about how many foods you eat with your hands.
You can't wear rubber gloves all day long, but you can wash your hands so those germs don't get a chance to make you or someone else sick. When germs go down the drain, they can't make anyone sick.
So when are the best times to wash your hands?
when your hands are dirty
before eating or touching food (like if you're helping cook or bake, for example)
before and after visiting a sick relative or friend
Now you have the when and the why of hand washing. But did you know that a lot of people don't know how to get their paws perfectly clean? The next time you're told to step up to the sink and scrub up, remember these handy hints:
Use warm water (not cold or hot) when you wash your hands.
Use whatever soap you like. Some soaps come in cool shapes and colors or smell nice, but whatever kind gets you scrubbing is the kind you should use. Antibacterial soaps are OK to use, but regular soap works fine.
Work up some lather on both sides of your hands, your wrists, and between your fingers. Don't forget to wash around your nails. This is one place germs like to hide. Wash for about 10 to 15 seconds — about how long it takes to sing "Happy Birthday." (Sing it quickly two times or just once if you go nice and slow.)

Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and the Political History of the United States
GEORGIA, one of the thirteen original United States. Its territory was originally included in the charter of 1662-3 to the lords proprietors of the Carolinas, but was set apart by a royal charter of June 9, 1732, to a company organized by James Oglethorpe to provide homes in America for indigent persons. The boundaries of the new colony were laid down in the charger as follows: "All those lands, countrys and territories situate, lying and being in that part of South Carolina, in America, which lies from the most northern part of a stream or river there, commonly called the Savannah, all along the sea coast, to the southward, unto the most southern stream of a certain other great water or river called the Alatamaha, and westerly from the heads of the said rivers respectively in direct lines to the south seas." this boundary was more precisely defined by the state constitution of 1798 as beginning at the mouth of the Savannah, running up that river and the Tugalo to the headwaters of the latter, thence straight west to the Mississippi, down that river to parallel 31° north latitude, thence east on that parallel to the Appalachicola or Chattahoochee, along that river to the Flint, thence straight to the head of the St. Mary's river, along that river to the Atlantic, and thence along the coast to the place of beginning. June 20, 1752, the charter was surrendered, and the colony be came a royal province.
—The first state constitution was adopted by a state convention, Feb. 5, 1777. It changed the name of parish to that of county, gave the choice of the governor to the legislature, fixed the governor's term at one year, and forbade the election of any person as governor for more than one year in three. A new constitution was formed by a state convention which met at Augusta, Nov. 4, 1788, and was ratified by another convention at the same place, May 6, 1789. Among other changes, it prolonged the governor's term to two years, and directed the senate to elect the governor from three names to be selected by the house. By an amendment adopted by a new state convention at Louisville, May 16, 1795, Louisville was made the permanent seat of government. Another constitution was adopted in state convention at Louisville, May 30, 1798. It abolished the African slave trade, but forbade the legislature to emancipate slaves without the consent of their owners, or to prevent immigrants from other states from bringing their slaves with them. Various amendments to this constitution were made up to and including the secession convention of 1861, the only one necessary to specify here being that of Nov. 17, 1824, which transferred the election of governor to the people. The changes produced by the rebellion will be given hereafter.
—The territory originally claimed by Georgia, extending from the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi, was diminished in 1798 by the formation of Mississippi territory, from which the states of Mississippi and Alabama were afterward formed. (See
—In presidential elections the electoral votes of Georgia have always been cast for democratic candidates, except in 1840 and 1848, when they were cast for Harrison and Taylor respectively, the whig candidates. In 1789 and 1792 the Georgia electors voted for Washington for the presidency and for various democrats for the vice-presidency. (See
—The state elections until 1830 were undisputedly democratic, and all political struggles were entirely personal between different members of the same party. From 1796 until 1810 the claim of land companies to the Mississippi lands claimed by Georgia was the controlling issue in state politics, as was the case from 1825 until 1835 with the removal of the Creek and Cherokee Indians from the state. (See
—After 1830 the state elections resulted almost as steadily in democratic success, but with much greater difficulty. Although but one governor, Crawford, was an avowed whig, the whig party in the state disputed every election vigorously, aided in electing at least one governor, Gilmer, in opposition to the national or regular democratic candidate, and frequently controlled the legislature, generally in years not affected by a presidential election. As a general rule the whig vote in the state may be reckoned at from 47 to 49 per cent. of the total, occasionally rising to a majority.
—The formation of the so-called American party in the state reduced the opposition vote to about 40 per cent., and this proportion represents the opposition in 1860-61 both to the election of Breckinridge and to secession. The opposition to the latter measure, as elsewhere-mentioned, was to the advisability, not to the principle, of secession, and ceased when the majority and pronounced the decision. Indeed, the leader of the so-called union party of the state, A. H. Stephens, was almost immediately elected vice-president of the new southern confederacy. (See
—In November, 1860, an act of the legislature provided for a special election for delegates to a state convention, which met at Milledgeville, Jan. 16, 1861. Jan. 16, by a vote of 208 to 89, an ordinance of secession was passed. It repealed the ordinance ratifying the constitution, and the acts ratifying the amendments to the constitution, dissolved the union between Georgia and the other states, and declared "that the state of Georgia is in the full possession and exercise of all those rights of sovereignty which belong and appertain to a free and independent state." The minority, however, signed the ordinance, as a pledge that they would sustain their state, with the exception of six; and these yielded so far as to place on the minutes a pledge of "their lives, fortunes and honor" to the defense of the state. Ten delegates were chosen by the convention to represent the state at the organization of the provisional government in Montgomery, and Georgia thus became one of the confederate states. The progress of the war developed a considerable opposition in Georgia to the confederate government. In the leaders it took the form of a sublimated state sovereignty, in opposition to the despotic acts of the executive; but in the mass of voters there seems to have been a strong undercurrent in favor of reconstruction in its first form, that is, re-entrance to the Union on terms. April 30, 1865, the Sherman-Johnson agreement ended the rebellion in Georgia. (See
—June 17, 1865, James Johnson was appointed provisional governor of the state. Under his directions a convention met at Milledgeville, Oct. 25, repealed the ordinance of secession, voided the war debt, and adopted a new state constitution, Nov. 7, which was ratified by popular vote. It recognized the abolition of slavery by the federal government as a war measure, but reserved the right of its citizens to appeal to "the justice and magnanimity of that government" for compensation for slaves; it made the governor ineligible for re-election; it confined the right of suffrage to free white male citizens; and it enjoined upon the legislature the duty of providing by law for "the government of free persons of color." State officers were elected Nov. 15, 1865, the legislature met in December, and the state remained under the new form of government until March, 1867. (See
—The election at which the constitution had been ratified had resulted in the choice of republican state officers, a republican senate, and a democratic house of representatives. In July the new state officers entered on their duties and the legislature ratified the congressional changes in the constitution, but during this and the next month the legislature proceeded to declare negroes ineligible to membership in it, and to admit to membership several persons who, it was alleged, were disqualified to hold office by the 14th amendment. During the year the state supreme court decided in favor of the eligibility of negroes to office, but the action of the legislature provoked an unfavorable feeling to Georgia in congress, and was construed as an effort to avoid the terms of reconstruction. In December, therefore, the Georgia senators were not admitted, and did not obtain their seats until January and February, 1871; the representatives had been admitted July 25, 1868. The Georgia electors, in obedience to a state law passed under the confederacy and not repealed in 1880, voted Dec. 9, 1868, the second Wednesday of December, instead of the first, as required by the federal statute. On this nominal ground a vigorous effort was made in February, 1869, to reject the vote of Georgia, but it was counted "in the alternative." (See
—Nothing, however, could save Georgia from re-reconstruction. The act of Dec. 23, 1869, authorized the governor to reconvene the legislature, with only such members as the reconstruction acts allowed, prohibited the exclusion of qualified members, authorized the use of the army and navy to support the governor, and imposed upon the legislature the ratification of the proposed 15th amendment as a condition precedent to the admission of senators and representatives from Georgia. The seats of the representatives also were thus vacated until January and February, 1871. The organization of the legislature in January and February, 1870, was only effected with great difficulty by the governor, and his irregular course of action was condemned by the senate investigating committee; but the organization was finally accomplished, the conditions fulfilled by the legislature, and the state admitted by act of July 15, 1870. The first election under the new regime took place Dec. 20—22, 1870, and resulted in the choice of democratic state officers, and of five democratic and two republican representatives in congress. At the next election for congressmen, 1872, the state having been re-districted, the republicans lost one congressman and gained one. At the next election, 1872, the democrats elected all the nine congressmen: in two districts the republican vote entirely disappeared, and in all the others it was much reduced. Since that time the state has been democratic in all elections, state and national, and the political contest has been confined to factions of the dominant party. The peculiar state law, requiring electors to vote on thesecondWednesday of December, excited some comment in 1881, but the undisputed republican majority in the presidential election of 1880 allowed the state's electoral votes to be admitted without objection.
—A new constitution was formed by a convention which met at Atlanta, July 11, 1877, and was ratified by popular vote, Dec. 5. Its only noteworthy changes were its location of the state capital at Atlanta, and its limitation of the right of suffrage by prohibiting any one convicted of a penitentiary offense, and not pardoned, from registering, voting or holding office.
—The most prominent citizens of the state in national politics have been William H. Crawford, Herschel V. Johnson, and Alexander H. Stephens. (See those names.) Reference should also be made (see also list of governors) to John M. Berrien, democratic United States senator 1825-9, attorney general under Jackson (see
—The name of Georgia was given to the colony in 1732 in honor of King George II. The prosperity of the state and its vast possibilities of future growth have encouraged its citizens to give it the popular name of the empire state of the south.
—GOVERNORS George Walton (1789-90); Edward Telfair(1790-3); Geo. Matthews (1793-6); Jared Irwin (1796-8); James Jackson (1798-1801); Josiah Tatnall (1801-2); John Milledge (1802-6); Jared Irwin (1808-9); David B. Mitchell (1809-130; Peter Early (1813-15); David B. Mitchell (1815-17); William Rabun (1817-19); John Clark (1819-23); George M. Troup (1823-7); John Forsyth (1827-9); George R. Gilmer (1829-31); Wilson Lumpkin (1831-5); William Schley (1835-7); George R. Gilmer (1837-9); Charles J. McDonald (1839-43); George W. Crawford (1843-7); G. W. B. Towns (1847-15); Howell Cobb (185103); Herschel V. Johnson (1853-7); Joseph E. Brown (1857-65); James Johnson (provisional, 1865); Chaekwa J. Jenkins (1863-7); John Pope and G.G. Meade (military governors, March, 1867-June, 1868); Rufus B. Bullock (June, 1868-October, 1871); Benjamin Coley (acting, October 1871-January, 1872); James M. Smith (chosen by special election, January, 1872-January, 1877); Alfred H. Colquitt (1877-83).
Return to top

For the past decade I’ve been developing forensic techniques for determining if an image is a forgery. The general philosophy that I have adopted is to first concede that there is no single technique that can detect all forms of digital manipulation. I have, therefore, been developing a number of different forensic tools each tailored to detecting specific forms of photo manipulation – some of these techniques operate on subtle pixel-level statistics that are invisible to the human eye, and others operate on geometric properties that can sometimes be seen with a trained eye.
For example, in the image shown below, the bottle’s cast shadow is clearly incongruous with the shape of the bottle (as is the shadow on this cover of Time Magazine). Such obvious errors in a shadow are easy to spot, but more subtle differences can be harder to detect.
Shown below are two images in which the bottle and its cast shadow are slightly different (the rest of the scene is identical). Can you tell which is consistent with the lighting in the rest of the scene?
The geometry of cast shadows is dictated by the 3-D shape and location of an object and the illuminating light(s). It turns out, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, that there is a simple and intuitive 2-D image-based geometric analysis that can verify the authenticity of shadows.
Locate any point on a shadow and its corresponding point on the object, and draw a line through them. The best points to use are the corners of an object for which it is easier to match shadow and object. Repeat for as many clearly defined shadow and object points as possible. As you do this, you will find that all of the lines should intersect at one point – the location of the illuminating light.
Here is the basic intution for why this image-based construction works. Since light travels in a straight line, a point on a shadow, its corresponding point on the object, and the light source must all lie on a single line. Therefore, the light source will always lie on a line that connects every point on a shadow with its corresponding point on an object. Because under the rules of perspective projection, straight lines project to straight lines, this basic geometry is preserved in the 2-D image of a scene. Notice that this constraint holds regardless of the shape or orientation of the surface onto which a shadow is cast.
Shown below are the results of this simple geometric analysis, which clearly reveals the second bottle to be the fake.
In practice, there are some limitations to a manual application of this geometric analysis. Care must be taken to select appropriately matched points on the shadow and the object. This is best achieved when the object has a distinct shape (the corner of a cube or the tip of a cone). In addition, if the dominant light is the sun, then the lines may be nearly parallel, making the computation of their intersection vulnerable to slight errors in selecting matched points. And, it is necessary to remove any lens distortion in the image which causes straight lines to be imaged as curved lines which will then no longer intersect at a single point.
We are developing a suite of forensic tools that will automate and simplify the detection of fakes, one of which will almost certainly rely on the analysis of shadows.
[CGI model credit to Jeremy Birn, Lighting and Rendering in Maya]

Archive for the ‘transcendental geometry’ tag
The modern mathematician finds the space of three dimensions, in which our visible universe is containled, entirely too contracted for his conceptions, and is obliged to imagine a space of “n” dimensions in order that his fancy may find room to disport itself. But it is a new idea, on the part of the novelist, to make the conceptions of transcendental geometry the basis for an amusing story.
The very short article goes on to compare “Flatland” with “Through the Looking Glass” and their use of geometry as speculative and imaginative.
In trying to find more about this term, it appears that sadly the intelligent design crowd has laid claim to it. The most I could find (in an admittedly short search) was this related Wikipedia article on “Complex Geometry“:
In mathematics, complex geometry is the study of complex manifolds and functions of many complex variables. Application of transcendental methods to algebraic geometry falls in this category, together with more geometric chapters of complex analysis.

Child and Adolescent Suicide
Left untreated, depression can lead some youth to take their own lives. Suicide is the third leading cause of death for 15- to 24-year-olds and the sixth leading cause of death for 5- to 14-year-olds. Attempted suicides are even more common.
Warning signs of suicide
Four out of five teens that attempt suicide give clear warnings. If you suspect that a child or adolescent is suicidal, look for these warning signs:
- Threats of suicide—either direct or indirect.
- Verbal hints such as “I won’t be around much longer” or “It’s hopeless.
- Obsession with death.
- Overwhelming sense of guilt, shame or rejection.
- Putting affairs in order (for example, giving or throwing away favorite possessions).
- Sudden cheerfulness after a period of depression.
- Dramatic change in personality or appearance.
- Hallucinations or bizarre thoughts.
- Changes in eating or sleeping patterns.
- Changes in school performance.
What Should Parents and Other Adults Do if They Think a Child Is Suicidal?
- Ask the child or teen if he or she feels depressed or thinks about suicide or death. Speaking openly and honestly allows the child to confide in you and gives you a chance to express your concern. Listen to his or her thoughts and feelings in a caring and respectful manner.
- Let the child or teen know that you care and want to help.
- Supply the child or teen with local resources, such as a crisis hotline or the location of a mental health clinic. If the child or teen is a student, find out if there are any available mental health professionals at the school and let the child know about them.
- Seek professional help. It is essential to seek expert advice from a mental health professional that has experience helping depressed children and teens.
- Alert key adults in the child’s life—family, friends, teachers. Inform the child’s parents or primary caregiver, and recommend that they seek professional assistance for their child or teen.
- Trust your instincts. If you think the situation may be serious, seek immediate help. If necessary, break a confidence in order to save a life.
This will connect you with a crisis center in your area.
Covenant House Nine Line
This is a 24-hour teen crisis line.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
American Association of Suicidology

Alternative Instruction Program
The Alternative Instruction Program (AIP) provides an appropriate educational setting for students with diagnosed learning disabilities and/or attention disorders. While the standard-sized classroom works well for many students, the learning needs of some are better met in a small group environment providing more frequent interaction and closer supervision.
For admission into the AIP, the student must have a recent or updated diagnosis of a learning disability and/or attention disorder. Other data will also be taken into consideration as part of the admissions process such as standardized test scores, academic ability, observations, input from classroom teachers, work samples, and emotional or behavioral factors. Student progress in AIP is assessed regularly to ensure that enrollment in the program adequately meets the student’s educational needs.

The history of Cornell University’s South Asia Collection dates from 1868 when Cornell’s President Andrew D. White went to Europe armed with formidable lists of books and apparatus to be collected. He made large purchases of scientific and literary works. One of the most important of his acquisitions was the library of one of the founders of historical linguistics, Franz Bopp (1791-1867). Fully one-third of Bopp’s approximately five thousand volume collection was comprised of Indological subject matter. Since the beginning, Cornell University has continued to build on the initial strength of the Bopp library, acquiring complete collections of most of the important serials and monographs in this field.
Today, with material from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal, the South Asia Collection is the fourth largest in the United States and the largest intershelved collection combining both Indic and Western languages.
Collections in rural sociology, anthropology, communications, education, regional planning and art history are also noteworthy among the South Asia Collection. The holdings include the Gandhi Memorial Library, which Cornell received as a gift in 1949. The South Asia Collection has grown steadily with gifts from the government of India and individuals in this country, as well as substantial library acquisitions.

Darryl D’Monte continues his reportage of the Climate Action Network International meet on in Bangkok where, he says, two NGOs put forward blueprints that could be templates on which the new climate treaty is based
Two NGOs -- the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and a consortium led by Greenpeace -- have put forward blueprints that could be templates on which the new climate treaty, due to be negotiated in Copenhagen in December, is based.
WWF employs the concept of greenhouse development rights (GDRs), which have earlier also been propagated by the Stockholm Environment Institute and others. This August, it released a report titled ‘Sharing the effort under a global carbon budget’.
WWF says: “A strict global carbon budget between now and 2050 based on a fair distribution between rich and poor nations has the potential to prevent dangerous climate change and keep temperature rise well below 2 degrees Celsius.”
The report is based on research and shows different ways to cut global emissions by at least 80% globally, by 2050, and by 30% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels. Both the EU and US have agreed to this 2050 target but differ drastically on the intermediate goals, which have a vital bearing on keeping global temperatures from rising above 2 degrees C, beyond which there will be catastrophic climate changes.
“In order to avoid the worst and most dramatic consequences of climate change, governments need to apply the strictest measures to stay within a tight and total long-term global carbon budget,” said Stephan Singer, director of global energy policy at WWF. “Ultimately, a global carbon budget is equal to a full global cap on emissions.”
According to the analysis, the total carbon budget -- the amount of tolerable global emissions over a period of time -- has to be set roughly at 1,600 Gt CO2 eq (gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent) between 1990 and 2050.
As the world has already emitted a large part of this, the budget from today until 2050 is reduced to 970 Gt CO2 eq, excluding land use changes.
The report evaluates different pathways to reduce emissions, all in line with the budget. It describes three different methodologies which could be applied to distribute the burden and the benefits of a global carbon budget in a fair and equitable way.
- Greenhouse development rights (GDRs), where all countries need to reduce emissions below business-as-usual based on their per capita emissions, poverty thresholds, and GDP per capita.
- Contraction and convergence (C&C), where per capita allowances converge from a country’s current level to a level equal for all countries within a given period.
- Common but differentiated convergence (CDC), where developed countries’ per capita emissions converge to an equal level for all countries and others converge to the same level once their per capita emissions reach a global average.
The report says that by 2050, the GDR methodology requires developed nations as a group to reduce emissions by 157% (twice what they are contemplating). “Given that they cannot cut domestic emissions by more than 100%, they will need to finance emission reductions in other countries to reach their total.”
While the greenhouse development rights method allows an increase for most developing countries, at least for the initial period, the two other methods give less room for emissions increase. Under the C&C and CDC methodology, China, for example, would be required to reduce by at least 70% and India by 2-7% by 2050, compared to 1990.
The poorest countries will be allowed to continue to grow emissions until at least 2050 under the GDR methodology, but will be required to reduce them after 2025 under the two remaining allocation options.
The Greenpeace proposal, which has WWF and other partners, was released at an earlier UN climate meet in Bonn this year. It also talks of a global carbon budget. Industrial countries would have to phase out their fossil fuel energy consumption by 2050. The trajectory would be as follows: 23% between 2013 and 2017, 40% by 2020 (twice the EU commitment), and 95% by 2050.
Globally, deforestation emissions would need to be reduced by three-quarters by 2020, and fossil fuel consumption by developing countries would have to peak by 2020 and then decline.
The proposal envisages that industrial countries will provide at least $160 billion a year from 2013 to 2017, “with each country assuming national responsibility for an assessed portion of this amount as part of its binding national obligation for the same period”.
The main source of this funding, which could prove controversial, would be auctioning 10% of industrial countries’ emissions allocations. There would also be levies on aviation and shipping, since both add to global warming.
Greenpeace proposes a Copenhagen climate facility which would apportion $160 billion as follows:
- $56 billion for developing countries to adapt to climate change.
- $7 billion a year as insurance against such risks.
- $42 billion in reducing forest destruction and degradation.
- $56 billion on mitigation and technology diffusion.
Talks at Bangkok are deadlocked between the G77 and China that want to continue with the Kyoto Protocol, and the US which wants a new treaty. The EU is open to a continuation of the old treaty with a new track to include the US (which has not ratified Kyoto), as well as emerging developing countries. Where and how such proposals will dovetail with the document now being negotiated is by no means clear, and it will be nothing less than a catastrophe for the entire planet if Copenhagen ends in a stalemate.
Infochange News & Features, October 2009

The Ancient Forests of North America are extremely diverse. They include the boreal forest belt stretching between Newfoundland and Alaska, the coastal temperate rainforest of Alaska and Western Canada, and the myriad of residual pockets of temperate forest surviving in more remote regions.
Together, these forests store huge amounts of carbon, helping tostabilise climate change. They also provide a refuge for large mammalssuch as the grizzly bear, puma and grey wolf, which once ranged widelyacross the continent.
In Canada it is estimated that ancient forest provides habitat forabout two-thirds of the country's 140,000 species of plants, animalsand microorganisms. Many of these species are yet to be studied byscience.
The Ancient Forests of North America also provide livelihoods forthousands of indigenous people, such as the Eyak and Chugach people ofSouthcentral Alaska, and the Hupa and Yurok of Northern California.
Of Canada's one million indigenous people (First Nation, Inuit andMétis), almost 80 percent live in reserves and communities in boreal ortemperate forests, where historically the forest provided their foodand shelter, and shaped their way of life.
Through the Trees - The truth behind logging in Canada (PDF)
On the Greenpeace Canada website:
Interactive map of Canada's Borel forest (Flash)
Fun animation that graphically illustrates the problem (Flash)
Defending America's Ancient Forests

Many manufacturing plants employ compressed air systems in one capacity or another, and, for the most part, these systems provide similar output. While all compressed air might be the same, the engineering of that air is not. The needs of a petrochemical plant are quite different from those of an automobile manufacturing plant. Application-specific engineered air addresses those different needs.
Engineered air describes compressed air tailored to meet specific industry needs—100 percent oil-free, particulate filtered, and reliable. It goes beyond the simple output of compressed air at a specified pressure pounds per square inch. Engineered air provides the right type of air for the right application. A good example of this concept put into practice is work done at a North American ethylene plant.
Ethylene processing plants use compressed air systems in a number of ways. Air powers pneumatic tools used in general maintenance, and it is employed for other plant operations, such as blow-down and dry-out. Blow-down uses compressed air to clear pipes and vessels of debris and blockage, while dry-out uses compressed air to remove moisture from pipes prior to ethylene processing.
Ethylene plants also use compressed air combined with steam to remove the coke build-up in the cracking furnaces. Scheduled periodic removal of this solid build-up allows the overall ethylene processing operations to run more efficiently.
Recently, a world-scale North American ethylene plant was undergoing a major expansion project that required a specially designed compressor system to handle the additional requirements. With this major expansion underway, it was vital that this new system provide absolutely reliable engineered air.
In order to ensure the most dependable compressed air source possible, the compressor package included a custom-designed compressor with a high-tech control system, meeting requirements for durability and reliability, accessibility and maintainability, and high level of control (Fig. 1).
The base design for this customized system also had to meet stringent API 672 standards for packaged, integrally geared centrifugal air compressors for petroleum, chemical, and gas industry services.
Durability and reliability
A baseload ethylene plant is the lynchpin of any petrochemical manufacturing complex. Ethylene is the building block and feedstock for all the downstream feeder plants. A baseload plant is expected to run continuously, maximizing efficiencies and minimizing costs. Downstream plants totally rely on the plant to provide a continuous supply of feedstock—in this case ethylene.
This is one of the key reasons the compressor system had to be designed to be extremely durable. To ensure this durability, the customized air compressor features self-adjusting tilting pad journal bearings that can adapt to load changes, providing stability, as well as double-acting thrust bearings to accommodate all load conditions. In addition, the system features stainless steel impellers, resistant to corrosion and erosion.
All of the compressor systems had to run reliably also. An unplanned shutdown would have an adverse impact on the entire petrochemical complex manufacturing capabilities. The compressor was built with a redundant oil system, helping eliminate the possibility of system failure, allowing the ethylene plant to meet its availability targets (Fig. 2).
Within an air compressor, the oil pump is the heart of the lubrication system; it is what keeps the machine running smoothly. If the pump breaks down, the machine comes to a grinding halt. To avoid this, we included not one, but two full capacity, full pressure pumps in the design—one motor-driven auxiliary and the other a shaft-driven main.
During regular operations, the shaft-driven main is operating, while the motor-driven auxiliary is on perpetual standby for emergency situations, providing additional overall package protection. Without this redundant system, in the event of an oil system malfunction, the entire compressor system needs to be shut down. The redundant system eliminates downtime and provides a reliable source of engineered air.
Accessibility and maintainability
In order to keep the plant’s compressor system running efficiently and reliably, it was essential to design the unit for maximum accessibility and maintainability. While requiring additional time and attention from plant engineers, scheduled cleaning and maintenance are a sound investment. As with all other plant operating systems, compressed air systems that have a planned maintenance program are less likely to have unexpected breakdowns. Simply put, less downtime allows for more production. In addition, consistent cleaning and maintenance practices help keep wear and tear to a minimum. This ultimately saves money in replacement parts.
The intercooler design is an example of the ease-of-maintenance design philosophy. Within a compressor intercooler, both U-shaped and straight intercooler tubes are industry practice. However, straight tubes are easier to clean than those with a U-bend design. An engineer can simply remove the water piping, unbolt the water box, and rod the tubes in place. Rodding is not possible with U-bend tubes found in some compressors.
In addition, intercooler tubes with a water-in-tube design are easier to clean and maintain than those with an air-in-tube design that require wire brush or chemical bath cleaning. This compressor features straight intercooler tubes with water-in-tube design for this very reason. The longer it takes to clean the intercooler, the longer engineered airflow is down.
Another example of important compressor components that benefit from diligent inspection and maintenance are journal and thrust bearings. These bearings help provide a stable and near frictionless environment to support and guide the rotating shaft. Properly installed and maintained, these bearings can last for extended periods of time. However, regularly scheduled inspections and maintenance keep them running reliably. The ethylene plant’s compressor features horizontally split bearings, which are easy to maintain, inspect, and replace. An engineer simply removes the top half of the gear case to service. No other disassembly is required.
Interchangeability of parts is another factor taken into consideration when designing the ethylene plant’s compressor system. Interchangeability contributes heavily to ease of maintenance. Interchangeable parts save time and money. Multiple stage air compressors use a bull gear and pinion system to power the impellers at each stage of air compression. The quality of the bull gears used directly determines whether they are interchangeable. The customized compressor uses high precision AGMA Quality 13 gears.
The American Gear Manufacturers Association (AGMA) provides established gear quality ratings, ranging from 3-15. These numbers signify the quality levels, or standards, developed by the AGMA that differ per application. AGMA Quality Level 13 gears, otherwise known as aircraft-quality gearing, are generally regarded as high-precision gears. They provide lower noise levels and, under normal operating conditions, have a longer performance life. More importantly, though, they provide interchangeability.
If the gear is AGMA Quality Level 12 or below and any one of the three pieces needs to be replaced, all three pieces—one gear and two pinions—need to be replaced. However, with Level 13 gears, rather than remove and replace all three pieces, the plant engineer needs to swap out only the component in question. This saves time and money in unnecessary replacement parts.
High level of control
The operation of multiple compressors feeding into a single plant air system needs to be coordinated, monitored, and controlled in order to accommodate various applications. An initial investment in innovative monitoring technology can ultimately pay for itself.
With that in mind, the customized compressor can be accommodated with a PLC-based automatic sequencer, which permits up to eight compressor units to communicate with one another and operate in sequence according to a programmed schedule. High-tech PLC-based automatic sequencers are capable of monitoring and matching compressor supply to demand. For example, they can select which compressors to use at any given time, shutting down those compressors not necessary to plant operations, even choosing back-up units if needed. By turning multiple compressors into one, an automatic sequencer can ensure stable system pressure, which allows the entire operation to run as efficiently as possible, saving both time and money.
In addition, a PLC-based modular control system allows for remote monitoring and diagnostic checks on the compressed air systems, helping to predict and prevent any systems malfunctions that could result in stoppage of engineered air. This can save money on repairs and replacements, as well as lost production time.
The most cost-effective systems, like the FS-Elliott Regulus control system, provide state-of-the-art technology and ease-of-use. The ideal control system should feature an easy-to-operate touch screen with a graphic color display. These features allow operators to view easy-to-understand graphics while monitoring the plant engineered air systems. An advanced system also provides easy adjustment of set-points and control mode changes using the touch screen. These flexible controls are fully adaptive, changing to meet the plant’s application-specific needs.
The control system also stores and logs operating data used for trend monitoring and preventive maintenance. This feature permits engineers to monitor and predict trends in their engineered air systems and act before problems arise. Extended monitoring of vital parameters is important for equipment protection, saving money in maintenance and avoiding repairs.
Ethylene plants are extremely energy conscious. A systems operation closer to surge lines saves power and minimizes wasteful unloading, while lower set-points and precise control minimizes energy usage. The advanced control system is able to make more efficient use of the ethylene plant’s manpower. With easy-to-use remote control and monitoring capabilities, this system can reduce the tasks of the ethylene plant operators, allowing them to shift focus to other plant responsibilities.
An engineered air system is created with specific plant applications in mind, to increase reliability and efficiency. The custom-engineered compressor we installed at the ethylene plant was designed with the following key points in mind:
• Durability and reliability—A robust engineered design combined with key system redundancies.
• Accessibility and maintainability—Moving parts designed with ease of access and maintenance in mind.
• High level of control—High-tech control systems provide for efficient operation and allow plant operations to predict and prevent possible problems.

At the heart of the celebration of Thanksgiving is the idea of 'giving thanks' but the main attraction of this festival is the tradition of family gathering for sharing the Thanksgiving dinner and eating turkey on this holiday. It is well known that the turkey has a delicious history and it is considered as the favorite bird of the Americans. But there are even more interesting and fun facts about this bird, which can surprise you. Here we are with our collection of various facts about turkey as Turkey Trivia.
Turkeys originated in North and Central America.
Usually the turkeys are found in hardwood forests with grassy areas but
they are capable of adapting themselves to different habitats.
Turkeys spend the night in trees.
You can easily see a turkey on a warm clear day or during light rain.
Turkeys fly to the ground at first light and feed until mid-morning.
Feeding resumes in mid-afternoon.
Turkeys start gobbling before sunrise and generally continue through
most of the morning.
The field of vision of wild turkey is so good that it is about 270
The wild turkey has excellent hearing.
A spooked turkey can run at speed up to 20 miles per hour.
A wild turkey can run at speed of up to 25 miles per hour.
A wild turkey can fly for short distances at up to 55 miles per hour.
Domesticated turkeys or the farm-raised turkeys cannot fly.
Turkeys were one of the first birds to be domesticated in the America.
The male turkeys are called 'tom', the female turkeys are called 'hen'
and the baby turkeys are called 'poult'.
The male turkeys gobble whereas female turkeys make a clicking noise.
The male turkeys gobble to attract the female turkeys for mating. The
gobble is a seasonal call made during the spring and fall.
A mature turkey generally has around 3,500 feathers. The Apache Indians
considered the turkey timid and wouldn't eat it or use its feathers on
According to an estimate, during the Thanksgiving holiday more than 45
million turkeys are cooked and around 525 million pounds of turkey is
About ninety-five percent of American families eat turkey on the
Thanksgiving Day whereas fifty percent eat turkey on Christmas holiday.
Almost fifty percent of Americans eat turkey at least once every 2
According to the National Turkey Federation about twenty-four percent
of Americans purchase fresh turkeys for Thanksgiving and seventy percent
purchase frozen turkeys.
North Carolina is the number one producer of turkeys. It produces
around 61 million turkeys per year. Minnesota and Arkansas are second
and third number producers of turkey.
The part of the turkey that is used in a good luck ritual is known as
The red fleshy growth from the base of the beak that hangs down over
the beak is called 'snood'. It is very long on male turkeys.

Blue Ocean Research & Conservation
Discovering the Ocean
Our scientific research has focused recently on an often overlooked yet ecologically important part of many ecosystems–sponges. Numbering over 8000 species, they are common to many aquatic habitats from the Ross Shelf in Antarctica, Lake Baikal in Russia, rocky reefs in South Africa, to coral reefs throughout the Caribbean.
Sponges are critical to coral reef survival. Sponges filter and clean the water, provide shelter for commercially important species like juvenile lobsters, and are eaten by many fish and turtles. On many coral reefs, sponges outnumber corals, with sponges providing three-dimensional structure that creates habitat and refuge for thousands of species. Because of their large size and kaleidoscope colors, sponges help fuel the popular and lucrative diving and tourism industries.
As climate change results in warmer, more acidic oceans, all marine life is potentially affected. It is well-known that coral health declines under these conditions, but the effect on sponge growth and survival is unknown. Significant declines in sponge health and biomass would be catastrophic to coral reefs, reducing water quality and severely impacting thousands of species from symbiotic microbes to foraging hawksbill turtles. A major loss of sponges would not only negatively impact marine life, but also local communities that depend on reefs for coastal protection and food.
Blue Ocean’s research scientist, Dr. Alan Duckworth, studied the effects of warmer, more acidic waters on the sponge Cliona celata, which bores into the shells of scallops and oysters, weakening and eventually killing them. Alan hypothesized that because climate change will result in shellfish having weaker shells, these sponges could cause greater losses of shellfish. This study has been done in collaboration with Dr. Bradley Peterson of Stony Brook University.
Alan’s other area of study was the first climate change experiment focused on tropical sponges. It investigated the effects of warmer, more acidic water on the growth, survival, and chemistry of several Caribbean coral reef sponges. This study was based at the Discovery Bay Marine Lab in Jamaica and chemical analysis of sponge samples was completed by Dr. Lyndon West from Florida Atlantic University.
Putting Teeth in Shark Conservation
The goal of this fellowship is to help small, island nations by strengthening their ability to identify illegal shark fishing and enforce recently established shark sanctuaries. It will help provide much needed scientific research, training, outreach and DNA-testing tools which can then be used to help protect valuable marine sanctuaries worldwide.

A jet owned by the German Air Research Center, which is equipped with devices and sensors to analyze the ash emitted by the volcano in Eyjafjallajökull glacier in Iceland, arrived in the country yesterday.
“The jet can tell us about the distribution of the ash and it can, to a certain degree, fly into the ash cloud, although it cannot be exposed to too much ash,” Haraldur Ólafsson, professor in meteorology at the University of Iceland, told Morgunbladid.
On their way to the country, the crew of the test jet didn’t notice much ash above Iceland’s southwestern corner. The jet took a few dives above Eyjafjallajökull to collect samples, which will be analyzed today.
Ólafsson said it is clear that the ash level will be low. The jet will go on another expedition today and is expected to return to Germany on Sunday.
The cost of the expeditions, approximately ISK 30 million (USD 233,000, EUR 175,000), will only be covered by Iceland to a small extent—the largest part will be paid for by the German Ministry of Transport and the British Meteorological Office.
Ólafsson explained that significant interests are at stake. “In the past days the forecasts that have come from the British Met Office have been rather bleak and more pessimistic than what considered reasonable compared to the current situation of the eruption”.
“The reason [for the testing] is that it is costly to close the airspace and it is very important to have confirmation of whether there is a real danger,” Ólafsson said, adding that the risk factor of ash in the atmosphere has never been analyzed directly before.
“It has been evaluated visually. People have measured the height of the ash plume on radars and visually from airplanes,” Ólafsson explained. “Significant uncertainty lies in these measurements, which explains why the forecasts have been questionable”.

The European Union runs into roadblocks in its plans for Kosovo
WHEN the Austro-Hungarian empire declared war on Serbia in July 1914, few could have imagined that the result would be the demise not only of the Habsburg empire, but also of the Russian and Ottoman ones. Nobody believes that Serbia's challenge to the European Union over Kosovo will be anything like as dramatic; most Serbs want to join the EU, not destroy it. Yet 100 days after Kosovo declared independence, Serbia has done a lot better than anybody expected in thwarting the EU's plans for it.
Serbia still regards Kosovo as a province, but the ethnic Albanians, who constitute over 90% of its 2m people, declared its independence in February. So far 41 countries have recognised Kosovo, including America and 20 of the EU's 27 members. But five of these are microstates like Nauru and the Marshall Islands. And such big hitters as Brazil, China, India and Russia have not recognised the new country. Nor have Spain, Egypt or even most Muslim countries.
Since the end of the war in 1999, Kosovo has come under the jurisdiction of the United Nations. Legally the last word in its government accordingly lies with the head of the UN mission in Pristina. When Kosovo declared its independence, the EU authorised the establishment of a big new police and justice mission named EULEX. With the Americans and others, it also set up the office of the international civilian representative (ICR), investing him with sweeping powers.
On June 15th Kosovo's new constitution is due to come into force. It foresees no role at all for the UN. But legal and technical problems mean that the EULEX mission has been postponed. As for the ICR, whose (Dutch) head, Pieter Feith, is also the EU's special representative in Kosovo, one UN official scoffs, “He and his team are here as tourists. What are they doing? They can't take over the role they were assigned, as we are still here.”
Since independence the Belgrade government has consolidated its grip on Serbian areas of Kosovo, including almost all of the region north of Mitrovica. It even held local elections, condemned as illegal by the UN, the EU and the ICR. EULEX and the ICR will be unable to operate in these areas. De facto, Kosovo is thus divided not only into Serb and ethnic-Albanian areas, but also into places where the UN will keep operating and the ethnic-Albanian areas where EULEX and the ICR will probably take over. For the EU, says one diplomat, “It is a face-saving operation now. Their plan has been derailed.”
As the June 15th deadline nears, meeting after meeting is taking place to try to resolve the impasse. The UN's future role is now utterly unclear because, as the joke has it, everyone is “waiting for Ban”. Under pressure from all sides, the UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, has done little beyond prohibiting the transfer of cars, buildings and equipment to EULEX and the ICR. The Russians recently warned him that any notion that he might try to resolve the problem without the approval of the UN Security Council (and thus of Russia) was “out of the question”.
Attempts are now being made to square the circle by seeing if EULEX could somehow come under the UN's legal authority, but so far no progress towards a deal has been made. What is becoming distressingly obvious to Kosovo's Albanians is that, despite declaring independence, their future is still tied to Serbia's. Keen to gain more recognition, they are making little fuss. But Mr Feith says “they need to be given some comfort that their interests are being taken care of.” If they don't get it, he sees trouble ahead.

Considering the fact that half of you reading this right now are probably wearing one, It’s only right to start this week off with the most commonplace of all acronymic items– the OCBD (oxford cloth button down.) While the latter half is attributed to the shirt’s button down collar, Oxford Cloth itself has a far less straightforward explanation. As the last remaining fabric from a series of four, Oxford cloth’s story is one of inexplicable survival. In the late nineteenth century a Scottish Mill designed and produced four cloths, one for each of the world’s most distinguished universities. While Harvard, Yale, and Cambridge all had their respective cloths lost to history, for reasons unknown Oxford endured becoming one of the most widespread fabrics in the world. Oxford cloth is created by weaving together two yarns that are of the same color but just a shade different, giving it a marled texture that breaks from the ordinary aesthetic of a solid dress shirt.
Oxford Cloth shirts were originally perceived to be a piece of formal wear and were exclusively worn as part of a suit. This all began to change in 1896, when John E. Brooks, (the grandson of Henry Sand Brooks, the founder of Brooks Brothers’) went to England and noticed that polo players were wearing shirts with button down collars to keep them secured during games. Brooks brought the design back to the states, and Brooks Brothers combined the button down collar with oxford cloth to create the OCBD. They remained a relatively formal shirt until the 1930′s, when tennis and polo players began wearing Oxford cloth button downs during their games. While these were still unequivocally upper class sports, they nonetheless placed the Oxford shirt in an entirely new context, and by the 50′s Ivy League undergrads were wearing OCBD’s. For the students, and their limited wardrobes, the versatile shirts were a major asset. OCBD’s could not only be worn untucked on weekends, or with a jacket when going out, the shirts relaxed basket weave also allowed them to be worn pretty much year round. Today, practically every company produces their version of the OCBD, and they’re somewhat of a collectors item, not because they’re rare but because you can never collect too many.

|BEING PREPARED - READ ONLINE|
Winter storms may include strong winds, heavy snow, sleet, freezing rain, ice and/or extreme cold. Storms often knock out power, down trees, and make roads impassable for days. The weight of snow and ice can collapse buildings. Winds descending off mountains can reach 100 miles per hour. Ice jams in rivers can lead to flooding, and snow in the mountains can become an avalanche.
Winter storms are called deceptive killers because most deaths are only indirectly related to the storm. Nearly seventy percent of all deaths from ice and snow are due to traffic accidents on icy roads. The remainder are from exposure of people caught out in the storm, hypothermia, dehydration, and heart attacks from over exertion.
What constitutes extreme cold varies in different areas of the country. In southern and coastal areas, both the people and the buildings are unused to winter weather. Extreme cold may mean temperatures just below freezing (32 degrees Fahrenheit) because it damages crops, bursts pipes, brings down power lines and threatens people living in houses with inadequate heat. In the north and Midwest, winter storms are expected and few would consider it extreme cold unless the temperatures are below zero.
The safest place to be in a winter storm is in a building. If you live in an area that has severe winters, your house should be prepared. Start with an outdoor thermometer that is easily readable from inside the house. As winter approaches, install storm windows or staple over windows with strong plastic sheeting to improve insulation. Windows should also have heavy draperies that can keep out the cold. Insulate outside walls, attics and crawl spaces. Weather strip all doors. Wrap or insulate water pipes to prevent freezing. Remove and store hoses and cover the hose nipples until spring. Make sure your furnace is working properly and check all fireplaces or other secondary heating systems. As a bonus, all this will save you money on your heating bills.
As a winter storm approaches, there are additional preparations. Make sure that you have food and water for a week because it may be difficult to get out for several days after the storm passes. Fill your car with gas and check your emergency supplies. If you live in an area where winter storms are unusual, you may need to bring in hoses, wrap pipes and cover windows to improve your insulation.
During the storm, stay inside. Even if you lose power and heat, you will be safer in the house than in a car. Wear several layers of loose fitting, light weight, warm clothing so you can adjust to the temperature in the house. Wear socks and shoes. Get out mittens and a hat that covers your ears to use if you need them. Eat regularly and drink plenty of water, broth or juice to avoid dehydration. Avoid alcohol and caffeine since they make hypothermia and dehydration worse.
Reduce the temperature in the house to conserve fuel: 65F in the day and 55F at night. There will be very high demand on the natural gas and electricity distribution systems. If you use oil, your tank could run dry before you can get it refilled.
When using alternative heat from a fireplace, wood stove or space heater, follow all fire safety rules and ventilate properly to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. Keep a fire extinguisher or bucket of water near the fire in case it gets out of control.
Open cabinet doors under sinks to keep the pipes warm and let all faucets drip a little to keep the water lines from freezing. If a pipe freezes, use a hair dryer to thaw it out gently, never a torch. Heat only the areas of your house that you are using.
If you lose heat, move everyone into one room to conserve what heat you can. Use an interior room with few doors or windows. A bedroom or dining room is usually a good choice. Seal off drafts by putting blankets over windows and towels under doors. Walk around or exercise to generate body heat and maintain circulation. Sleep in shifts. At least one person should stay awake at all times to make sure the others are alright. Watch for signs of hypothermia such as slurred speech, disorientation, or uncontrollable shivering. Let the authorities know that you are in trouble so they can get to you as quickly as possible after the storm.
Try to make sure your car will continue to work if you need it. Winterize your car in the fall. Keep the battery and ignition system in top condition, and keep the battery terminals clean. In long periods of severe cold, cars will be hard to start in the morning. If you don’t have an engine warmer, you can keep the car warm the same way you keep a person warm. Every few hours, start the car and run it until it is warm. Make sure the garage door is open to avoid carbon monoxide. When the car is warm, turn it off and close the garage. Put blankets over the hood and radiator. This holds in the engine heat and keeps the car warm enough to restart.
Use public transportation instead of your car, if public transportation is available. If you must drive in a winter storm, be very well prepared. If the car is parked outside, clean the ice and snow off the hood, roof, trunk and lights, as well as the windows. Warm up the car outside, never in the garage. Plan your route carefully, stay on main roads and plan alternatives if some roads are impassable. Call ahead so you are expected. Give your route and estimated time of arrival.
If possible, travel with at least two people in the car and travel only in daylight. If you have a choice of vehicles, take the one that is most brightly colored. Drive for the road conditions: do not speed; be cautious about passing; and remember that patches of ice can be virtually invisible. Make sure the car is fit for the road. In bad conditions, you should have snow tires or chains. Keep the car at least half full of gasoline and top it off before the storm hits. This reduces the chance of icing in the fuel line. Wear polarized sunglasses to reduce glare. Carry a cell phone and keep in touch with those at your destination.
Keep emergency supplies in the car all winter long. Along with the usual car emergency kit, you should have supplies for being stranded in the snow. These include several gallons of water, high calorie non-perishable foods, blankets, a change of clothes for keeping dry, a bright colored flag for the antenna or window, sand or cat litter for traction, a shovel, a windshield scraper, and a large coffee can with lid and toilet paper for sanitation.
If you get stuck in the snow, turn the steering wheel from side to side to clear away some of the snow. Accelerate slowly and see if you can get the car moving again. If this does not work, use the shovel to dig out the drive wheels and put some sand or litter under them for traction. If neither of these works, you are stuck.
If you have to stop, stay in your vehicle. You will quickly become disoriented in snow and cold. Try to find a place where you are partially protected by an overpass or tree line. Make the car as visible as possible: set out flares or triangles; lift the hood; put a brightly colored cloth or flag on the antenna or window; clear snow off the roof. Leave the overhead light on so you can be seen at night unless this appears to be running down the battery. In remote areas, spread a large cloth or the trunk mat on top of the snow to attract the attention of rescue planes.
Clear the snow away from the exhaust pipe, open the two front windows about 2 inches and run the engine and heater for 10 minutes out of every hour. This is usually enough to keep the occupants warm while conserving fuel and reducing the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning. Listen to the radio, charge the cell phone and turn on the emergency flashers while the motor is running. Roll the windows up just before turning off the engine. If you feel drowsy or nauseated, turn the engine off immediately.
Conserve as much body heat as possible. Wear all the dry clothing you have available. Huddle together if there is more than one person in the car. Use maps and newspapers as added insulation under the blankets. If they are dry, put the floor mats under you on the seat to insulate your back side. Keep your hands and feet inside your clothing and cover your head and ears.
Keep your circulation going and generate body heat by doing isometric exercises. Contract muscles in your arms and legs rhythmically. Clap your hands and move your legs. Sing and dance to the music in your seat. If there are two people in the car, alternate brief periods of sleep. You need to reawaken and exercise periodically.
Don’t go outdoors in a winter storm unless it is absolutely necessary. If you must go out, prepare very carefully. Stretch and warm up before going out. If you are shoveling snow, pushing a car, or walking in deep snow, you are doing heavy exercise. Avoid over exertion and take frequent breaks to warm up. Do not work up a sweat as this can lead to chilling and hypothermia. If you develop chest pain or shortness of breath stop immediately and go inside since these may be signs of a heart attack. Walk carefully. Falling on ice can cause disabling injuries.
If you are caught outside in a snow storm, the first thing to do is find shelter. If you can get to a building or a car, go immediately. If you are too far away from existing shelters, try to build a shelter. Prepare a lean-to, wind-break or even a snow cave for protection from the wind. Build a fire in the open for heat and as a signal to rescuers. If you can place rocks around the fire they will absorb and radiate heat to keep you warmer. Curl up and cover all exposed parts of your body to preserve heat and prevent frostbite of your fingers and toes. Stay as dry as possible. In extreme cold, do not let yourself go to sleep. If you feel drowsy, start exercising. This will wake you up and increase your body heat.
Once the snow storm has passed, do whatever you can to make yourself visible to rescuers. Dig out your car or tent so it shows up against the snow. Get out from under trees. Use a bright cloth as a flag. Stamp out “HELP” or “SOS” in the snow. Write the message with tree limbs or stones or anything that will show up against the snow. Don’t over exert yourself and don’t try to walk out. Let help come to you.

You have always heard that in ancient times salt was like gold, but why is that? Salt is the original preserving mean. Meat cured in salt doesn’t spoil, cheese soaked in brine lasts longer, and those foods could then be stored for long travels, colder months, or times of famine. Cervia, a small town on the Adriatic coast of Italy whose main trade has traditionally been in salt, has always been considered a prized domain by the Pope State exactly for this reason.
Salt has been for a very long time a state monopoly in Italy, so all production was sent to be repackaged at a central government facility. Only in the past five years the salt monopoly has been lifted, allowing salt producing facilities to brand their products. So, instead of getting whatever salt you can get at the Sali e Tabacchi store (the designated monopoly outlet where you buy all tobacco products and lottery tickets- and where you used to buy salt as well!) you can pick a local salt, from a given salt pond. Since Cervia is about 2 miles from my hometown, smack in the heart of Romagna, I am partial to Cervia’s salt!
The salt ponds in Cervia are fortunately alive and well. They survived modernization and mechanization, and some of the ponds are still harvested by hand, making for an extraordinary open air museum of salt heritage! Sal Fiore (flower salt, the same fleur de sel of French celebrity) is a fine sea salt, still called sale del papa (Pope’s salt), as traditionally the first harvested salt was delivered to Rome to be used on the Pope’s table. Given this important historic background, the salt producers in Cervia decided to brand their salt as Sale Dei Papi, the Popes’ salt. An important name!
In 2004, Slow Food recognized Salina Camillone (a salt pond, pictured above) as a Presidia, to preserve the production, harvesting methods and the quality of the product. Two salts are then recognized as the diamond head of Cervia’s production: the Salina Camillone salt and the Salfiore di Romagna, the Popes’ Salt.
Both Salina Camillone salt and Sal Fiore are completely natural: they dry by sunlight, and no additivies or anti-caking agents are added to the final product- not even iodine, as sea salt naturally has it! Sal Fiore is a fine salt, the first one to be harvested in the traditional method, and it’s a perfect finishing salt, as its crunchy texture and sharp sea taste make for an interesting touch on salads and steamed vegetables. The salt from Salina Camillone is instead very coarse, harvested by hand in limited uquantities every day, from June till September. The Camillone salt pond has been harvested in the same way since Roman times, and the salt it produces is somewhat more humid than other sea salts, making for a terrific ingredient in salt crust recipes.
Cervia’s salt is still an artisanal product, not widely available on the shelves- even in Italy! You can find it mainly online, at the official website of the Saline di Cervia, or at this other small online shop, based on the East Coast, Olive Nation. Corti Brothers also carries it online, and the website carries an extensive history of the product!
Filed under: Traditional Foods

August 20, 2012
- coddle (verb)
- What does it mean?
- : to treat with extreme care : pamper
- How do you use it?
- "Big Ma was not one for coddling any of us, but now she turned from the stove and, wiping her hands on her long white apron, sat down on the bench and put her arm around Little Man." (Mildred D. Taylor, _Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry_)
- Are you a word wiz?
The "pamper" sense of "coddle" comes from an earlier meaning that had to do with a special kind of careful treatment given to something delicate. What do you think was treated so carefully?We're not going to coddle you, just tell you that A is the right answer. When "coddle" first came to be part of the English language around 1600, the word meant to cook something slowly and gently in water that is just below the boiling point. Usually eggs are what's being cooked when "coddle" is used in this sense today, but when "coddle" was first being used, other foods, especially fruit, were also cooked by coddling. Because coddling is a very gentle way to cook something, such gentle treatment led to the extended meaning of "to treat with extreme care, pamper."

From cave paintings to the internet NOV 03 2008
A fantastically extensive timeline of recorded information "from cave paintings to the internet". It's an expanded version of the timeline that appears in the book, From Gutenberg to the Internet (more info), which seems really interesting.
From Gutenberg to the Internet presents 63 original readings from the history of computing, networking, and telecommunications arranged thematically by chapters. Most of the readings record basic discoveries from the 1830s through the 1960s that laid the foundation of the world of digital information in which we live. These readings, some of which are illustrated, trace historic steps from the early nineteenth century development of telegraph systems -- the first data networks -- through the development of the earliest general-purpose programmable computers and the earliest software, to the foundation in 1969 of ARPANET, the first national computer network that eventually became the Internet. The readings will allow you to review early developments and ideas in the history of information technology that eventually led to the convergence of computing, data networking, and telecommunications in the Internet.
(via design observer)

The riveting story of the two crusading lawyers who led the legal battle to end segregation, one case and one courtroom at a time.
The Supreme Court’s decision inBrown v. Board of Educationis widely considered a seminal point in the battle to end segregation, but it was in fact the culmination of a decades-long legal campaign.Root and Branchis the epic story of the two fiercely dedicated lawyers who led the fight from county courthouses to the marble halls of the Supreme Court, and, in the process, laid the legal foundations of the civil rights movement.
Charles Hamilton Houston was the pioneer: After becoming the first African-American on theHarvard Law Review, he transformed the law school at all-black Howard University into a West Point for civil rights advocacy.
One of Houston’s students at Howard was a brash young man named Thurgood Marshall. Soon after Marshall’s graduation, Houston and Marshall opened the NAACP’s legal office. The abstemious, proper Houston and the folksy, easygoing Marshall made an unlikely duo, but together they faced down angry Southern mobs, negotiated with presidents and senators, and convinced even racist judges and juries that the Constitution demanded equal justice under law for all American citizens.
Houston, tragically, would die before his strategy came to fruition in the Brown suit, but Marshall would argue the case victoriously and go on to become the first African-American Supreme Court justice—always crediting his mentor for teaching him everything he knew. Together, the two advocates changed the course of American history.

Nordic Cool 2013: Literature Panel: The Secret Behind the Northern Lights
In this interactive session, Norwegian solar physicist Pål Brekke utilizes photos and video footage from NASA satellites to discuss the visual phenomenon known as the Northern Lights.
- Sat., Mar. 2, 2013, 10:30 AM
- Terrace Gallery
Please use the event calendar to search for current events.
For the duration of Nordic Cool 2013, the Terrace Gallery will become the Cool Club, an extension of the Nordic Design Illustrated exhibition. The Cool Club will feature the iconic Arne Jacobsen Series 7 chairs, on loan from Fritz Hansen, the Embassy of Denmark in Washington, D.C., and Furniture from Scandinavia, and a new curtain made from fabric by Marimekko.
For thousands of years, people in the northern part of the world have marveled at the spectacular and fearful displays that occasionally light up the northern sky. Award-winning Norwegian solar physicist Pål Brekke has published several popular books about the Sun and the aurora borealis, including the most recent, Our Explosive Sun and The Northern Lights: A Guide. One of the foremost scholars on the subject, Mr. Brekke has spoken multiple times to full houses at the Smithsonian and elsewhere. In this interactive session, he will utilize photos and video footage from NASA satellites to discuss the visual phenomenon known as the Northern Lights. This panel will be moderated by Joseph M. Davila, an Astrophysicist in the Solar Physics Branch at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, MD.
Part of Nordic Cool 2013.
Joseph M. Davila, USA (Moderator)
Joseph M. Davila is an award-winning astrophysicist in the Solar Physics Branch of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Davila earned a BS in Mechanical Engineering from Lamar University, Beaumont, TX in 1972, a BS in Physics from the University of California, Irvine in 1978 and a PhD in Astronomy from the University of Arizona in 1982. His research interests have included the linear and non-linear theory of hydromagnetic waves; hydromagnetic instabilities due to energetic particle beams, resonance absorption in inhomogeneous plasmas, the acceleration of high speed wind streams in solar and stellar coronal holes, and plasma heating in closed magnetic structures. Dr. Davila has also published research on the acceleration of cosmic rays, the transport of energetic particles within the Galaxy, the modulation of Galactic cosmic rays by the solar wind, and the propagation of solar cosmic rays in the interplanetary medium.
Pål Brekke, Norway
Pål Brekke received a Dr. Scient degree in 1993 from the University of Oslo and he participated on behalf of Norway in the pre-launch activities for the NASA/ESA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission. After the launch of SOHO in December 1995, he was part of the science operation team at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1999, he joined the European Space Agency (ESA) as the SOHO Deputy Project Scientist stationed at NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. While there he was also responsible for outreach and media activities making SOHO into one of the most well-known current satellite projects with more than 60 million hits per month on their web page. Currently, he works as a senior advisor at the Norwegian Space Centre in Oslo and as an adjunct professor at the University Center at Svalbard (UNIS). He is a Norwegian delegate to the ESA Science Programme Committee and a delegate to the International Living with a Star. He is the recipient of a Fulbright Fellowship, ESA's Exceptional Achievement Award, and the Laurels for Team Achievements from the International Academy for Astronautics. He is an internationally known lecturer and author of several popular science articles and books - the latest Our Explosive Sun (Springer 2012). He will be coming out with a new book in January tailored toward tourists, visitors, and anyone hunting the northern lights, The Northern Lights: A Guide.
This is a FREE event. General Admission tickets will be distributed, two (2) per person on a first-come-- first-serve basis, in front of the theater, 30 minutes before the performance begins.
The Nordic Cool 2013 Literature Series is curated by Danish Arts Council, Norwegian Literature Abroad, Swedish Arts Council (Kulturrådet), Finnish Literature Exchange, and Icelandic Literature Foundation.
Nordic Cool 2013 is presented in cooperation with
and Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden.
The Honorable Bonnie McElveen-Hunter, Marilyn Carlson Nelson, and Barbro Osher
Major support is provided by the Honorable Bonnie McElveen-Hunter,
Mrs. Marilyn Carlson Nelson and Dr. Glen Nelson, the Barbro Osher Pro Suecia Foundation,
David M. Rubenstein, and the State Plaza Hotel.
International Programming at the Kennedy Center is made possible through the generosity of the
Kennedy Center International Committee on the Arts.

Dover Castle, Kent - England
Located at the shortest crossing between the UK and continental Europe, Dover Castle played a prime role in England's historical fortunes. Invading from France, William the Conqueror built the first castle in 1066 - an earthwork structure with a motte. Henry II did most to shape the building between 1179 and 1188, adding defences radiating out from the keep to produce Europe's first concentric castle. Henry II’s work was carried out with the help of Maurice the Ingeniator, and was completed by King John, resulting in a four-storey keep, a three-towered forebuilding and impregnable defensive walls.
From 1216-17 the castle was besieged by the French, standing up to the test, but Henry III strengthened the defences further. The outer curtain wall was completed, stretching to the edge of the cliff, and Constable's Gate was constructed - a cluster of different sized towers designed to command all angles of attack. In the 18th century, Colonel William Twiss added extra gun positions, and constructed Constable's Bastion, Canon's Gateway and numerous barracks and storehouses. Further additions were made in the 1850s, and Dover Castle played an vital role in the two world wars as a site for anti-aircraft guns and radar. The army remained in the castle until 1958, and in 1963 handed it over to the Ministry of Works for preservation.
The entry to Dover Castle, which includes two chapels, is the magnificent forebuilding. The significance of the three-towered forebuilding , can be fully appreciated, stretching along the eastern wall of the keep. It was around this stronghold that the concentric castle was developed and work was completed in the mid-13th century. Looming over the busy port, the centrepiece of Dover Castle is the Great Tower - the largest keep in Britain - a four storey building housing a basement, a first floor and a second floor spanning two stories. The outer curtain wall, with twenty individual towers, creates an outer bailey stretching to the edge of the cliff.
The Great Tower and forebuilding, viewed from the west demonstrate the vast size of Dover Castle, perched atop the cliffs overlooking the English Channel. Beneath the castle is a network of tunnels, a barracks during the Napoleonic Wars and a military command centre during World War II.

Robin Yapp, Contributor
December 10, 2012 | 5 Comments
Saudi Arabia's newly announced commitment to introducing solar-powered desalination plants marks a welcome and significant step in advancing the technology. In October 2012, Abdul Rahman Al-Ibrahim, governor of the country's Saline Water Conversion Corporation (SWCC), which procures the majority of its extensive municipal desalination assets, announced plans to establish three new solar-powered desalination plants in Haqel, Dhuba and Farasan. SWCC is the biggest producer of desalinated water worldwide, accounting for 18% of global output.
Energy-intensive desalination plants have traditionally run on fossil fuels, but renewables, particularly solar power, are now beginning to play a part.
Around half the operating cost of a desalination plant comes from energy use, and on current trends Saudi Arabia and many other countries in the region would consume most of the oil they produce on desalination by 2050.
The dominant desalination technology at present, with around 60% of global capacity, is Reverse Osmosis (RO), which pushes brine water through a membrane that retains the salt and other impurities.
Thermal desalination uses heat as well as electricity in distillation processes with saline feedwater heated to vaporise, so fresh water evaporates and the brine is left behind. Cooling and condensation are then used to obtain fresh water for consumption.
Multi Stage Flash (MSF), the most common thermal technique accounting for around 27% of global desalination capacity, typically consumes 80.6 kWh of heat energy plus 2.5-3.5 kWh of electricity per m3 of water. Large scale RO requires only around 3.5-5 kWh/m3 of electricity.
According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), desalination with renewable energy can already compete cost-wise with conventional systems in remote regions where the cost of energy transmission is high. Elsewhere, it is still generally more expensive than desalination plants using fossil fuels, but IRENA states that it is 'expected to become economically attractive as the costs of renewable technologies continue to decline and the prices of fossil fuels continue to increase.'
Solar Reducing Costs
SWCC has taken a long view and aims to gradually convert all its desalination plants to run on solar power as part of a drive unveiled by the Saudi government earlier this year to install 41 GW of solar power by 2032.
The Al-Khafji solar desalination project, near the border with Kuwait, will become the first large-scale solar-powered seawater reverse osmosis (SWRO) plant in the world, producing 30,000 m3 of water per day for the town's 100,000 inhabitants.
Due for completion at the end of 2012, it has been constructed by King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), the Saudi national science agency, using technology developed in conjunction with IBM. Innovations include a new polymer membrane to make RO more energy efficient and protect the membrane from chlorine - which is used to pretreat seawater - and clogging with oil and marine organisms.
The use of solar power will bring huge cuts to the facility's contribution to global warming and smog compared to use of RO or MSF with fossil fuels, according to the developers.
Al-Khafji is the first step in KACST's solar energy programme to reduce desalination costs. For phase two, construction of a new plant to produce 300,000 m3 of water per day is planned by 2015, and phase three will involve several more plants by 2018.
Historically, desalination plants have been concentrated in the Persian Gulf region, where there is no alternative for maintaining the public water supply. The region has excellent solar power prospects, suggesting that coupling of the two technologies may become commonplace. A pilot project to construct 30 small-scale solar desalination plants by the Environment Agency Abu Dhabi has already seen 22 plants in operation, each producing 25 m3 of potable water per day.
But population increases and looming water scarcity have also prompted widespread investment in desalination. It is now practised in some 150 countries including the US, Europe, Australia, China and Japan and it is becoming an increasingly attractive option both financially and for supply security.
Over the past five years the capacity of operational desalination plants has increased by 57% to 78.4 million m3 per day, according to the International Development Agency. Sharply falling technology costs have been a key driver of the trend and an EU-funded project is examining the case for expanding solar-powered desalination.
Solar power may even offer a solution to an impending crisis in Yemen, where water availability per capita is less than 130 m3/year. Yemen's capital Sana'a, with a population of two million, faces running out of groundwater before 2025. It is estimated that a solar plant powered by a 1250 MW parabolic trough to desalinate water from the Red Sea and pump it 250 km to Sana'a could be constructed for around $6 billion.
Around 700 million people in 43 countries are classified by the UN as suffering from water scarcity today - but by 2025 the figure is forecast to rise to 1.8 billion. With the global population expected to reach nine billion by 2050 and the US secretary of state openly discussing the threat of water shortages leading to wars, desalinated water has never been more important.
Demand for desalinated water is projected to grow by 9% per year until 2016 due to increased consumption in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and in energy-importing countries such as the US, India and China.Population growth and depletion of surface and groundwater means desalination capacity in the MENA region is expected to grow from 21 million m3/day in 2007 to 110 million m3/day in 2030, according to the International Energy Agency.
US President John F Kennedy, speaking in 1962, said: 'If we could produce fresh water from salt water at a low cost, that would indeed be a great service to humanity, and would dwarf any other scientific accomplishment.' In the half century since, the need for innovation to satisfy humanity's demand for clean water has become ever more urgent. While technological advances continue to improve the efficiency of desalination methods, it is vital that the sources of power used by desalination plants also continue to evolve.
To add your comments you must sign-in or create a free account.
With over 57,000 subscribers and a global readership in 174 countries around the world, Renewable Energy World Magazine covers industry, policy, technology, finance and markets for all renewable technologies. Content is aimed decision makers...

Please visit this url for more educational videos:
World War I (abbreviated as WW-I, WWI, or WW1), also known as the First World War, the Great War, and the War to End All Wars, was a global military conflict that embroiled most of the world's great powers, assembled in two opposing alliances: the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance. Over 70 million military personnel were mobilized in one of the largest wars in history. The main combatants descended into a state of total war, pumping their entire scientific and industrial capabilities into the war effort. Over 15 million people were killed, making it one of the deadliest conflicts in history.
The immediate or proximate cause of war was the assassination on 28 June 1914 of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, by Gavrilo Princip, a Serbian nationalist. Austria-Hungary's resulting demands against the Kingdom of Serbia activated a sequence of alliances. Within weeks the major European powers were at war; their global empires meant that the conflict soon spread worldwide.
By the war's end, four major imperial powers—Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire—had been militarily and politically defeated, with the latter two ceasing to exist as autonomous entities. The revolutionized Soviet Union emerged from the Russian Empire, while the map of central Europe was completely redrawn into numerous smaller states. The League of Nations was formed in the hope of preventing another such conflict. The European nationalism spawned by the war, the repercussions of Germany's defeat, and the Treaty of Versailles would eventually lead to the beginning of World War II in 1939.

THREE-PHASE ROTATING FIELDS
The three-phase induction motor also operates on the principle of a rotating magnetic field. The following discussion shows how the stator windings can be connected to a three-phase ac input and have a resultant magnetic field that rotates.
Figure 4-4, views A-C show the individual windings for each phase. Figure 4-4, view D, shows how the three phases are tied together in a Y-connected stator. The dot in each diagram indicates the common point of the Y-connection. You can see that the individual phase windings are equally spaced around the stator. This places the windings 120° apart.
Figure 4-4. - Three-phase, Y-connected stator.
The three-phase input voltage to the stator of figure 4-4 is shown in the graph of figure 4-5.
Use the left-hand rule for determining the electromagnetic polarity of the poles at any given instant. In applying the rule to the coils in figure 4-4, consider that current flows toward the terminal numbers for positive voltages, and away from the terminal numbers for negative voltages.
Figure 4-5. - Three-phase rotating-field polarities and input voltages.
The results of this analysis are shown for voltage points 1 through 7 in figure 4-5. At point 1, the magnetic field in coils 1-1A is maximum with polarities as shown. At the same time, negative voltages are being felt in the 2-2A and 3-3A windings. These create weaker magnetic fields, which tend to aid the 1-1A field. At point 2, maximum negative voltage is being felt in the 3-3A windings. This creates a strong magnetic field which, in turn, is aided by the weaker fields in 1-1A and 2-2A. As each point on the voltage graph is analyzed, it can be seen that the resultant magnetic field is rotating in a clockwise direction. When the three-phase voltage completes one full cycle (point 7), the magnetic field has rotated through 360°.
ROTOR BEHAVIOR IN A ROTATING FIELD
For purposes of explaining rotor movement, let's assume that we can place a bar magnet in the center of the stator diagrams of figure 4-5. We'll mount this magnet so that it is free to rotate in this area. Let's also assume that the bar magnet is aligned so that at point 1 its south pole is opposite the large N of the stator field.
You can see that this alignment is natural. Unlike poles attract, and the two fields are aligned so that they are attracting. Now, go from point 1 through point 7. As before, the stator field rotates clockwise. The bar magnet, free to move, will follow the stator field, because the attraction between the two fields continues to exist. A shaft running through the pivot point of the bar magnet would rotate at the same speed as the rotating field.
This speed is known as synchronous speed. The shaft represents the shaft of an operating motor to which the load is attached.
Remember, this explanation is an oversimplification. It is meant to show how a rotating field can cause mechanical rotation of a shaft. Such an arrangement would work, but it is not used. There are limitations to a permanent magnet rotor. Practical motors use other methods, as we shall see in the next paragraphs.
The construction of the synchronous motors is essentially the same as the construction of the salient-pole alternator. In fact, such an alternator may be run as an ac motor. It is similar to the drawing in figure 4-6. Synchronous motors have the characteristic of constant speed between no load and full load. They are capable of correcting the low power factor of an inductive load when they are operated under certain conditions.
They are often used to drive dc generators. Synchronous motors are designed in sizes up to thousands of horsepower. They may be designed as either single-phase or multiphase machines. The discussion that follows is based on a three-phase design.
Figure 4-6. - Revolving-field synchronous motor.
To understand how the synchronous motor works, assume that the application of three-phase ac power to the stator causes a rotating magnetic field to be set up around the rotor. The rotor is energized with dc (it acts like a bar magnet). The strong rotating magnetic field attracts the strong rotor field activated by the dc. This results in a strong turning force on the rotor shaft. The rotor is therefore able to turn a load as it rotates in step with the rotating magnetic field.
It works this way once it's started. However, one of the disadvantages of a synchronous motor is that it cannot be started from a standstill by applying three-phase ac power to the stator. When ac is applied to the stator, a high-speed rotating magnetic field appears immediately. This rotating field rushes past the rotor poles so quickly that the rotor does not have a chance to get started. In effect, the rotor is repelled first in one direction and then the other. A synchronous motor in its purest form has no starting torque. It has torque only when it is running at synchronous speed.
A squirrel-cage type of winding is added to the rotor of a synchronous motor to cause it to start. The squirrel cage is shown as the outer part of the rotor in figure 4-7. It is so named because it is shaped and looks something like a turnable squirrel cage. Simply, the windings are heavy copper bars shorted together by copper rings. A low voltage is induced in these shorted windings by the rotating three-phase stator field. Because of the short circuit, a relatively large current flows in the squirrel cage.
This causes a magnetic field that interacts with the rotating field of the stator. Because of the interaction, the rotor begins to turn, following the stator field; the motor starts. We will run into squirrel cages again in other applications, where they will be covered in more detail.
Figure 4-7. - Self-starting synchronous ac motor.
To start a practical synchronous motor, the stator is energized, but the dc supply to the rotor field is not energized. The squirrel-cage windings bring the rotor to near synchronous speed. At that point, the dc field is energized. This locks the rotor in step with the rotating stator field. Full torque is developed, and the load is driven. A mechanical switching device that operates on centrifugal force is often used to apply dc to the rotor as synchronous speed is reached.
The practical synchronous motor has the disadvantage of requiring a dc exciter voltage for the rotor. This voltage may be obtained either externally or internally, depending on the design of the motor.

As a holistic veterinarian, I feel it is incredibly important to take the whole
animal into consideration when it comes to nutrition. And, whenever practical, my
preference is to provide nutrients, minerals and vitamins in their natural forms.
In this post, I’d like to talk to you specifically about vitamin E, to review both the strengths and weaknesses
of natural and synthetic forms.
Vitamin E is an incredibly complex and important nutrient that, among other things,
functions as an antioxidant. Antioxidants are naturally occurring nutrients that
promote health by slowing the destructive aging process of cells (a breakdown called
“peroxidation”). In peroxidation, damaged molecules known as free radicals steal
pieces from other cells, like fat, protein or DNA. The damage can spread, damaging
and killing entire groups of cells. While peroxidation can be useful to destroy
old cells or germs and parasites, when left unchecked, free radicals produced by
peroxidation also damages healthy cells. Antioxidants can help to stem the tide
of peroxidation, thus stabilizing free radicals.
Antioxidants like vitamin E are crucial to the health of companion animals of any age.
They can improve the quality of the immune response and the effectiveness
of vaccines in young pets, and help maintain a vital immune system in seniors. More...

Today, existing insulin pumps are about the size of a pager. The new ST- enabled Debiotech miniaturized MEMS device is about one quarter the size of these existing pumps and can be worn as a nearly invisible patch on the skin. The small size frees the patient from concerns with holding the pump in place and concealing it under clothing.
The insulin Nanopump, developed by Debiotech and industrialized by ST, represents the first use of microfluidic MEMS technology in diabetes treatment. Functional samples have already been produced and the two partners expect that a fully industrialized product, in the form of a disposable cartridge, will be available in selected markets in 2008. Debiotech will remain responsible for the commercialization of the product through its licenses with major players in the medical device market.The press release states that the Nanopump can control it's output down to the nanoliter level and has capabilities of detecting occlusions, bubbles and other malfunctions. A browse through their website shows that this is not the only innovation they're working on that affects diabetics. They're also developing a micro-needle array built using MEMS technology to allow for improved hypodermic drug delivery.

Examples of analysis sections
An example from a law field report about a courtroom observation
Click here to see the description section of this law field report.
| The legal processes I observed in the district court hearing reflect to a certain extent Australian social values. Their purpose is to attempt to maintain an efficient court system and create justice before the law. Processes such as rules of evidence which ensure only the most applicable evidence is heard have been developed over many years, thus demonstrating an influence of past and future cases. Similarly, the doctrine of precedent ensures that similar cases have similar results. Procedural grounds for objections protect witnesses from harassment and potential confusion. Therefore, all of these legal processes create an environment in which changing social values will bring about complementary changes in court decisions.
||The meaning and theoretical significance of the observations described are explored
Footnote 1: adapted from Woodward-Kron, R., Thomson, E. & Meek, J. (2000) A text based guide to academic writing. CD-Rom. Dept. Of Modern Languages, University of Wollongong.
An example from an education field report about a classroom practicum experience
| As I help the students I am conscious of the scaffolding Vygotsky described taking place. I observed other people such as teachers and parents scaffolding with their children. It was, therefore, interesting to realise that I was doing the same as I walked around the classroom helping the children with their tasks. Scaffolding helps the children to reach their zone of proximal development which in turn helps them to achieve more complex tasks.
I have found my practical experience in the classroom has been full of examples supporting the theories of Piaget and Vygotsky and to a lesser extent Erikson. It is also good to see that these theories actually have real world application to child development.
|Exploring the significance of practical experience and observations from a theoretical perspective
Reflection about what the field experience has meant for theoretical understanding
This is the analysis section from a history field report about historical monuments.
Click here to see the description section of this history field report.
The Bulli Coal Mining Company had 331 employees: this represented approximately 20% of the population of Bulli. Given the small size of the Bulli community, the population was calculated at 1352 persons in the 1891 census (Mitchell & Sherington, 1984: 42), and its dependence on the Bulli Coal Mining Company, the impact of a disaster of this magnitude was enormous. Henry Parkes and his government realising the hardship being experienced by the community, particularly the bereaved families, gave “official support to a public fund and established a board to distribute the money after investigating the needs of those bereaved” (Mitchell & Sherington, 1984: 58).
The impact of the disaster is reflected in the structure of the monument. The monument was intended to last the test of time. Its shape, an obelisk, is unlike anything else in the area. This fact combined with the historical use of the obelisk, principally in ancient Egypt, suggests the memorial was considered important to the community. No reference is made on the monument, however, in regard to the date of the dedication or to who unveiled it which is significant given the government support of a disaster relief fund for the Bulli community in the wake of the disaster.
Analysis of the event the monument commemorates
Conclusion drawn about the structure and shape of the monument given
Footnote 2: adapted from Flello, J. unpublished manuscript.
An example from an education field report about a classroom practicum experience. (This example contains a mixture of description and analysis within a single paragraph. This is an alternative approach to having these two types of different writing in separate sections.)
| Both childcare centres encouraged the children to think critically and reflectively about themselves and the wider community; for example, I observed an incident at centre 2 (14/5), where the teacher helped the children with an equity of access issue in the playground. Several children wanted to play on the slide and gym equipment but one child continually walked up the slide disrupting the pattern of play. The group of children began to speak loudly and harshly to him and threatened to kick him. The teacher was able to facilitate a resolution to this problem by getting the children to examine what was happening and think of alternative actions. There were all, in effect, being empowered to deal with the injustice they were facing in the playground rather than resorting to physical violence or giving up and playing elsewhere, as some children were about to do.
||Topic sentence: a general theoretical conclusion is drawn
Conclusion illustrated by an example observed in the field
Description of the observed event
Theoretical perspective used to analyse the event
Footnote 3: adapted from McNabb, Learning Skills Centre, University of Melbourne.
Comments and questions should
be directed to Unilearning@uow.edu.au

Before we may design a crystal filter it is necessary to know the crystal's data.
Unfortunately this information is not in the datasheet - or we have no datasheet
because the crystals were bought on a market some decades ago ...
Fig.1: A crystal, it's symbol and equivalent circuit
Fortunately these values may be measured using a small adapter - which may be built on the fly.
We measured our crystals using the circuit below :
Fig.2: Measurement Adapter
Fig.3: Measurement Adapter Schematics
The Capacitors used are Mica (Glimmer) obtained from www.reichelt.de
With a jumper either the short or one of the series capacitors ( 15 pF or 33 pF ) may be selected.
The tree positions of the jumper result in 3 different Transmission curves when using
a Network Analyser or Spectrum Analyser with built in generator.
( of course you may use a generator and a hf-voltmeter or anything equivalent ... )
The Amplitude response looks somehow like this :
Fig.4: Measured Amplitude Response S21
You will notice, that the maximum (fs) will move while the minimum (fp) remains constant.
With the short selected we measure the lowest frequency where Transmission
is maximum. The maximum ( with 33 pF selected ) is next and then the
maximum ( with 15 pF selected ).

"We consider it essentially the child's personal time and don't feel it should be taken away for academic or punitive reasons," said Dr. Robert Murray, who co-authored the new policy statement for the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Recess helps students develop communication skills, such as cooperation and sharing, and helps counteract the time they spend sitting in class, according to the statement.
"The cognitive literature indicates that children are exactly as we are as adults. Whenever they're performing a complicated or complex task, they need time to process the information," said Murray, a professor at Ohio State University in Columbus.
"Kids have to have that time scheduled. They're not given the opportunity to just get up and walk around for a few minutes," he added.
Previous research, according to the statement's authors, found children pay closer attention and perform better mentally after recess.
Last January, a review of 14 studies found kids who get more exercise from - among other things - recess and playing on sports teams tend to do better in school (see Reuters Health story of January 3, 2012 here: http://reut.rs/UcJhV0.)
But a 2011 survey of 1,800 elementary schools found about a third were not offering recess to their third grade classes (see Reuters Health story of December 5, 2011 here: http://reut.rs/UcOqwt.)
Murray told Reuters Health that schools in Japan offer children about 10 minutes of free time after every 50 minutes of class, which he said makes sense.
"I think you can feel it if you go to a lecture that after 40 to 50 minutes of a concentrated activity you need to take a break," he said.
Currently, the American Heart Association calls for at least 20 minutes of recess every day, but Murray said recess needs depend on the child.
"Most schools - on average - are working on the framework of 15 to 30 minute bursts of recess once or twice a day," he said.
There is, however, consensus on when in the day children's recess should take place.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Agriculture both recommend schools schedule recess before lunch.
Previous studies have found that children waste less food and behave better for the rest of the day when their recess is before their scheduled lunch, the pediatricians' statement notes.
The statement also says schools should not substitute physical education classes for recess.
"Those are completely different things and they offer completely different outcomes," said Murray. "(Physical education teachers are) trying to teach motor skills and the ability of those children to use those skills in a bunch of different scenarios. Recess is a child's free time."
The pediatricians also warn against a recess that is too structured, such as having games led by adults.
"I think it becomes structured to the point where you lose some of those developmental and social emotion benefits of free play," said Murray.
"This is a very important and overlooked time of day for the child and we should not lose sight of the fact that it has very important benefits," he added.
SOURCE: http://bit.ly/HjQ8dI Pediatrics, online December 31, 2012.

Choose Privacy Week
Privacy is a particularly slippery and amorphous issue, about which people hold a wide variety of opinions and beliefs, particularly in the post-9-11 world in which we live.
Libraries and library workers think about privacy issues a lot - and want our customers to think critically about privacy issues, too. Personal privacy issues touch everyone at virtually every stage of life, and even into death (e.g., access to the Social Security Death Index online), raising a universe of hard questions to be answered.
Sponsored by the ALA’s Office for Intellectual Freedom (OIF), Choose Privacy Week is an annual initiative inviting library users of all ages and backgrounds into a national conversation about privacy rights in a digital age. The theme for this year's Choose Privacy Week is "Freedom from Surveillance."
Libraries have been interested in maintaining the privacy of individuals. Beaufort County Library Board of Trustees adopted the American Library Association Core of Ethics years ago. It's part of our core values as library workers. Why? Because freedom of speech is meaningless without the freedom to read.
Click here [http://www.privacyrevolution.org/images/uploads/Trina_UserHandout.pdf] for handout explaining why librarians and libraries insist upon empowering our customers to explore, research, and make choices based upon their individual needs.
Q: Where are the lines drawn between "right of privacy" and "right to know" today ?
The major source used in the preparation of this entry was http://www.privacyrevolution.org/. Please explore the website - and think hard about where you stand on the issue of individual privacy rights.

3.1 Systematic Errors
Systematic errors are uncertainties in the bias of the data. A simple example is the zeroing of an instrument such as a voltmeter. If the voltmeter is not correctly zeroed before use, then all values measured by the voltmeter will be biased, i.e., offset by some constant amount or factor. However, even if the utmost care is taken in setting the instrument to zero, one can only say that it has been zeroed to within some value. This value may be small, but it sets a limit on the degree of certainty in the measurements and thus to the conclusions that can be drawn.
An important point to be clear about is that a systematic error implies that all measurements in a set of data taken with the same instrument are shifted in the same direction by the same amount - in unison. This is in sharp contrast to random errors where each individual measurement fluctuates independently of the others. Systematic errors, therefore, are usually most important when groups of data points taken under the same conditions are being considered. Unfortunately, there is no consistent method by which systematic errors may be treated or analyzed. Each experiment must generally be considered individually and it is often very difficult just to identify the possible sources let alone estimate the magnitude of the error. Our discussion in the remainder of this chapter, therefore, will not be concerned with this topic.

This week’s illustration post focuses on perhaps the most popular illustrated genre of the Renaissance: the emblem book. Emblem books were a genre developed in the early 16th century as digestible and curious works which combined an image, a motto and an explanatory text. This genre remained popular on the continent well into the 17th century, although, strangely, it never found any real footing in the U.K. The illustrations were most commonly woodcuts and the mottoes Latin, however Greek and vernacular mottoes were common as well.
The intention of most emblem books was to deliver a moral lesson through text and image, but often the connection between these two elements is obscure. There are many projects that have developed over the last decade to provide a digital repository for these books worth exploring (Emblematica Online [Univeristy of Illinois and Herzog August Bibliothek], University of Glasgow and the Emblem Project Utrecht are good examples).
Although St Andrews 17th century holdings remain largely unexplored, I did come across a wonderful example of a Spanish emblem book published at the height of the genre’s popularity. This week’s post features the emblems from Sebastián de Covarrubias y Orozco’s Emblemas morales (1610). This work was published under the direction of Don Francisco Gómez de Sandoval, 1st Duke of Lerma, shortly after Covarrubias had recovered from a serious illness. This is perhaps Covarrubias’s most popular publication on emblems, but he is most well-known for his Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española (1611).
From the beginning of this book it is quite obvious that the author’s roots, both as a canon in the Catholic Church and as a keen lexicographer, are quite influential. However, Covarrubias does stray off into the weirder and esoteric world of the emblem books of the day: dragons, serpents, snake-eating deer and oversized-tops (above, which look like the ship from Flight of the Navigator to this blogger). Covarrubias also draws on everyday scenes of fishermen and farmers toiling in the field to root this emblem book in the real-world.
I’ve sampled here some of my favourites from this book, however a full scan is available at Emblematica Online. This work was not Covarrubias’s first foray into the world of emblem books, in 1589 he published a work, also entitled Emblemas morales, which provides almost 100 pages worth of text about emblems and their origins and then provides 100 examples afterword (none of which are repeated in his 1610 work). This work was republished in 1604 with the same text but with new woodcuts.
Covarrubias’s 1610 Emblemas morales, however, is a completely new work, featuring new emblems and mottoes with shorter verse explanations.

S7 Technical Assistance
Eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthera leucophaea)
Determining whether eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthera leucophaea) may be present in a proposed project area in the following northeastern Illinois counties: Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry and Will.
|Photo by Mike Redmer
As part of Step 1 of the S7 process, you checked the Illinois species list and found that eastern prairie fringed orchid is present in the county where your proposed project is located. The next step is to determine whether eastern prairie fringed orchid "may be present" in the action area of your proposed project. Below is guidance to help you make that determination.
Habitat: The eastern prairie fringed orchid (orchid) occurs in a wide variety of habitats, from wet to mesic prairie or wetland communities, including, but not limited to sedge meadow, fen, marsh, or marsh edge. It can occupy a very wide moisture gradient of prairie and wetland vegetation. It requires full sun for optimal growth and flowering, which ideally would restrict it to grass and sedge dominated plant communities. However, in some plant communities where there are encroaching species such as cattail and/or dogwood, the orchid may be interspersed or within the edge zones of these communities and thus can sometimes occur in partially shaded areas. The substrate of the sites where this orchid occurs include glacial soils, lake plain deposits, muck, or peat which could range from more or less neutral to mildly calcareous (Bowles et al. 2005, USFWS 1999). In some cases, the species may also occur along ditches or roadways where this type of habitat is present.
Processes that maintain habitats in early or mid-successional phases may be important in providing the sunny, open conditions required by the orchid (USFWS 1999). Sedge meadow and marsh habitats that support this orchid are usually early- or mid- successional because of past grazing, drainage, or soil disturbance. Patch disturbances that expose the soil to this orchid’s seeds, and reduce competition from established plants, may be needed for seedling establishment.
Hawkmoths are the pollinators of this orchid species. In Illinois the hawkmoth, Sphinx eremitus is a confirmed pollinator although there may be others. Eumorpha pandorus and Eumorpha achemon have been confirmed as pollinators in other states. Host plants for the caterpillars of Sphinx eremitus include various species of beebalm (Monarda spp.), mints (Mentha spp.), bugleweed (Lycopus spp.) and sage (Salvia spp.).
Follow the steps below to determine whether the eastern prairie fringed orchid may be present in the action area of your proposed project. This guidance is specific to Cook, Lake, McHenry, DuPage, Kane, and Will counties in northeastern Illinois.
1) Define the action area – all areas to be affected directly or indirectly by the Federal action and not just in the immediate area involved in the action. (For example: downstream areas, adjacent off-site wetlands, etc.)
2) Does the action area support any wet to mesic prairie or wetland
communities including, but not limited to sedge meadow, fen, or marsh edges?
If the answer is yes, go to number 3 (below). If the answer is no, conclude that “the eastern prairie fringed orchid is not present,” document your finding for your records or provide this information to the federal action agency. No further consultation is required.
3) Conduct a floristic quality assessment for the proposed project site during the growing season or use a previous assessment that is not more than three years old and was conducted during the growing season.
4) If any wetland in the action area is determined to be high quality, (a Floristic Quality Index of 20 or greater and/or a Native Mean C of 3.5 or greater) proceed to number 5 (below) or contact the Chicago Field Office for further consultation.
Wetlands that are not high quality will not support eastern prairie fringed orchid. For those wetlands, conclude that “the eastern prairie fringed orchid is not present,” document your finding for your records or provide this information to the federal action agency. No further consultation is required for those wetlands.
5) Compare the plant species list generated for each high quality wetland with our Associate Plant Species List for the Eastern Prairie Fringed Orchid. If four or more associates are listed, then proceed to number 6. If not, high quality wetlands that support three or less eastern prairie fringed orchid associate plant species are unlikely to support eastern prairie fringed orchids. Conclude that “the eastern prairie fringed orchid is not present” and document your finding for your records or provide this information to the federal action agency. No further consultation is necessary for those wetlands.
6) The eastern prairie fringed orchid may be present in your action area. You may either assume that the eastern prairie fringed orchid is present and proceed to Step 2 of the Section 7 Consultation Process or conduct a field search during the bloom date of the orchid; June 28 through July 11. Because northeastern Illinois orchid populations bloom sporadically rather than all plants blooming at the same time, searches should be conducted on a minimum of three non-consecutive days within this time period. Please notify the Chicago Field Office before conducting your survey.
7) If you assume that the eastern prairie fringed orchid may be present in the action area or a field search proves that the orchid is present, the next step in the S7 Consultation Process is to determine whether the proposed action may affect any eastern prairie fringed orchids. Go to Step 2 of the S7 Consultation Process to begin that determination.
Please contact the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Chicago Illinois Field Office if you for more information or if you have any questions.
Chicago Illinois Field Office
1250 South Grove, Suite 103
Barrington, Illinois 60010
Phone: 847/381-2253, ext. 20
1Swink, F. and G. Wilhelm. 1994. Plants of the Chicago Region, 4th ed. Indiana Academy of Science, Indianapolis. 921pp.
Step 1 of the Section 7 Process
Section 7 Technical Assistance

A species on the brink – Freshwater Pearl Mussel
They can live for over a century, they have one of the most bizarre life-cycles of any species you’re likely to find and they’re one of the reasons why the Romans invaded Britain. What’s more is that their future is in our hands. The freshwater pearl mussel might not have the glamour of some other iconic ‘Scottish’ species like the golden eagle or red squirrel, but they’re incredibly important. Scotland holds around half of the world’s population of this fascinating creature and they are currently balancing on a knife-edge.
Populations are found in some of the rivers flowing into Loch Ness.
Freshwater pearl mussels are very slow-growing and live at the bottom of clean, generally fast-flowing rivers. These animals, which spend the early part of their life harmlessly attached to the gills of trout and salmon before settling onto a suitable substrate are now extinct across most of their former range. Highland rivers are a stronghold for the species.
As their name suggests, they very occasionally bear a pearl, and this has in many ways led to their downfall. The taking of mussels by ‘pearl-fishers’ has been the main reason for the massive declines in these populations, but they have also been affected by pollution and river-engineering works.
The freshwater pearl mussel was given full legal protection in 1998 but unfortunately illegal activity still continues. Every year we still come across significant ‘kills’ where piles of hundreds of empty shells mark the scene of a few hours illegal fishing, where a whole population of this globally threatened species can be wiped out in a couple of hours.
These threats to the species have meant that the freshwater pearl mussel is a UK Wildlife Crime priority. This means that the Police work closely with Scottish Natural Heritage, anglers, bailiffs, river users and a wide-range of other organisations to help tackle these crimes by improving awareness, collection of intelligence and better enforcement to safeguard the species.
However, whilst the police and other organisations do their best to help tackle wildlife crime in this way they can’t do it alone, and the help of the public can be absolutely crucial. Pearl fishing is often carried out in remote locations, or very early in the morning when there is less chance of being detected, and often during the summer when daylight hours are long and the rivers are low. Fishing is often carried out by wading out into rivers and using glass-bottomed buckets to find the mussels and a cleft stick to recover them. If anyone sees or suspects that pearl fishing is taking place we urge people to report it to their local police station and Wildlife Crime Officer as soon as possible.
At the same time there are numerous projects aimed at active conservation of the species, including a recent £3.5 million project funded by the European Commission’s LIFE+ fund and secured by Scottish National Heritage and 14 other organisations. The project will improve habitats for the species, encourage simple and effective positive management of rivers where they are present, improve awareness and understanding of the species as well as helping address wildlife crime issues.
So it’s not all doom and gloom for this remarkable species, and everybody has a role in ensuring it’s survival – let’s hope that we can bring the freshwater pearl mussel back from the brink.
If you would like more information on the species visit SNH’s website at http://www.snh.gov.uk/about-scotlands-nature/species/invertebrates/freshwater-invertebrates/freshwater-pearl-mussel/

Science in fiction affects our ability to understand science in real life. For instance, you might already be familiar with the idea that detective shows on TV, particularly forensics shows like CSI, might be influencing what juries expect to see in a courtroom.
This is called the "CSI effect" and it's hotly debated. Some prosecutors think it has a real impact on jury decisions—if they don't get the fancy, scientific evidence they've been conditioned to expect then they won't convict. Meanwhile, though, empirical evidence seems to show a more complicated pattern. Surveys of more than 2000 Michigan jurors found that, while people were heavily expecting to see some high-tech forensic evidence during trials, that expectation probably had more to do with the general proliferation of technology throughout society. More interestingly, that broad expectation didn't seem to definitively influence how jurors voted during a specific trial. In other words: The jury is still out. (*Puts on sunglasses*)
A FRONTLINE documentary that airs tomorrow centers around an interesting corollary on this issue: Whether or not shows like CSI influence juries to expect more technology, they do present a wildly inaccurate portrait of how accurate that technology is. The reality is, many of the tools and techniques used in detective work have never been scientifically verified. We don't know that they actually tell us what they purport to tell us. Other forensic technologies do work, but only if you use them right—and there's no across-the-board standard guaranteeing that happens.
Even ideas you think you can trust implicitly—like fingerprint evidence—turn out to have serious flaws that are seriously under-appreciated by cops, lawyers, judges, and juries.
Brandon Mayfield, an Oregon lawyer, was at the center of international controversy in 2004 after the FBI and an independent analyst incorrectly matched his prints to a partial print found on a bag of detonators from the Madrid terrorist bombings.
Dror asked five fingerprint experts to examine what they were told were the erroneously matched prints of Mayfield. In fact, they were re-examining prints from their own past cases. Only one of the experts stuck by their previous judgments. Three reversed their previous decisions and one deemed them “inconclusive.”
Dror’s argument is that these competent and well-meaning experts were swayed by “cognitive bias”: what they knew (or thought they knew) about the case in front of them swayed their analysis. The Mayfield case and studies like Dror’s have changed how fingerprints are used in the criminal justice system. The FBI no longer testifies that fingerprints are 100 percent infallible.
The Real CSI episode of FRONTLINE airs tomorrow, April 17th. Check out the FRONTLINE website for more information.
Image: Fingerprint developed with black magnetic powder on a cool mint Listerine oral care strip, a Creative Commons Attribution (2.0) image from jackofspades's photostream.

The Chesapeake Bay TMDL, Maryland's Watershed Implementation Plan and Maryland's 2012-2013 Milestone Goals
The Chesapeake Bay TMDL: A Pollution Diet for the Chesapeake Watershed
The Chesapeake Bay is a national treasure constituting the largest estuary in the United States and one of the largest and most biologically productive estuaries in the world. Despite significant efforts by federal, state, and local governments and other interested parties, pollution in the Chesapeake Bay prevents the attainment of existing water quality standards. The pollutants that are largely responsible for impairment of the Bay are nutrients, in the form of nitrogen and phosphorus, and sediment.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in coordination with the Bay watershed jurisdictions of Maryland, Virginia, Pennsylvania, Delaware, West Virginia, New York, and the District of Columbia (DC), developed and, on December 29, 2010, established a nutrient and sediment pollution diet for the Bay, consistent with Clean Water Act requirements, to guide and assist Chesapeake Bay restoration efforts. This pollution diet is known as the Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL), or Bay TMDL.
MDE took part in an ongoing, high-level decision-making process to create the essential framework for this complex, multi-jurisdictional TMDL that will address nutrient and sediment impairments throughout the entire 64,000 square mile Chesapeake Bay watershed.
MDE participated in numerous inter-jurisdictional and inter-agency workgroups and committees over the last three years to provide technical expertise and guidance for developing the Bay TMDL in a manner consistent with the State’s water quality goals and responsibilities. In particular, MDE worked to ensure that the Bay TMDL addressed the nutrient and sediment impairments in all of Maryland’s tidal waters listed as impaired by those pollutants on the State’s Integrated Report of Surface Water Quality.
MDE took the lead on developing an allocation process that will enable the State to meet a key requirement for the Bay TMDL and Maryland’s Watershed Implementation Plan: the sub-allocation of major basin loading caps of nutrient and sediment to each of 58 “segment-sheds” in Maryland – the land areas that drain to each impaired Bay water quality segment – and to each pollutant source sector in those areas.
Maryland’s Watershed Implementation Plan for the Bay TMDL
Concurrent with the development of the Bay TMDL, EPA charged the Bay watershed states and DC with developing watershed implementation plans in order to provide adequate “reasonable assurance” that the jurisdictions can and will achieve the nutrient and sediment reductions necessary to implement the TMDL within their respective boundaries.
Maryland’s Phase I Plan provides a series of proposed strategies that will collectively meet the 2017 target (70% of the total nutrient and sediment reductions needed to meet final 2020 goals). After more than a year of cooperative work, MDE and the Departments of Natural Resources, Agriculture, and Planning released a Draft Phase I Plan for public review in October 2010 and, following extensive consideration of hundreds of public comments, submitted Maryland’s Final Phase I Watershed Implementation Plan to EPA on December 3, 2010.
Maryland’s Phase II Plan provides a series of proposed strategies that will collectively meet the 2017 target (60% of the total nutrient and sediment reductions needed to meet final 2025 goals). This was changed from Phase I due to concerns that the implementation was not achievable with that timeframe. Maryland worked many partners in local jurisdictions to develop Phase II Watershed Implementation Plans with more detailed reduction targets and specific strategies to further ensure that the water quality goals of the Bay TMDL will be met. See Maryland's Development Support for the Chesapeake Bay Phase II WIP webpage.
MDE is continuing to work with its partners in local jurisdictions to implement the Phase II WIP. See the Implementing Maryland’s WIP: Making Progress toward Bay Restoration Goals webpage.
Please direct questions or comments concerning this project to Tom Thornton with Maryland's TMDL Program at (410) 537-3656 or email at Thomas.Thornton@maryland.gov.
|Acrobat® Reader is required to view and print the PDF files. If you do not have it click on the icon to the right.

Coffee is an important crop and is crucial to the economy of many developing countries, generating around US$70 billion per year. There are 115 species in the Coffea genus, but only two, C. arabica and C. canephora, are commercially cultivated. Coffee plants are attacked by many pathogens and insect-pests, which affect not only the production of coffee but also its grain quality, reducing the commercial value of the product. The main insect-pest, the coffee berry borer (Hypotheneumus hampei), is responsible for worldwide annual losses of around US$500 million. The coffee berry borer exclusively damages the coffee berries, and it is mainly controlled by organochlorine insecticides that are both toxic and carcinogenic. Unfortunately, natural resistance in the genus Coffea to H. hampei has not been documented. To overcome these problems, biotechnological strategies can be used to introduce an α-amylase inhibitor gene (α-AI1), which confers resistance against the coffee berry borer insect-pest, into C. arabica plants.
We transformed C. arabica with the α-amylase inhibitor-1 gene (α-AI1) from the common bean, Phaseolus vulgaris, under control of the seed-specific phytohemagglutinin promoter (PHA-L). The presence of the α-AI1 gene in six regenerated transgenic T1 coffee plants was identified by PCR and Southern blotting. Immunoblotting and ELISA experiments using antibodies against α-AI1 inhibitor showed a maximum α-AI1 concentration of 0.29% in crude seed extracts. Inhibitory in vitro assays of the α-AI1 protein against H. hampei α-amylases in transgenic seed extracts showed up to 88% inhibition of enzyme activity.
This is the first report showing the production of transgenic coffee plants with the biotechnological potential to control the coffee berry borer, the most important insect-pest of crop coffee.

Close to standard
|Points of interest||
Ancient Rakatan ruins
Tandun III was originally surveyed approximately 12,293 BBY by Doctor Beramsh, who led an expedition from Ord Mantell. What Beramsh and his team discovered was a lush beautiful world with close to standard gravity and was suitable for both oxygen breathing humans and humanoids. Further exploration of the planet also revealed ruins of ancient population centers which Beramsh believed were constructed by the Rakata.
Despite the survey report of ideal atmospheric conditions, its distance from the Hydian Way prevented Tandun III from ever being colonized. Historical records would indicate that a possible second survey was conducted generations later during Chancellor Finis Valorum's second term.
At some point between 29 BBY and 19 BBY, the Republic Group took an Insignia of Unity that once stood on the podium of the Galactic Senate Rotunda. The group believed the insignia could be used as a symbol to restore Republic honor to the galaxy and brought it to Tandun III for safe-keeping. Enlisting the help of the Antarian Rangers, the Republic Group built a secret storehouse in one of the planet's ancient ruins and made the Stellar Envoy the key to accessing the facility. In 19 BBY the Republic Group and the Antarian Rangers were considered enemies of the Empire and thus the secret facility and the Insignia of Unity were left abandoned and forgotten for over six decades.
During the Yuuzhan Vong's invasion of the galaxy, the Yuuzhan Vong settled the world and began Vongforming it to meet their needs. The land was transformed into cliffs of yorik coral, tampasis of s'teeni, with populations of scherkil hla, sparkbees, and other Yuuzhan Vong biots.
Over the course of twenty years the Vongforming had taken its toll on the planet. Intact forests abundant with life still covered the southern hemisphere, while surface temperatures had rendered landmasses in the northern hemisphere unsuitable for all but the most extremophilic sentient species. Extensive regions of extreme volcanic and tectonic activity griped the planet in catastrophic forces that were likely to destroy it. The sky was filled with powerful winds and icy clouds that produced storms with sheets of rain, lightening, and hailstones. And while still breathable, dweebit beetles filled the atmosphere with high concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, and sulfur.
In 43 ABY the Solos, accompanied by Tobb Jadak and Flitcher Poste, came to Tandun III as part of their quest to uncover the history of the Millennium Falcon. They landed the Falcon inside of the abandoned Republic Group warehouse and discovered the Insignia of Unity. It was at that time that Lestra Oxic appeared and revealed that he had followed the Solos to Tandun III in order to claim the emblem for himself. He told all present the history behind how the emblem ended up at Tandun III and inspected it only to realize that the emblem before him was a fake.
At the same time of the meeting, groundquakes increased in severity and volatility finally ending in the planet's strongest quake. Oxic and his associates, now accompanied by Jadak and Poste, left to continue the search for the true Insignia of Unity, as the Solos themselves fled the planet.
It was shortly after the Millennium Falcon's return to space that Tandun III flared and erupted in a shock wave that hurtled enormous chunks of itself into the vacuum of space.
Behind the scenesEdit
C-3PO stated the first survey of the world took place around 12,293 BBY and that the expedition was launched from Ord Mantell. This is odd due to the fact that Ord Mantell was not colonized until 12,000 BBY.
Additionally, C-3PO said Dr. Beramsh believed the ancient population centers were Rakatan in origin. Yet, the Rakata were unknown to the galaxy at large until the end of the Jedi Civil War in 3,956 BBY.
He continued to claim that the world was not colonized most likely due to its distance from the Hydian Way which was pioneered in 3,705 BBY. Thus the reason why the world was never colonized in the thousands of years between its exploration and the founding of the Hydian Way remains a mystery.

Information contained on this page is provided by NewsUSA, an independent third-party content provider. WorldNow and this Station make no warranties or representations in connection therewith.
/National Children's Cancer Society) - The good news is that some drug shortages
have been resolved, and many essential childhood cancer drugs are now more available. The root of the problem, however, persists.
For the past two years, hospitals have been hit with significant shortages of many generic drugs for several diseases, including cancer. In 2011 alone, there were at least 250 different shortages.
Pharmaceutical companies and drug manufacturers make less money off many of the older, generic drugs used for cancer treatment. But generally, most shortages are a result of manufacturing snags and production problems.
Improvements are being made; cooperation between drug manufacturers and the FDA has helped prevent many new shortages. But at large, oncology drugs for both children and adults are severely lacking.
Sandra Kweder, deputy director of the FDA's Office of New Drugs, wholeheartedly agrees, "With regard to oncology drugs we remain extremely concerned about the shortages," she said at a press conference held by the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
Although there are ongoing shortages of anesthesia, pain medicines and antibiotics, the scarcity of cancer drugs means that any shortage has a huge impact. Last year broke records -- more than 200 cancer drugs were unavailable.
When an Ohio plant was shut down due to manufacturing problems last November, production halted on several critical drugs, including a preservative-free version of methotrexate -- the key treatment for the common pediatric cancer acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
"The childhood cancer community was very concerned," says Angie Hayes, Case Manager for The National Children's Cancer Society (NCCS). "Childhood cancer patients and families shouldn't have to delay treatment because hospitals and cancer treatment centers ran out of medication."
The Fight Against Childhood Cancer Continues
The NCCS has provided assistance to more than 30,000 children in the U.S. For 25 years, NCCS has grown and evolved with programs such as the Pediatric Oncology Program (POP), which has distributed over $54 million to families, and Beyond the Cure. This year alone, Beyond the Cure -- a survivorship program designed to educate children and their families about the challenges they may face as childhood cancer survivors -- has awarded $125,000 in college scholarships to 38 cancer survivors.
To learn more about the resources offered by NCCS, visit www.theNCCS.org

CURRENT CZECH NAME: Ostroh
Ostroh Uhersky, Uhersky Ostroh, Ungarisch-Ostra, Ungarisch-Ostroh
LOCATION: Ostroh is a small
town in Moravia, located at 48.59 longitude and 17.23 latitude, 75 km E
of Brno, 9 km ENE of Bzenec (seeMap
- by Mapquest, then click
on your browser's "Back" button to return to this page).
HISTORY: The earliest known
Jewish community in this town dates from 1592. In 1635 there were
22 Jewish houses. In 1671 there were 16 Jewish houses with more than
30 Jewish families, including Isak Schulklopper, Salamon Lateiner, Israel
Isak, Mandl, Salamon Chaska, Benesch, Friedrich Kojeteiner, Schmidl, Jekl
Fleischhacker, Salamon Mojses, Rabiner, Mojses Stanjetz, Jakob Gutman,
Israel Strimpfstricker, and Loebl Isak. From 1798-1848 there were
89 Jewish families. In 1848 the community numbered 478 members, but
dropped to 220 after the First World War. The Jewish population was
70 in 1930. The present town population is 5,000 - 25,000 with fewer
than 10 Jews.
Noteworthy historical events involving or affecting the Jewish community
were the separation of a Jewish quarter in 1727 and the existence of a
self-standing political community from 1890-1920. The old Jewish
cemetery was established in 17th century, with the last known Jewish burial
in 1862. The Jewish congregation was Conservative.
Birth, Death and Marriage record books for Ostroh may be located at the
Czech State Archives in Prague, Statni istredni archiv, tr. Milady Horokove
133, CZ-166 21 Praha 6, Czech Republic, tel/fax: +42 (2) 333-20274.
Search JewishGen/Internet resources for Ostroh.
NOTABLE RESIDENTS AND DESCENDANTS:
According to the entry in the International Association of Jewish Genealogical
Societies Cemetery Project database, Chaim Weizmann, president of the State
of Israel, once lived in Ostroh.
The following rabbis worked in Ostroh: Salomo Mose (1592); David b. Samuel
Halevy (1659); Mose b. Hakadosch Elchanan from Fuerth (1655); Jesaja b.
Sabatai Scheftel (1659); Joel b. Samuel from Krakau (1668); Mhrr Pinchas
(after 1700); Mhrr Salomo (before 1719); Kolonimos b. mhrr Baruch (from
1720); Loeb Steiniz (d. 1760); Mhrr Pinchas b. mhrr Aaron (1766); Jakob
Hirsch b. Mose Loeb (Biach) Feilbogen (1790-1853); Mose Loeb b. mhrr JA
ha-Kohen Mueller (d. 1853); Dr. Joel Mueller; Dr. S. Wolfsohn; (1876-1878);
Dr. Israel Taglicht (1883-1893); Dr. Emanuel Lenke; Dr. D. Herzog (1897-1900);
Dr. Simon Friedmann; Dr. Michael Halberstamm (from 1919).
Other notables include: Mordechai b. Schalom (community elder and author
of the statutes of the chevra kadisha in 1650); Schalom b. Jecheskel (landowner
1668); Mandl Salamon Steinitzer (land deputy 1732); Michl b. R. Sch. David
(judge); Mose Singer (judge 1835); Mandl Duschak (judge 1858); Loeb Winter
(judge 1860); Jesajas Braun (judge 1864); Sal. Kihn (judge 1876); Salamon
Winter (judge 1880-1888); Jonatan Lamberg (judge); Max Kihn (judge 1898);
Dr. Eduard Stern (judge 1902); Jehuda Diamand (judge 1903); Sigmund Klein
(judge 1909); Loeb Nussbaum; Samuel Kornblueh; Sal. Sommer; Jakob Hahn;
Jakob Strauss; Jechiel Gruenbaum.
Rabbi Dr. Moritz Grünwald was born 29 March 1853 in Ostroh.
He studied at the Universities of Vienna and Leipzig. He founded
the Jüdische Centralblatt in Belovar. In 1883 he became rabbi
of Pisek and later Jungbunzlau. He was the chief rabbi of Sofia from
1893 until his death in London on 10 June 1895.
The great-great- grandson of Amalie Reif (b. Ostroh), E.
Randol Schoenberg, is a frequent contributor to Jewishgen's Austria-Czech
SIG and the submitter of this page.
Tom Beer has submitted an interesting story about his great-grandfather,
Beer (b. Ostroh).
CEMETERIES: There are two Jewish
cemeteries in Ostroh. The older cemetery location is urban, on flat
land, separate but near other cemeteries, and not identified by any sign
or marker. It is reached by turning directly off a public road.
It is open to all. The cemetery is surrounded by no wall or fence
and there is no gate. The approximate size of cemetery before WWII
and now is 0.1277 hectares. The cemetery contains no special memorial
monuments. The cemetery contains no known mass graves. Within the limits
of the cemetery there are no structures. The municipality is the
present owner of the cemetery property, which is now utilized for recreation
(park, playground, sports field). Adjacent properties are commercial
or industrial. The cemetery boundaries have not changed since 1939.
Private visitors come rarely to the cemetery. The cemetery
was vandalized during World War II and between 1945 and 1981. No
maintenance has been done. Now there is occasional clearing or cleaning
by authorities. There is a slight threat posed by pollution and proposed
The new cemetery is located at 1.5 km to the E, Veselska-Str. This
Jewish cemetery was established in 1862. The last known Jewish burials
were in the 1950s and 1960s. The cemetery location is urban, on flat
land, separate, but near other cemeteries, and not identified by any sign
or marker. It is reached by crossing the public property of the town
cemetery. It is open to all. A continuous masonry wall surrounds
the cemetery. There is a gate that does not lock. The
approximate size of the cemetery is now 0.2777 hectares; before WWII it
was about 0.47 hectares. There are 100-500 stones. The cemetery
has no special sections. The tombstones and memorial markers
are made of marble, granite and sandstone. The tombstones vary among
flat shaped stones, finely smoothed and inscribed stones, flat stones with
carved relief decoration and obelisks. The cemetery has tombstones
with bronze decorations or lettering and metal fences around graves.
Inscriptions on tombstones are in Hebrew, German and Czech. The cemetery
contains special memorial monuments to Holocaust victims. There are
no known mass graves. Within the limits of the cemetery are no structures.
The present owner of the cemetery property is the local Jewish community
of Brno. The adjacent properties are other cemeteries.
The current Jewish cemetery boundaries are smaller now than in 1939 because
of the town cemetery. Private visitors come occasionally to the cemetery.
The cemetery has been vandalized occasionally, mostly between 1981-91.
No maintenance has been done. Local/municipal authorities and Jewish
groups from within the country did restoration work, finally completed
in 1991. Now there is occasional clearing or cleaning by authorities.
There is a moderate threat posed by pollution, vegetation and vandalism;
and slight threats are posed by uncontrolled access, weather erosion, and
existing and proposed nearby development.
These surveys were completed on 1.3.1992 by Ing. Arch. Jaroslav Klenovsky,
Zebetinska 13, 623 00 Brno.
CONTACTS: Town officials:
Magistrate Jiri Chmelar, Mestsky urad Hradistska 305, 687 24 uhersky Ostroh,
tel. 0632/91116. Regional officials: PhDr. Jana Spathova, Okresni urad,
Referat Kultury, 686 01 Uherske Hradiste, tel. 0632/432. Interested parties:
Slovacke muzeum, dir. PhDr. Ivo Frolec, Smetanovy sady, 686 01 Uherske
Hradiste, tel. 0632/2262. Other sources: Bohumil Gelbkopf, Rybare 198,
687 24 Uhersky Ostroh, Tel. 0.
SOURCES: Gedenkbuch der
Untergegangenen Judengemeinden Mährens, Hugo Gold ed. (1974), pp..
116-117; Die Juden und JudengemeindenMährens in Vergangenheit unde
Gegenwart, Hugo Gold ed. (1929), pp: 563-570 (pictures); Jiri Fiedler,
Jewish Sights of Bohemia and Moravia (1991), pp. 53-54; International Association
of Jewish Genealogical Societies Cemetery Project, Czech Republic, Ostroh.
SUBMITTER: E. Randol
Schoenberg, 3436 Mandeville Canyon Road, Los Angeles, California 90049-1020
USA. Tel: 1-310-472-3122 (h), 1-213-473-2045 (w). Fax: 1-213-473-2222.
Web Page: http://www.schoenberglaw.com
Return to GemeindeView
Return to Austria-Czech SIG Homepage

The New Genetics of Mental Illness; June/July 2008; Scientific American Mind; by Edmund S. Higgins; 8 Page(s)
Throughout history shamans, clerics and physicians have tried to pin down what goes awry when a person slips into sadness, insanity or psychosis. Theorists have variously blamed mental illness on an imbalance of bodily fluids, the movement of planets, unconscious mental conflict and unfortunate life experiences. Today many researchers believe that psychiatric disorders arise in large part from a person¿s genetic makeup. Genes, after all, are the blueprints for the proteins that create and control the brain.
And yet genetics cannot be the whole story: identical twins, who have virtually the same DNA, do not always develop the same mental disorders. For example, if one identical twin acquires schizophrenia, the other stands just a 50 percent chance of also suffering from the disease. Indeed, abundant data suggest that psychiatric ailments typically result from a complex interplay between the environment and a number of different genes [see ¿The Character Code,¿ by Turhan Canli; Scientific American Mind, February/March 2008]. But only recently have scientists begun to grasp how the environment affects the brain to produce psychological changes.

Our newest title
Busy with Bugs
Extremely Interesting Things to Do with Bugs
Illustrated by Margaret Brandt
National Best Books 2010 Award
Children's Educational category
USA Book News
For kids who love bugs and
bug adventures, Busy
with Bugs is a
guide for exploring the miniature world of tiny animals. This book buzzes
with information, fun facts, and 160 extremely interesting things to do
with bugs. It teaches children to explore the anatomy, behavior, life
cycles, and habitats of bugs in their own backyards and school yards.
Reference pages include a glossary packed with information, a
lists of useful resources, and an invaluable guide to
Find out more
Creek Books is a
small publisher committed to "teaching kids to care for the Earth."
Our books are designed to motivate children to listen to, learn from, and love
the world of nature. We believe that children who learn to love our Earth
today will protect it tomorrow.
On our web site, you can look at our books and find out how to order them. In
you¡¯ll find fascinating information, and projects and activities to try at
home or school. We are working to develop our site into an ideal place for
kids ¡ª a place where they can have fun learning about our Earth.
the Squirrel House, a photo journal about a family of squirrels which live
at Trickle Creek. You'll find plans for building a squirrel house, other
squirrel activities, and photos of baby squirrels.
Cooper to download a
complete teacher's guide (preK-2) for teaching
about rainforests. You'll also find free paper dolls, coloring pages,
bookmarks, a pattern for making a bromeliad and a poison-arrow frog, and an
interview with Toni Albert, the author of Saving the Rain Forest with
Cammie and Cooper.
Buy the hardcover edition of
I Heard the Willow Weep for $6.00. (Retail price: $15.95) This
is the perfect book for Earth Day ¡ª
and Earth Day is everyday!
You'll find it in our Half-Price Warehouse.

The latest weapon unleashed to battle California's growing energy demand comes in the form of free software. The State of California Energy Commission's Public Interest Energy Research (PIER) program is responsible for the development of a free software package dubbed the Sensor Placement and Orientation Tool (SPOT). The purpose of this software is to help designers establish correct photosensor placement relative to a given daylighting and electric lighting design.
Daylighting systems, which use natural lighting to supplement electric lighting, are sensitive to photosensor placement and performance. However, until now, there have been no easy-to-use tools to help designers predict performance and determine optimum sensor positioning. Using an Excel worksheet interface, SPOT accounts for variables such as room geometry, surface reflectances, solar orientation, electric lighting layout, and window design to help determine the best location for photosensors. It also helps designers comply with the daylighting requirements in California's Title 24 energy code, which calls for separate controls for daylit areas and offers substantial energy budget credits for automatic daylighting controls.
This software may be downloaded for free at www.archenergy.com/SPOT/index.html.

Hop into roo before it's too late
A call for Australians to eat kangaroos to combat climate change might be a case of tuck in now before it's too late, research by an Australian biologist suggests.
Writing in the December edition of Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, Dr Euan Ritchie, of James Cook University in Queensland, says population numbers of the iconic Australian marsupial are at threat from climate change.
Ritchie, from the School of Marine and Tropical Biology, says a rise in average temperatures in northern Australia of just 2°C could reduce suitable habitat for kangaroo populations by as much as 50%.
His findings follow a recent call by economist, Professor Ross Garnaut, of the Australian National University, that Australians help fight climate change by swapping their beef-eating habits for a taste of Skippy.
Ritchie, who admits to being a committed roo eater, says his findings should not deter people from kangaroo steaks and may even help the animal survive.
"The species [of kangaroo] currently being harvested are very well monitored," he says.
"So it means we will pick up differences [in range and population] very quickly and will be in a position to respond to that."
According to the study, the kangaroo species under greatest threat is the antilopine wallaroo.
Ritchie says it is more vulnerable because it has a very defined range across the tropical savannas of far northern Australia from Cape York in Queensland across to the Kimberleys of Western Australia.
Using climate change computer modelling, Ritchie and co-author Elizabeth Bolitho, also of James Cook University, found the 2°C temperature increase, predicted by 2030, would shrink the antilopine's range by 89%.
A 6°C increase, the upper end of temperature increase predictions to 2070, may lead to their extinction if they are unable to adapt to the arid environment which results, Ritchie says.
He says the main threat of climate change is not on the kangaroo itself, but on the habitat that sustains its populations.
Among the impacts that will affect their geographic range are increased prevalence of fires and changes to vegetation and the availability of water.
He says a 0.4°C increase would reduce the distribution of all species of kangaroos and wallaroos by 9%.
An increase of 2°C saw the geographic range of the kangaroos reduced by as much as 50%.
Weathering the changes
However the news is not all bad.
By contrast to the antilopine, Ritchie says the eastern gray kangaroo is in a strong position to weather climate changes because of its predominance in the cooler eastern seaboard of Australia.
And he says the red kangaroo and common wallaroo are better adapted to sustain hotter climates.
Professor Lesley Hughes, of the Climate Change Ecology Group at Macquarie University in Sydney, backs Ritchie's findings.
"Virtually every time we do bioclimatic modelling you get this result [of species under threat]," she says.
However she says few studies "go up to 6°C" because "the more you extrapolate into the future the more doubt you have".
Hughes adds however that a 6°C rise in temperature would "wipe out" most native Australian species.

Deep in a North Carolina marsh, a lone swamp sparrow sits on his perch in the middle of the water. He’s singing his usual song. But he’s also aggressively flapping one wing, trying to incite a nearby male into action. Onlookers are watching – just to see what happens.
However, this is no ordinary territorial scuffle. This is bird research. The sparrow on the perch is a robot, and the chief, hip wader-clad onlooker – who is also in control of the robot’s movements – is Steve Nowicki, Ph.D., a biology, psychology, and neurobiology professor at Duke University. He’s testing whether the wing flap will actually prompt a fight.
According to Nowicki, birdsong and signaling have a surprisingly close relationship with human speech.
“It’s an unexpected and remarkable model for human speech control, development and perception,” he said. “Birds also learn their songs in much the same way humans learn to speak, and that’s an unusual trait. They have to learn their language from their parents.”
His research, though, isn’t about merely studying how birds behave and communicate. He and his team watch signals and behaviors; they run simulations and analyze hormones; they record neurons and assemble protein sets. They’re deciphering how birds promote their survival and reproductive success. In short – they’re studying evolution, past and present.
Nowicki, who is also dean and vice provost of undergraduate education, was almost the bird researcher who wasn’t. As a student at Tufts University in Boston, he was a declared music major. Late in his collegiate career, he discovered a love of biology – particularly the brain and behavior – and raced to complete a major in the subject. He then pursued his graduate degree in neurobiology at Cornell University.
It was there he was first introduced to the siren song of birds. When it comes to communicating, birds have far less to say than humans. But they express themselves in equally complex ways, Nowicki said.
“Humans use complicated signal communication, and we use an array of sounds to create words that have rich meanings,” he said. “When you look at sparrow songs – the number of notes per second and the frequency – it’s just as complicated as human speech. They’re just not saying much.”
All the same, they’re getting their points across.
Songs, signals and responses
In addition to the aggressive response the swamp sparrow’s wing flap provokes, the absence or introduction of song or even a physical attribute can prompt birds to behave differently, Nowicki said.
Birds, like most animals, are territorial and will, in most cases, defend their turf. But how will neighboring birds respond if a battle ensues? Will they come to help or avoid the fight? Will they treat the male differently if he loses to the interloper? Researchers can test this reaction, Nowicki said, by removing a bird from its environment, playing a recording of another male’s song, and, then, reintroducing the bird to see how the others respond.
“It’s interesting to see what happens, because no one wants a floating male in the neighborhood,” he said. “Research has shown that with some birds, peer birds are more wary of the winner, but they might also try to encroach on a loser’s territory.”
And, just as with other species, birds can use their physical attributes to signal to and communicate with each other. For example, a trait, such as a bright red neck and throat commonly seen in the male house finch, can broadcast a bird’s prowess or superior qualities. The red-throated male finch does attract more females, Nowicki said, but it isn’t because of the color. The pigment comes from a carotenoid-rich diet that gives these males a stronger immune system, making them better mates.
Male song sparrows use their song repertoire in much the same way. The more songs they learn and exhibit, the more attractive they are to females. The reason, Nowicki said, is that birds with larger song selections appear to be smarter. They simply learn songs faster.
“Males who sing better have better developed brains, and in theory that makes them better mates,” he said. “We’re still working out why having a better brain for learning song is better for the female, but it’s clear females prefer these males as their mates.”
Impact on human activity
Understanding the role and importance of birdsong and signaling doesn’t shed much light on the evolution of human communication, but knowing what songs and signals mean to birds can directly affect human choices and behavior.
For example, researchers have evidence that stress directly affects a bird’s ability to develop song, which can ultimately impact pair bonding and mating. If scientists study the way birds living in both polluted and pristine environments sing, the data could play a role in accurately evaluating ecosystem health.
This knowledge also can impact wildlife preservation efforts. It isn’t enough to allocate a certain amount of space to a population based only on the number of animals surveyed. There are often other factors at work, Nowicki said. In the case of the small warbler ovenbird, it’s important to know that females won’t be setting in an area with fewer than 10 males. This type of information can significantly alter conservation efforts, he said.
Regardless of how the research of birdsong is used, Nowicki said, his work constantly reminds him of how intertwined birds and music are with our surroundings.
“I keep coming back to birdsong not simply because it’s a good model,” Nowicki said. “When I wake up in the morning and hear birds singing, it’s part of the wonderful aesthetic world we live in, and my job to learn more about it is a privilege.”

Philosophy and Religion
The Philosophy and Religion Department at Montclair State University is home to the "big questions": the nature of truth, knowledge, art, morality, social justice, life, death, God, the universe, and Being itself. In our department, you will learn what human beings have thought about these big questions throughout history, and how they have sought to live their lives in relation to the answers. You will also be encouraged to address these questions yourself and make them relevant to your own life.
The discipline of Philosophy puts you in conversation with thinkers from ancient times to the present who have asked questions such as: What is the nature of truth, and justice? Is there a natural law that governs the universe? How can I know reality—through reason or through sense experience? How is my mind related to my body? How do I make ethical judgments when there is no clear "right" or "wrong" answer? What makes something beautiful? Is democracy always the best form of government?
The study of Religion aims to understand how people have lived out their central beliefs about this world and the next, the secular and the sacred, humanity and the divine. In itself, religion has been an arena for struggling with questions of meaning and reality. It has also been a powerful influence in law, government, family life, and the arts. One cannot adequately understand human experience or the clash of nations and empires without attending to the roles played by religion.
For more information, contact:

Description from Flora of China
Herbs, annual or perennial, all parts strongly aromatic (anise-scented). Stem erect, terete, gray-green or lurid-green, glabrous. Leaves petiolate, sheaths membranous-margined; blade pinnately decompound; ultimate segments linear. Umbels compound, terminal and lateral; bracts and bracteoles absent; rays numerous, upwards-spreading, unequal. Calyx teeth obsolete. Petals yellow, obovate, mid rib conspicuous, apex with narrowly inflexed lobule. Stylopodium conic; styles very short, reflexed. Fruit oblong, terete, glabrous; ribs 5, acute or round-obtuse; vittae 1 in each furrow, 2 on commissure. Seed face plane or slightly concave. Carpophore 2-cleft to base.
One species: Mediterranean region; cultivated and adventive worldwide, including in China.
(Authors: She Menglan (佘孟兰 Sheh Meng-lan); Mark F. Watson)

What orbits the Earth at 17,500 miles per hour, is 360 feet wide, 260 feet long and has a crew of 3? It is the International Space Station, also known as the I.S.S. It is going to be finished in the year 2006. The countries that are putting it together are the United States, Russia, Japan, Canada, Brazil, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. There will be 100 different pieces sent up to space to create the I.S.S.
What You Want to Know About The I.S.S.
When it is completed, the I.S.S. will be the size of two football fields. You will be able to see it from Earth without a telescope. The I.S.S. will be much bigger than previous space stations. Other space stations, like Mir, were cramped. You also had to eat dehydrated food (food without water). The I.S.S. will have a refrigerator with fresh foods.
The I.S.S. is like living on earth except one thing-you are weightless! When you are sleeping, you have to be strapped to the wall or else you will float out of your bed.
The first crew went up in orbit on October 31, 2000. The size of the crew was decided by how big the escape pod was. That was 3.
Did you know that every time we breathe or exercise we add moisture to the air? This extra moisture has to be removed from the air on the ISS so the moisture doesnít collect on the ISS equipment. This moisture will be recycled.
The crew will recycle all of the water on board from the moisture in the air to the crewís urine and wash water. I know that sounds really gross, but the water is going to be purified and going to be cleaner than the water we drink here on Earth. There are 3 steps to purifying the water:
The crew will be up in space for a long time, but when they come back, they wonít be able to walk right away. There is no gravity in space so you donít use your legs that much, and when you go to use them itís just like trying to run after you rollerblade.
The people that are training to get on the space station are going to train hard. They will have to train for 2 years. Some of that training will be in the Canadian forest in the middle of winter to prepare them for problems they might run into up in space.
What are Some Modules Up in Space?
In 1999,the first U.S. built station component, the Unity connecting module, was moved to the launch pad. It was loaded onto the Space Shuttle, Endeavour.
More than six major components are in the processing facility. At the end of the year 2000, more than 500,000 pounds of U.S. and international station equipment was completed. Thatís the weight of 250 pick-up trucks.
Unity is a six-sided connecting module to which all-future U.S. station modules will attach. Unity will serve as a passageway to various parts of the station. Attached to Unity are two adapters. One to serve as a permanent connection to the Russian station and another that will serve as a shuttle docking port.
What is Going to Put Some Of the International Space Station Together?
Some of the I.S.S. is going to be put together from the outside. One of the dangers is that you could be hit by a micrometeoroid. Some micrometeoroids are the size of a grain of sand, but others can be the size of basketballs and go right through you. The countries that are building the I.S.S. have built robots to put together some of the I.S.S. so that no one gets hurt. Remember, the I.S.S. is made up of 100 different modules so it will take a long time to put it together.
Space: Everything You Want to Know and Beyond. </J0112388> Last Visited: December, 2001.
NASA.<http://www.nasa.gov> Last Visited: January, 2002.
Space in the Spotlight Novi Meadows Elementary 2002
All pictures courtesy of NASA unless otherwise noted

Hexavalent chromium is a compound used to create pigments and prevent corrosion in dyes, paints, primers, inks and plastics. The chemical is used in the production of stainless steel, leather tanning and wood preservation.
The Hexavalent Chromium Panel was formed in October 2009 to represent former and current users of hexavalent chromium. The panel’s primary activities include sponsoring research to fill the scientific database informing the risk levels for hexavalent chromium in drinking water and communicating the findings of this research.
In the past year, the panel has undertaken an effort to sponsor an independent study. Guided by highly qualified, leading experts, research is being conducted to determine the threshold at which the chemical is not toxic. This data will inform EPA and other policymakers as they develop a drinking water standard for hexavalent chromium.

The Handel and Haydn Society is a chorus and period instrument orchestra in the city of Boston, Massachusetts. Founded in 1815, it is one of the oldest performing arts organizations in the USA. Most widely known for its performances of George Frideric Handel's Messiah, the group gave its American premiere in 1818 and has performed the piece annually since 1854.
The Handel and Haydn Society was founded as an oratorio society in Boston on April 20, 1815, by Gottlieb Graupner, Thomas Smith Webb, Amasa Winchester, and Matthew S. Parker, a group of Boston merchants and musicians who were eager to improve the performance of choral music in a city that, at the time, offered very little music of any kind. The name of the Society reflects the foundersí wish to bring Boston audiences the best of the old (G.F. Handel) and the best of the new (Haydn) in concerts of the highest artistic quality. The first performance by the Society was held on Christmas night in 1815 at King's Chapel, and included a chorus of 90 men and 10 women.
From its earliest years, the Handel and Haydn Society established a tradition of innovation, performing the American premieres of G.F. Handelís Messiah in 1818, Haydnís The Creation in 1819, Verdiís Requiem in 1878, Amy Beach's Mass in 1892, and numerous other works by G.F. Handel, Mozart, J.S. Bach, and others.
The Society was also an early promoter of composer Lowell Mason, publishing his first collection of hymns and later electing him as the group's President. Mason's music was extremely influential and much of it is still performed today. He is best known for composing the music for the popular carol, Joy to the World. Mason was also instrumental in establishing music education in the USA.
Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, Handel and Haydn staged music festivals to commemorate its own anniversaries and such significant events as the end of the Civil War. The Society organized Americaís first great music festival in 1857, and in later years gave benefit concerts to aid the Union Army, victims of the Chicago fire in 1871, and Russian Jewish refugees in 1882. Over the years, the Handel and Haydn Society has performed for such luminaries as President James Monroe, Grand Duke Alexis of Russia, Admiral Dewey, and Queen Elizabeth II.
By the mid 20th century, the Handel and Haydn Society had begun to move toward vocal and instrumental authenticity. In 1967, an acknowledged expert in Baroque performance practice, Thomas Dunn, became the Society's Artistic Director and transformed the group's large amateur chorus into one of approximately 30 professional singers. In 1986, Christopher Hogwood succeeded Thomas Dunn as Artistic Director and added period-instrument performances and a new verve to the high choral standards of the Society. In October 1986, Handel and Haydn presented its first period instrument orchestra concert under Christopher Hogwoodís baton, and by the 1989-1990 season all of the Society's concerts were performed on period instruments. The Society has remained committed to historically informed performance following the end of Christopher Hogwood's tenure as Artistic Director in the spring of 2001.
Handel and Haydn Society announced the appointment of Harry Christophers as Artistic Director on September 26, 2008. Harry Christophers, a regular guest conductor of the Society, began his tenure as Artistic Director with the 2009-2010 season and is the organizationís thirteenth artistic leader since its founding in 1815. The initial term of Harry Christophersí contract with the Society extends through the 2011-2012 season.
Harry Christophers has conducted the Handel and Haydn Society each season since his first appearance in September 2006, when he led a sold-out performance in the Esterházy Palace at the Haydn Festival in Eisenstadt, Austria. Held in the same location where Haydn lived and worked for nearly 40 years, this Austrian appearance marked the Societyís first in Europe in its then 191-year history. Harry Christophers returned to conduct the Society in Boston in a critically acclaimed performance of G.F. Handelís Messiah in December 2007, followed by an appearance at Symphony Hall in January 2008. Founder and Music Director of the renowned UK-based choir and period-instrument orchestra, The Sixteen, he is also in demand as a guest conductor for leading orchestras and opera companies worldwide and in the USA.
Welsh conductor Grant Llewellyn joined Handel and Haydn in the 2001-2002 season as Music Director. Grant Llewellyn did not have a background in period-instrument performance prior to joining the Society, but has won wide acclaim from critics and musicians for his energetic and compelling conducting. He has been noted for his charming personality and for his ability to produce exceptional performances from the Society's musicians.
During his tenure as Music Director, the Society produced several recordings that have met with considerable commercial success, including Peace and All is Bright which both appeared on Billboard Magazine's Classical Top 10 chart. Handel and Haydn Society was also awarded its first Grammy Award for a collaboration with the San Francisco choral ensemble Chanticleer for the 2003 recording of Sir John Tavener's Lamentations and Praises.
The Society also entered into a multi-year relationship with Chinese director Chen Shi-Zheng starting in 2003. This has yielded fully-staged productions of Monteverdi's Vespers (in 2003) and Orfeo (in 2006) that Chen sees as the start of a cycle of Monteverdi's surviving operas and his Vespers. The 2006 Orfeo was co-produced by the English National Opera. Chen also directed a production of Purcell's Dido and Aeneas in 2005 for Handel and Haydn. Grant Llewellyn concluded his tenure in 2006.
In July 2007, the ensemble made a historic appearance at London's Royal Albert Hall as part of the BBC Proms concert series, presenting Haydn's oratorio Die Jahreszeiten (The Seasons), with Sir Roger Norrington conducting.

Crab, King – US (kani)
In the U.S., there are three commercial King Crab species – Red, Blue and Golden King Crab – all caught in Alaskan waters.
King Crabs typically mature around 5-7 years of age and can have a leg span of 6 feet. Most King Crab populations are at healthy levels of abundance and not considered overfished. Some populations are closed for fishing, however, to rebuild numbers.
King Crabs are caught using crab pots, which are typically 700 lb steel pots covered with nylon webbing. Although large, they do relatively little damage to the muddy sea floor. New management policies and regional closures have helped mold this ‘derby’ fishery into a well-regulated, efficient and economically stable program.
Bycatch in King Crab fisheries is low, typically consisting of female and undersized male crabs.

“Norman Clyde was attracted to the Sierra Nevada Mountains sometime after 1911 while in his mid-20s… Clyde spent more than 50 years perfecting his mental maps, locating crashed airplanes, and rescuing lost souls and climbers in trouble - or retrieving their bodies.
Clyde’s name was legendary. Many climbers would rank him second only to John Muir as an intimate pioneer of places inaccessible and second to none as a climber… Clyde climbed Mt. Whitney at least 50 times. Between 1914 and about 1940, he became the first climber to reach the tops of at least 126 peaks.”

Potatoes are one of the easiest plants to grow because they are not extremely picky about the soil that they are grown in. Growing the best potatoes, however, requires preparation and diligence during the growing stages. As potato plants spread and the potatoes start to grow, the gardener needs to be sure that the tubers remain covered with soil.
Chit (pre-sprout) the seed potatoes. This step is optional but recommended. Cut out the crown sprouts or eyes to allow the potato to grow sprouts from the shoulders and sides. To find the crown sprout, look closely at the potato for a cluster of more than four or five eyes. Cut out these eyes with a potato peeler and set the potatoes in an egg carton, crown side up.
Check the potatoes every few days and mist them lightly with a water/fertilizer mix. When the sprouts have grown to about an inch, they are ready to plant.
Clear the planting area of all weeds and debris, using a shovel and garden rake. Remove any rocks and roots, as they can interfere with the growth of the potatoes. Prepare the soil to approximately 1 foot deep.
Spread a 2-inch layer of compost or planting mix onto the cleared soil and mix in with a shovel. Dig into the soil with the shovel and turn the dirt several times until the compost and soil are mixed thoroughly.
Plant the sprouted (or unsprouted) seed potatoes at a depth of about 1 inch and about 1 foot apart. If the seed potatoes are small, less than 2 oz. each, they do not need to be cut; if they are larger than 2 oz., cut the potatoes into chunks that include at least one eye each. Each chunk should be no smaller than 1 square inch.
Water the potatoes thoroughly at least once each week. Over-watering will cause potatoes that have black centers, but potatoes need to be watered consistently to avoid misshapen tubers.
Check the leaves and stems daily for insect damage and treat as necessary. Bring in dirt from other areas of the garden to bury the tubers as they grow in size; do not let the potatoes become uncovered while growing.
Harvest the potatoes at any desired stage of growth. New potatoes are small, tender potatoes and are used in many recipes. Allow baking potatoes to grow larger.

Capital and oldest city of the kingdom of Navarra, Spain. Next to Tudela, it possessed the most important Jewish community. The Jewry was situated in the Navarreria, the oldest quarter of the city. When Navarra came under the guardianship of Philip the Fair, and the Pamplonians refused to pay him homage, the Jewry was destroyed by the French troops, the houses were plundered, and many Jews were killed (1277). In 1280, upon the complaint of the Jews, the city was directed to restore to them the confiscated propertiesand to assign to them other ground for building purposes. In 1319 the city council, in conjunction with the bishop, to whom the Jews were tributary, had resolved, in compliance with the wish of King Charles I., to rebuild the Jewry; but this was not done until 1336.
The new Jewry was near the Puente de la Magdalena, and was surrounded with strong walls to guard it against invasion. In the Jewry was the Alcaceria, where the Jews carried on considerable traffic in silk goods, while in a separate street were stores in which they sold jewelry, shoes, etc. Some of the Jews were artisans, and were employed by the royal court; others practised medicine. The physician Samuel, in recognition of his services as surgeon to the English knight Thomas Trivet, was presented by King Charles in 1389 with several houses situated in the Jewry and which had formerly been in the possession of Bonafos and his son Sento, two jugglers. In 1433 the physician Maestre Jacob Aboazar, who had his house near the Great Synagogue, accompanied the queen on a journey abroad. Contemporary with him was the physician Juce (Joseph).
In 1375 the Jews of Pamplona numbered about 220 families, and paid a yearly tax of 2,592 pounds to the king alone. They had, as in Estella and Tudela, their independent magistracy, consisting of two presidents and twenty representatives. Gradually the taxes became so burdensome that they could no longer be borne. In 1407 King Charles III. issued an order that the movable property of the Jews should be sold at auction, and the most notable members placed under arrest, unless they paid the tax due to him. To escape these frequent vexations many of the Jews resolved to emigrate; and a part of the Jewry was thus left uninhabited. No sooner had Leonora ascended the throne as coregent (1469) than she issued an order to the city magistrate to require the Jews to repair the dilapidated houses.
The policy of Ferdinand and Isabella triumphed in the Cortes of Pamplona in 1496. Two years later the Jews were expelled from Navarra. Many emigrated; and those who were unable to leave the city embraced Christianity. Ḥayyim Galipapa was rabbi of Pamplona in the fourteenth century; and the scholar Samuel b. Moses Abbas was a resident of the city.
- Kayserling, Gesch. der Juden in Spanien, i. 34, 43. 73, 93, 105 et seq.;
- Rios, Hist. ii. 452, iii. 200;
- Jacobs, Sources, s.v. Pamplona.

Most exercise-related injuries have the same basic cause - the overstressing of muscles, tendons, ligaments, bones, and other tissue. With sufficient precautions and care, risks can be minimized. Warming up slowly and cooling down properly can help prevent many stress injuries. To be effective, your warm-up and cool-down exercises should use the same muscles as your main exercise. For example, if you jog, begin by walking for several minutes, then jog slowly, before breaking into a full stride. Do this before and after your regular exercise. Every athlete should include a 15-minute warm up and cool down program as part of the workout. This will increase flexibility, reduce muscle soreness, and improve overall performance. Other good principles to follow during exercise are: know your body's limitations and warning signals; drink plenty of water; and never combine heavy eating with heavy exercising. For more information on the benefits of warming up and cooling down, consult a physician.

Textbook Page 16 Workbook 1-2 Pages 25 - 26
Enable full screen by clicking the button in the bottom right corner.
Description: The next several sections teach some of the most common objects in the home which are also some of the most commonly spoken words. This video begins the "home" series by teaching the names of the rooms themselves. You can use "The House Song" to reinforce what is being taught in these videos.

While Blackboard is the dominant commercial learning management (LMS) for the creation and management of
online courses, one of its main competitors is Moodle. Moodle is a free,
open source LMS for creating and managing online courses that is currently in use
from the classroom level to the university level. It can be used for completely
online courses or to augment classroom instruction. While it has forums and
wikis to create communities around courses, it can also be used with
assignments and quizzes to teach in a more traditional format.
How widespread is Moodle used in education? Currently,
there are 51,900 registered and validated Moodle sites hosting some 2.7 million
courses for 30 million users in 206 countries worldwide. It was designed to
promote the use of a social constructivist model wherein “groups construct
knowledge for one another, collaboratively creating a small culture of shared
artifacts with shared meanings. When one is immersed within a culture like
this, one is learning all the time about how to be a part of that culture, on
many levels.” Moodle doesn’t have to be used with this pedagogical model, but
its orientation is towards the community-based development structure (here,
learning) of the Web.
Connexions“Connexions is an environment for collaboratively developing, freely sharing, and rapidly publishing scholarly content on the Web.” It is not simply a Web site that hosts textbooks, articles, and courses. A non-profit run by
“Most textbooks are a mass of information in linear format: one topic follows after another. However, our brains are not linear - we learn by making connections between new concepts and things we already know. Connexions mimics this by breaking down content into smaller chunks, called modules, that can be linked together and arranged in different ways. This lets students see the relationships both within and between topics and helps demonstrate that knowledge is naturally interconnected, not isolated into separate classes or books.”
Connexions identifies itself as part of the open education movement and as inspired by the open source software movement. Their modules, be they a textbook, an article, or a course, are open education resources, which are “teaching and learning materials that are free to use and also re-use in new ways around the world.” Connexions sees itself as part of both a global and a grassroots community. Currently, 500,000+ unique visitors a month visit their Web site.
MIT OpenCourseWare (OCW)
MIT OCW is the result of MIT’s desire to use the Internet to pursue its mission of
advancing knowledge and educating students. Announced in 2001 and launched in
2002, MIT OCW has now published 1,890 courses online for free use. OCW is a “Web-based
publication of virtually all MIT course content. OCW is open and available to
the world and is a permanent MIT activity.” These courses are educational
resources and do not lead to course credit, certificates or degrees, nor do they
involve contact with faculty.
MIT OCW’s largest group of its one million monthly visits are self-learners though students and teachers are larger subgroups of what is a global audience. It is a major gift of knowledge to the open education movement from one of the world’s most prestigious academic institutions.
There are many other open education resources to explore, for example, the Open Education Resources Commons or even iTunes U, You Tube, or TeacherTube. The commercial sector undoubtedly has much to offer education, but the open education movement will continue to bring its own change just as Linux and Firefox continue to do so today.
What experience have you had with educational tools and resources on the Web? Contact us and share your experiences.
Return to previous page
No Comments for this article at this time.

Autism and the Recovery Act
Service in the Field: National Health Service Corps (NHSC)
The NHSC is a network of primary health care professionals working in underserved communities across the country. To support their service, the Recovery Act allocated funding to the NHSC to provide more than 4,000 clinicians with financial support in the form of loan repayment.
One NHSC loan repayor receiving Recovery Act funds has become involved in treatment/support of ASD patients. Andrea Kinlen, Ph.D., a licensed clinical psychologist working in McPherson, Kansas, is working with patients and families to provide testing and therapy services for ASD patients. As Dr. Kinlen continued to spend time with patients, learning about their struggles and telling them they weren’t alone, an idea for a local support group emerged. Encouraged by the support of her supervisor and funding provided by a partial community grant, Dr. Kinlen engaged the families she counseled, other clinics, and local schools. As families came together, they were able to share stories and discuss challenges. Although the ages of the children and levels of severity vary, members of the group have found much common ground.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of complex neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social impairments; communication difficulties; and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior. These characteristics can range in impact from mild to significantly disabling. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that an average of 1 in 110 children in the United States has ASD. Symptoms usually begin to appear before age three and can cause delays or problems that continue through adulthood. Early detection of ASD and intervention can greatly increase a child’s ability to learn new skills and improve overall quality of life.
The cost of ASD to affected people, their families, and society is enormous. Children with ASD have a wide range of healthcare and services needs, and their families typically lose income, often as a result of one parent leaving the workforce in order to care for and meet his or her child’s special health and educational needs. A great majority of adults with ASD struggle with ongoing and mostly unmet needs for employment, housing, services, and supports. Lifetime costs to care for an individual with ASD have been estimated to be $3.2 million. 
With funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Recovery Act), the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has been able to accelerate work in promising areas of ASD research.*
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
NIH invested $122 million in Recovery Act funds for groundbreaking research on ASD that otherwise would not have been possible, in areas such as screening, early detection, potential interventions and therapeutics, and in revealing the precise causes and mechanisms underlying this disorder (which are still largely unknown). Research area highlights include:
- Aiding Diagnosis: A two-site study at the University of Michigan-Ann Arbor and the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital is adapting the interview tool that is the current gold standard for diagnosing ASD into a brief parent interview that can be done over the telephone. This new tool may help reduce screening costs, which could mean that more children are able to be screened, and that screening could occur earlier in a child’s life, leading to starting treatments sooner for the child. Additionally, reduced costs would help researchers to quickly identify potential participants for ASD studies. As part of the research process, study investigators performed free ASD screenings in Ohio and Michigan to test their changes to the interview tool. These screenings have reached children from many families for whom a screening might otherwise have been too costly to afford. Read more.
- Addressing Disparities: Investigators at Florida State University are exploring the significant racial and ethnic minority disparities that exist in the early diagnosis of ASD, often delaying minority access to beneficial early interventions and services. The results of this research will lead to culturally sensitive screening and evaluation methods that may decrease the age at which all children with ASD are diagnosed. Read more.
- Possible Causes: Although the exact causes of ASD are still unknown, research suggests an interaction between environmental factors and genetic predisposition. A number of Recovery Act-funded studies are using advanced DNA sequencing technology that allows for quick study of many genes at a time, while others are focusing on a variety of other potential causes. For example, one study at the University of California-Davis is exploring the role of infection during pregnancy on raising the risk of ASD in a mouse model. Research suggests that a mother’s immune response to infection may affect levels of immune molecules in the fetal brain, impacting brain development and possibly contributing to ASD. Read more.
- Improving Interactions: Most children with ASD seem to have no reaction to other people or may respond atypically to others’ emotions. Such behavior can isolate children with ASD from their peers. NIH awarded a Challenge grant to support the development and testing of a new computer-assisted program at the University of California, San Diego to train children with ASD how to respond to others’ facial expressions (for example, widening one’s eyes, wrinkling one’s nose, etc.), and how to produce facial expressions conveying particular emotions to others. Read more.
- Potential Therapeutics: In another study, researchers at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine will determine whether a certain hormone improves social cognition in adults with ASD—a potentially new treatment for social impairment linked to ASD. There has been little headway in the development of pharmacological treatments for social impairment, and it is widely acknowledged that such treatments are needed as an alternative or addition to behavioral interventions. Read more.
- Skill Development: Employment can provide greater independence to people with ASD, but symptoms of the disorder often pose major social and communication barriers. In response to this issue, researchers at Do2Learn.com developed the free JobTIPS website. JobTIPS presents job-seeking resources to youth with ASD, and also provides detailed explanations of how to behave in specific situations, such as what to say and not say to a potential employer, and how to disclose their diagnosis. Two autism research centers at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Emory University, Atlanta, will help evaluate the effectiveness of JobTIPS in helping teens and young adults with ASD to learn new job-related skills and apply them in real world situations. Read more.
Read more about NIH’s Recovery Act-funded investments in ASD and learn how these investments are moving science forward sooner than anticipated in addressing some of the most significant challenges to understanding and treating ASD.
Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality (AHRQ)
AHRQ is using $1.4 million in Recovery Act funding for research that seeks to provide patients, clinicians, and others with evidence-based information to make informed decisions about health care—including research on ASD intervention strategies:
- Communicating ASD Treatments: There is no cure and no consensus regarding which intervention strategy is most effective for treating ASD. Given the complexity of ASD and associated therapies, it is clear that teachers, clinicians, and families need guidance in selecting appropriate treatments. AHRQ-funded research is developing, implementing, and evaluating strategies for disseminating information online about treatments for autism and ASD to over 16,000 individuals in important clinician, parent and teacher audiences. This novel approach will accelerate the translation of new scientific evidence on ASD therapeutics into practice and decision-making in families, the education system, the health care system, and public policy. Read more.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders - Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, United States, 2006. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Surveillance Summaries. December 2009;58(10):1-20.
 Montes G, Halterman JS. Association of childhood autism spectrum disorders and loss of family income. Pediatrics. April 2008;121(4):e821-6.
 Ganz ML. The lifetime distribution of the incremental societal costs of autism. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. April 2007;161(4):343–9.
*Projects cited in this report are examples of Recovery Act funding being applied to autism, not a comprehensive listing of Recovery Act-funded projects.

As one year shifts into the next, it is worthwhile to look at two artists who use non-permanence and change as their medium. It may seem strange to make an artwork knowing it may only last a few hours, but that's exactly what happens when you create art on the beach. And we're not talking sandcastles.
Jim Denevan and Andres Amador are just two artists who use sand as their palette and canvas. Their large scale earth works, so large they are only visible from afar, hark back to the sixties tradition of land art, zen meditation and even crop circles, but with a contemporary twist. Andres Amador's Playa Paintings, ranging from 100 to several thousand feet, were all made by raking sand on the beaches around California. "The beach renews itself and there is no clean up involved", he says of his methods. Some have environmental messages, like the Biohazard and Warning signs he made following the oil spill of 2007.
Surfer (and founder of the "Outstanding in the Field" moveable feasts) Jim Denevan has created over 600 drawings in the sand, using sticks and garden tools. He has also exhibited at PS1 MOMA and Headlands Center for the Arts. He recently made the world's largest freehand drawing on a dry lake in Nevada, walking for eight days to draw the 3 mile pattern. Although their art is as temporary as the winds or tides, for both Amador and Denevan it is this fleeting moment that motivates them. So sign up to their newsletters to find out about the next sand action, or it will be gone before you know it.
Click on a picture to launch the image gallery (7 images)

Acer griseum (Paperbark Maple) is a species of maple native to central China, in the provinces of Gansu, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Shaanxi, Shanxi, and Sichuan, at altitudes of 1,500–2,000 m. It is a small to medium-sized deciduous tree, reaching 6-9 m (20-30 ft) tall, 5-6 m (15-25 ft) wide, with a trunk up to 70 cm (2 ft) in diameter. The bark is smooth, shiny orange-red, peeling in thin, papery layers; it may become fissured in old trees. The shoots are densely downy at first, this wearing off by the second or third year and the bark exfoliating by the third or fourth year. The leaves are compound, with a 2–4 cm petiole with three leaflets, each 3-10 cm long and 2-6 cm broad, dark green above, bright glaucous blue-green beneath, with several blunt teeth on the margins. Paperbark Maple is widely grown as an ornamental plant in temperate regions. It is admired for its decorative exfoliating bark, translucent pieces of which often stay attached to the branches until worn away. It also has spectacular autumn foliage which can include red, orange and pink tones. In the world of trees, Acer griseum is a small species, generally growing to around 12m in height. But what it lacks in stature, it more than makes up for in beauty. Its copper-red bark ensures that it is easy to identify, even in winter, as does its technique of bark renewal. As the old sheaves of bark die, they peel themselves off revealing the young, smooth bark beneath. This self-exfoliation, although unusual, is not unique and also occurs in several species of birch.
At the turn of the 20th century, the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew sent a young botanist by the name of Ernest Henry Wilson to China. As well as looking into the effect the charcoal industry was having on the forests, Wilson was also asked by his financier, the Veitch Nursery, to find interesting plants. The plan was to find the handkerchief tree Davidia involucrata which had been described, but never collected. Eventually, Wilson found the location where the tree was last seen only to find a tree stump and a newly-erected hut built from its timber! Over the next decade or so, 'Chinese' Wilson, as he was to become known, brought back more than 1,000 garden plants - more than any other collector. This eventually included the handkerchief tree, the regal lily Lilium regale and also the Paperbark Maple Acer griseum.

Miriam has four children, although she has given birth six times. Two infants unfortunately died within days of birth. However, her most recent birth was different in that Miriam and her female relatives had learned from the local female community health worker (CHW) about the importance of keeping the baby warm.
An old custom of washing a newborn soon after birth is being discounted with the knowledge that infants were becoming sick. Instead, a baby should be gently dried with a towel and placed next to the mother's skin. Washing should wait until later.
"Until I received training about the care of newborn babies, I followed our old customs. I did not realize how important it is to keep the baby warm after birth," said a CHW. "Embracing a newborn against the mother's warm skin is so simple, and the mothers like it, too."
With nearly nine out of 10 births in Afghanistan still occurring in the home, USAID is training local health workers in essential maternal and newborn care. They then teach pregnant mothers and their families the simple but important actions they can take to preserve the lives of newborns.
Although general health has improved since 2002, Afghanistan remains a country with some of the poorest health indicators worldwide. Afghanistan has one of the highest mortality rates of any nation: about one in five children die before the age of five. Approximately 80 percent of women in rural Afghanistan give birth outside a health facility without a skilled birth provider. Consequently, teaching basic newborn care along with other basic health skills to community care providers is a vital part of the Ministry of Public Health's national strategy.
Together, USAID and the Afghan Ministry of Health are helping save the lives of babies born in rural homes by ensuring that local health workers know the key newborn care skills to share with pregnant mothers and their families. Families can be more confident and better prepared for their babies' births.
Last updated: June 05, 2012

Sign up for our newsletter
Gardening in the Rainy Zone.
Lilium 'White Stargazer'
Sunset zones: All.
USDA zones: 3-10.
Heat zones: 8-1.
Height: 30-35 inches (76-88 cm).
Star-shaped, white petals recurved at the tips.
Humus rich, slightly acidic, moist, well-drained soil.
In spring, when lilies are at the spear stage of growth (like asparagus), fertilize with a complete organic fertilizer. Do not feed again for the rest of the year; excessive fertilizing can promote disease and soft growth.
As soon as the foliage dies back, dig bulbs and remove scales, bulbils and offsets from bulb; immediately replant.
Remove dried stems only after foliage dies back.
Rainy Side Notes
Lilium 'White Stargazer' is the most popular of the white upright lilies and used by many for forcing. In fact, Peter Schenk bred it with forcing and the cut flower trade in mind. However, L. 'Siberia' and L. 'Jan de Graaf', two other upright whites, are not far behind in popularity. Like most Oriental lilies, white stargazer lily is deliciously fragrant.
Cut flowers when the first flower is first opening. The flower lasts from 5-9 days in the vase. Pull the pollen sacks off when the flower opens to keep pollen from staining linens beneath the vase. If pollen should get on clothes or linens, let it dry before wiping it off. If wiped when wet, the pollen will stain.
To grow lilies well, mulch with composted manures or compost and shredded bark to keep the roots cool while adding humus to the soil.
Article: Oriental Lilies for the Summer Garden:
Photographed in author's garden.

In a study led by UCSF team an existence of relationship between asthma and composition of bacterial species, which are present in bronchial airways was revealed.
This finding could suggest new treatment or even potential cures for the common inflammatory disease.
Using new detection methods, researchers learned that the diversity of microbes inside the respiratory tract is far vaster than previously suspected - creating a complex and inter-connected microbial neighborhood that appears to be associated with asthma, and akin to what has also been found in inflammatory bowel disease, vaginitis, periodontitis, and possibly even obesity.
"People thought that asthma was caused by inhalation of allergens but this study shows that it may be more complicated than that - asthma may involve colonization of the airways by multiple bacteria," said study co-author Homer Boushey, MD, a UCSF professor of medicine in the division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine.
In their three-year pilot project, the scientists collected samples from the airway linings of 65 adults with mild to moderate asthma and 10 healthy subjects. Then, using a tool that can identify approximately 8,500 distinct groups of bacteria in a single assay, the scientists profiled the organisms present in each sample to look for relationships between bacterial community composition and clinical characteristics of the patients' asthma.The researchers found that bronchial airway samples from asthmatic patients contained far more bacteria than samples from healthy patients. The scientists also found greater bacterial diversity in the asthmatic patients who had the most hyper-responsive or sensitive airways (a feature of asthma).
The study has been published online in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology.

Here are 15 ways kids can benefit from learning meditation techniques:
1. Meditation practice develops strength of character, as the child learns about virtuous living by thinking over the qualities of each virtue. 2. Meditation can help a child learn to think for themselves, and determine a best course of action by reflecting on possible solutions. 3. If the child is being raised in a particular religion, the quiet time of meditation is a chance to reflect on the spiritual lesson for the day.
4. Meditation is a positive activity that can be an example to a child's friends of a way to handle stress and work out problems. 5. Meditation feels good because a calm mind and relaxed body generate feelings of harmony. 6. As kids grow up and meditation deepens feelings of joy awaken within, and can be shared in daily living through caring actions, making meditation a win-win activity.
7. Learning even, regular breathing gives instant stress relief on a moment's notice. The regular even breathing is a bridge that ties body to mind; when breathing is made regular it calms the physical body. 8. Following the sequence within a meditation develops memory and the ability to concentrate, which carries over into school work. 9. Longer meditations give the body and mind time to deeply relax and center.
10. I found in teaching, that active or hyperactive kids moving in rhythm with the group, such as in walking meditation, derive a calming effect. 11. Meditation is non-competitive, and each can participate within the limits of their own ability, with adaptations if needed, or by working with a partner. 12. Meditation can be done individually or in a group setting and it does not need a special place to practice.
13. Beginning meditation practice in childhood sets up a lifetime habit for a way to handle stress, and as the child matures spiritual qualities can be added to meditate upon, such as kindness, loving, honesty, compassion. 14. Developing the discipline to sit still for meditation carries over into learning how to sit and concentrate to work out a problem or do school work. 15. Meditation feeds self-esteem: when in control of body and mind the youngster finds confidence to handle any situation competently.
For offline reading
God Speaks through the Holy Spirit
More than 100 spiritual relationship topics with a reflective meditation to bring you into personal contact with the Holy Spirit. Uplifting to the goal of meditation, communion with our Creator, Sustainer. 198 pages.
Meditation for all Kids
Sitting, walking, dance and group circle meditations, along with positive affirmations, verses and benefits of meditation for kids of all ages and abilities in a 100 page book with illustrations.
Article by Susan Helene Kramer

Self-Reliance in a Power Outage
People do not usually think of a power outage in the same light as an earthquake. However, when the power is out for a long period of time, citizen requests for fire, police, medical, and other public services will begin to mount. At some point, the increased demand for services could result in delayed response times.
For this reason, every citizen should learn to be self-reliant in an emergency. And even though power outages may only last a few hours, individuals and organizations should be prepared to be without assistance for 72 hours or longer.
To assist individuals prepare for an emergency, the City of San Mateo, State of California, American Red Cross, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and Pacific Gas and Electric Company have provided information on what to do during a power outage or other emergency.
- Check Circuit Breakers. If your power goes out, check your home's circuit breakers or fuses first. Your power could be out because a circuit has tripped or a fuse has blown.
- Report Electrical Outages. See if the lights in your neighborhood are off. Contact the local electric utility to report an outage.
- Power Lines. If you can see any power lines on the ground, stay at least 10 feet away from them as electricity might still be flowing through the lines.
- Sensitive Appliances. Protect appliances from possible power surges when electricity is restored. Unplug appliances and computers, if possible, and turn off non-essential lights.
- Keep Food Cold. Keep refrigerator and freezer doors closed as much as possible to help prevent food spoilage. Refrigerated foods should remain safe to eat for four hours. Food in a closed freezer can stay frozen for up to two days. If in doubt, throw it out.
- Dry Ice. Add dry or block ice to the freezer to help keep food frozen. Never add dry ice with your bare hands or place directly on top of food.
- Water. Discontinue non-essential water usage. Do not drink cloudy or dirty water. Don't be alarmed if chlorine level is higher than normal. Notify water officials of low or no water pressure.
- Stay Cool. During hot days, stay cool indoors and drink plenty of fluids.
- Check on Neighbors. Check on elderly or medically dependent neighbors.
- Life Support Equipment. If someone in your household uses life support equipment, make arrangements for a back-up power supply.
- Generators. Establish independent, short-term power supplies such as generators or battery-operated devices. If you own a generator, never plug it into any electric outlet in your home. Instead, plug appliances directly into the generator.
- Monitor Radio and Television. Monitor battery operated radio or television for current information on the outage.
- Telephones. A telephone that does not depend on electricity. Cordless phones will not function during an outage.
- Garage Doors. Know how to manually release and open any electric doors, like garage doors.
- Security Gates. Find out the steps needed to take to open and close security gates.
- House Numbers. Ensure house numbers are readily visible from the street for emergency response.
- Anticipate Traffic Delays. Intersections should be treated as four-way stops when traffic lights are out. Anticipate long traffic delays in areas where the power is out.

What Is It?
A meniscus is a disk-shaped piece of cartilage that acts as a shock absorber inside a joint. Each knee has one lateral meniscus under the outer knob of the thighbone and one medial meniscus under the inner knob of the thighbone. Each meniscus acts as a natural cushion between the thighbone (femur) and shinbone (tibia). The two cushions prevent excess wear and tear inside the knee joint by keeping the ends of the two bones from rubbing together. Each meniscus also absorbs much of the shock of jumps and landings and helps to distribute joint fluid evenly to lubricate and nourish the knee.
In the United States, a torn meniscus is the most common reason for knee surgery.
The symptoms of a torn meniscus can include:
- Knee pain, usually on one side of your knee
- Tenderness at the side of the joint
- Knee swelling within the first 12 hours after injury
- A "locked" knee that can't be bent
- A knee that catches during movement, or can't be fully straightened
- A click, pop or grinding inside your knee when you move it
- A knee that buckles, gives way or feels generally weak
Your doctor will inspect both your knees to compare your injured knee with your uninjured one. He or she will check your injured knee for signs of swelling, tenderness and fluid inside the knee joint. If your knee is not locked, the doctor will bend your injured knee and check for clicks, snaps and "catches" within the joint. Your doctor also will evaluate your knee's range of motion and will maneuver your knee to see whether your meniscus is sensitive to pressure. For example, in the "McMurray test," the doctor bends the leg at the knee, and then rotates it inward or outward while straightening it. If you feel pain during this test or if there is a "click" sound as your leg rotates, there is a good chance that your meniscus is torn.
If the results of your exam suggest you have a torn meniscus, you may need more tests, including:
- Knee X-rays to check for bone injuries, including fracture, that can cause symptoms similar to a torn meniscus
- A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or computed tomography (CT) scan -- Nine out of 10 times, a torn meniscus will show up on one of these tests.
- Arthroscopy (camera-guided surgery) to look inside the knee joint and examine the meniscus -- When arthroscopy is used for diagnosis, the problem can often be treated during the same surgery.
If you have arthroscopic surgery to treat your torn meniscus and your job involves sedentary work (mostly sitting), you may be able to return to work one to two weeks after surgery, with full recovery in about four to eight weeks. If you are an athlete or your job requires a lot of physical activity, it may take three to four months after surgery before you feel like you have as much function in your knee as you require.
Although it's hard to prevent accidental knee injuries, you may be able to reduce your risks by:
- Warming up and stretching before participating in athletic activities
- Exercising to strengthen the muscles around your knee
- Avoiding sudden increases in the intensity of your training program
- Wearing comfortable, supportive shoes that fit your feet and your sport
- Wearing appropriate protective gear during activities, including athletic activities, in which knee injuries are common (especially if you've had knee injuries before).
There are several options for treating a torn meniscus:
- Nonsurgical. This may include a temporary knee brace and rehabilitation to keep the knee muscles strong while the knee is not bearing as much weight. This approach is most effective for small tears (5 millimeters or less) near the edge of the meniscus, where healing is usually good, or for people who are not good candidates for surgery.
- Surgery to repair the tear. If the tear is large (1 to 2 centimeters), but it involves a part of the meniscus where there is enough blood supply for healing, the doctor may be able to repair it with stitches.
- Surgery to remove part of the meniscus (partial meniscectomy). If the tear involves part of the meniscus where healing is poor, the surgeon may trim away ragged edges along the tear to allow the joint to move smoothly.
- Surgery to remove the entire meniscus (total meniscectomy). This option is used for tears that cannot be treated any other way. Doctors try to avoid this, because it leaves the knee without a meniscus and greatly increases the wear on the ends of the femur and tibia. In the long run, this also increases the risk of osteoarthritis (degenerative joint disease) in the knee.
If you need surgery to correct a torn meniscus, it usually can be done using arthroscopy (camera-guided surgery) as a same-day procedure. After the procedure, you will begin physical therapy to help strengthen your knee muscles, reduce pain and swelling, and return the knee's full range of motion.
When To Call a Professional
Call your doctor to schedule an evaluation whenever an injured knee:
- Locks, catches or can't be fully extended
- Becomes very painful or swollen
- Makes a click, pop or grinding sound when you move it, especially if associated with pain
- Buckles, gives way or feels generally weak
In most cases, the outlook is very good. If your torn meniscus has been repaired surgically or partially removed, you probably will be able to resume your normal athletic activities once you've finished physical therapy.
According to long-term studies, most people who have had a meniscus repaired feel very satisfied with the results of their surgery, even 10 or 11 years after the procedure. However, some people with meniscus injuries eventually develop arthritis in the injured knee. Typically, arthritis develops many years after the injury. The highest risk is among those who've had a part or all of the meniscus removed, because significant injuries requiring this surgery often damage the joint but also because these surgeries take away some or all of the cushioning effect of the meniscus.
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
National Insitutes of Health
1 AMS Circle
Bethesda, MD 20892-3675
National Rehabilitation Information Center (NARIC)
8201 Corporate Dr.
Landover, MD 20785
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine
6300 North River Road
Rosemont, IL 60018
National Athletic Trainers' Association
2952 Stemmons Freeway
Dallas, TX 75247
American Physical Therapy Association
1111 North Fairfax St.
Alexandria, VA 22314-1488

On April 30, 1789, George Washington was sworn in as the first President of the United States.
George Washington wrote the following on the eve of his inauguration:
It is said that every man has his portion of ambition. I may have mine, I suppose, as well as the rest, but if I know my own heart, my ambition would not lead me into public life; my only ambition is to do my duty in this world as well as I am capable of performing it, and to merit the good opinion of all good men.
We are so lucky, so very lucky, to have had this man in our “canon”. There’s as always, so much to say. One of the thing that strikes me about him is that he never wanted to seem like he was jostling for power or position. George Washington had many wonderful qualities and abilities – but it was this distaste for public life that I believe made him truly great. He went out of his way to let everyone know how unworthy he felt, how he hoped their trust in him was warranted, that he was eager to finally go home and live the life of a private man… But on this day in history, April 30, there was to be no private man anymore. His people had chosen him, and while Mount Vernon continued to call to him, he knew he must accept.
David McCullough describes, in his book on John Adams, inauguration day:
On the day of his inauguration, Thursday, April 30 1789, Washington rode to Federal Hall in a canary-yellow carriage pulled by six white horses and followed by a long column of New York militia in full dress. The air was sharp, the sun shone brightly, and with all work stopped in the city, the crowds along his route were the largest ever seen. It was as if all New York had turned out and more besides. “Many persons in the crowd,” reported the Gazette of the United States “were heard to say they should now die contented ï¿½ nothing being wanted to complete their happiness ï¿½ but the sight of the savior of his country.”
In the Senate Chamber were gathered the members of both houses of Congress, the Vice President, and sundry officials and diplomatic agents, all of whom rose when Washington made his entrance, looking solemn and stately. His hair powdered, he wore a dress sword, white silk stockings, shoes with silver buckles, and a suit of the same brown Hartford broadcloth that Adams, too, was wearing for the occasion. They might have been dressed as twins, except that Washington’s metal buttons had eagles on them.
It was Adams who formally welcomed the General and escorted him to the dais. For an awkward moment Adams appeared to be in some difficulty, as though he had forgotten what he was supposed to say. then, addressing Washington, he declared that the Senate and House of Representatives were ready to attend him for the oath of office as required by the Constitution. Washington said he was ready. Adams bowed and led the way to the outer balcony, in full view of the throng in the streets. People were cheering and waving from below, and from windows and rooftops as far as the eye could see. Washington bowed once, then a second time.
Fourteen years earlier, it had been Adams who called on the Continental Congress to make the tall Virginian commander-in-chief of the army. Now he stood at Washington’s side as Washington, his right hand on the Bible, repeated the oath of office as read by Chancellor Robert R. Livingston of New York, who had also been a member of the Continental Congress.
In a low voice Washington solemnly swore to execute the office of the President of the United States and, to the best of his ability, to “preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States.” Then, as not specified in the Constitution, he added, “So help me God”, and kissed the Bible, thereby establishing his own first presidential tradition.
“It is done,” Livingston said, and, turning to the crowd, cried out, “Long live George Washington, President of the United States.”
The following is George Washington’s first inaugural address. What I sense in these words is what I sense in so many of the original documents of that time, written by the main players: they were embarking on a grand and hopeful experiment. They were entering uncharted waters. And they all seem determined (each in their different ways, with their different views) to make the most of the opportunity, to seize the day. No decision was unimportant, everything had meaning … and what I also sense in this inaugural address is that Washington knew that he wasn’t only talking to the people present, but he was also talking to us. The future generations. They all knew that they were being watched, carefully, by those who would come after.
The only thing required of a President on his inauguration day, in those early early days, was that he take the oath of Office. Washington, in composing an address, to the people who put their faith in him, set the precedent. Every president since then has followed his example.
George Washington’s first inaugural address:
Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and of the House of Representatives:
Among the vicissitudes incident to life no event could have filled me with greater anxieties than that of which the notification was transmitted by your order, and received on the 14th day of the present month. On the one hand, I was summoned by my Country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and, in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum of my declining years–a retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well as more dear to me by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time. On the other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and most experienced of her citizens a distrustful scrutiny into his qualifications, could not but overwhelm with despondence one who (inheriting inferior endowments from nature and unpracticed in the duties of civil administration) ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficiencies. In this conflict of emotions all I dare aver is that it has been my faithful study to collect my duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance by which it might be affected. All I dare hope is that if, in executing this task, I have been too much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instances, or by an affectionate sensibility to this transcendent proof of the confidence of my fellow-citizens, and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well as disinclination for the weighty and untried cares before me, my error will be palliated by the motives which mislead me, and its consequences be judged by my country with some share of the partiality in which they originated.
Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public summons, repaired to the present station, it would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official act my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being who rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations, and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that His benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States a Government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes, and may enable every instrument employed in its administration to execute with success the functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the Great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own, nor those of my fellow- citizens at large less than either. No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the Invisible Hand which conducts the affairs of men more than those of the United States. Every step by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency; and in the important revolution just accomplished in the system of their united government the tranquil deliberations and voluntary consent of so many distinct communities from which the event has resulted can not be compared with the means by which most governments have been established without some return of pious gratitude, along with an humble anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage. These reflections, arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You will join with me, I trust, in thinking that there are none under the influence of which the proceedings of a new and free government can more auspiciously commence.
By the article establishing the executive department it is made the duty of the President “to recommend to your consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.” The circumstances under which I now meet you will acquit me from entering into that subject further than to refer to the great constitutional charter under which you are assembled, and which, in defining your powers, designates the objects to which your attention is to be given. It will be more consistent with those circumstances, and far more congenial with the feelings which actuate me, to substitute, in place of a recommendation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to the talents, the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected to devise and adopt them. In these honorable qualifications I behold the surest pledges that as on one side no local prejudices or attachments, no separate views nor party animosities, will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests, so, on another, that the foundation of our national policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality, and the preeminence of free government be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections of its citizens and command the respect of the world. I dwell on this prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love for my country can inspire, since there is no truth more thoroughly established than that there exists in the economy and course of nature an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness; between duty and advantage; between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity; since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of Heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which Heaven itself has ordained; and since the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty and the destiny of the republican model of government are justly considered, perhaps, as deeply, as finally, staked on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.
Besides the ordinary objects submitted to your care, it will remain with your judgment to decide how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by the fifth article of the Constitution is rendered expedient at the present juncture by the nature of objections which have been urged against the system, or by the degree of inquietude which has given birth to them. Instead of undertaking particular recommendations on this subject, in which I could be guided by no lights derived from official opportunities, I shall again give way to my entire confidence in your discernment and pursuit of the public good; for I assure myself that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger the benefits of an united and effective government, or which ought to await the future lessons of experience, a reverence for the characteristic rights of freemen and a regard for the public harmony will sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question how far the former can be impregnably fortified or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted.
To the foregoing observations I have one to add, which will be most properly addressed to the House of Representatives. It concerns myself, and will therefore be as brief as possible. When I was first honored with a call into the service of my country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in which I contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary compensation. From this resolution I have in no instance departed; and being still under the impressions which produced it, I must decline as inapplicable to myself any share in the personal emoluments which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the executive department, and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the station in which I am placed may during my continuance in it be limited to such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.
Having thus imparted to you my sentiments as they have been awakened by the occasion which brings us together, I shall take my present leave; but not without resorting once more to the benign Parent of the Human Race in humble supplication that, since He has been pleased to favor the American people with opportunities for deliberating in perfect tranquillity, and dispositions for deciding with unparalleled unanimity on a form of government for the security of their union and the advancement of their happiness, so His divine blessing may be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and the wise measures on which the success of this Government must depend.
William Maclay, a senator from Pennsylvania, kept a daily journal – highly detailed, and rather cynical, about the Senate sessions of the first Congress. He describes the first inauguration in vivid detail:
30th April, Thursday.–This is a great, important day. Goddess of etiquette, assist me while I describe it. The Senate stood adjourned to half after eleven o’clock. About ten dressed in my best clothes; went for Mr. Morris’ lodgings, but met his son, who told me that his father would not be in town until Saturday. Turned into the Hall. The crowd already great. The Senate met. The Vice-President rose in the most solemn manner. This son of Adam seemed impressed with deeper gravity, yet what shall I think of him? He often, in the midst of his most important airs–I believe when tie is at loss for expressions (and this he often is, wrapped up, I suppose, in the contemplation of his own importance)– suffers an unmeaning kind of vacant laugh to escape him. This was the case to-day, and really to me bore the air of ridiculing the farce he was acting. “Gentlemen, I wish for the direction of the Senate. The President will, I suppose, addressthe Congress. How shall I behave? How shall we receive it? Shall it be standing or sitting?”
Here followed a considerable deal of talk from him which I could make nothing of. Mr. Lee began with the House of Commons (as is usual with him), then the House of Lords, then the King, and then back again. The result of his information was, that the Lords sat and the Commons stood on the delivery of the King’s speech. Mr. Izard got up and told how often he had been in the Houses of Parliament. He said a great deal of what he had seen there. [He] made, however, this sagacious discovery, that the Commons stood because they had no. seats to sit on, being arrived at the bar of the House of Lords. It was discovered after some time that the King sat, too, and had his robes and crown on.
Mr. Adams got up again and said he had been very often indeed at the Parliament on those occasions, but there always was such a crowd, and ladies along, that for his part he could not say how it was. Mr. Carrol got up to declare that he thought it of no consequence how it was in Great Britain; they were no rule to us, etc. But all at once the Secretary, who had been out, whispered to the Chair that the Clerk from the Representatives was at the door with a communication. Gentlemen of the Senate, how shall he be received? A silly kind of resolution of the committee on that business had been laid on the table some days ago. The amount of it was that each House should communicate to the other what and how they chose; it concluded, however, something in this way: That everything should be done with all the propriety that was proper. The question was, Shall this be adopted, that we may know how to receive the Clerk? It was objected [that] this will throw no light on the subject; it will leave you where you are. Mr. Lee brought the House of Commons before us again. He reprobated the rule; declared that the Clerk should not come within the bar of file House; that the proper mode was for the Sergeant-at-Arms, with the mace on his shoulder, to meet the Clerk at the door and receive his communication; we are not, however, provided for this ceremonious way of doing business, having neither mace nor sergeant nor Masters in Chancery, who carry down bills from the English Lords.
Mr. Izard got up and labored unintelligibly to show the great distinction between a communication and a delivery of a thing, but he was not minded. Mr. Elsworth showed plainly enough that if the Clerk was not permitted to deliver the communication, the Speaker might as well send it inclosed. Repeated accounts came [that] the Speaker and Representatives were at the door. Confusion ensued; the members left their seats. Mr. Read rose and called the attention of the Senate to the neglect that had been shown Mr. Thompson, late Secretary. Mr. Lee rose to answer him, but I could not hear one word he said. The Speaker was introduced, followed by the Representatives. Here we sat an hour and ten minutes before the President arrived–this delay was owing to Lee, Izard, and Dalton, who had stayed with us while the Speaker came in, instead of going to attend the President. The President advanced between the Senate and Representatives, bowing to each. He was placed in the chair by the Vice-President; the Senate with their president on the right, the Speaker and the Representatives on his left. The Vice-President rose and addressed a short sentence to him. The import of it was that he should now take the oath of office as President. He seemed to have forgot half what he was to say, for he made a dead pause and stood for some time, to appearance, in a vacant mood. He finished with a formal bow, and the President was conducted out of the middle window into the gallery, and the oath was administered by the Chancellor. Notice that the business done was communicated to the crowd by proclamation, etc., who gave three cheers, and repeated it on the President’s bowing to them.
As the company returned into the Senate chamber, the President took the chair and the Senators and Representatives their seats. He rose, and all arose also and addressed them. This great man was agitated and embarrassed more than ever he was by the leveled cannon or pointed musket. He trembled, and several times could scarce make out to read, though it must be supposed he had often read it before. He put part of the fingers of his left hand into the side of what I think the tailors call the fall of the breeches, changing the paper into his left hand. After some time he then did the same with some of the fingers of his right hand. When he came to the words all the world, he made a flourish with his right hand, which left rather an ungainly impression. I sincerely, for my part, wished all set ceremony in the hands of the dancing-masters, and that this first of men had read off his address in the plainest manner, without ever taking his eyes from the paper, for I felt hurt that he was not first in everything. He was dressed in deep brown, with metal buttons, with an eagle on them, white stockings, a bag, and sword.
From the hall there was a grand procession to Saint Paul’s Church, where prayers were said by the Bishop. The procession was well conducted and without accident, as far as I have heard. The militia were all under arms, lined the street near the church, made a good figure, and behaved well.
The Senate returned to their chamber after service, formed, and took up the address. Our Vice-President called it his most gracious speech. I can not approve of this. A committee was appointed on it–Johnson, Carrol, Patterson. Adjourned. In the evening there were grand fireworks. The Spanish Ambassador’s house was adorned with transparent paintings; the French Minister’s house was illuminated, and had some transparent pieces; the Hall was grandly illuminated, and after all this the people went to bed.
I have such a deep fondness for John Adams, with all his airs and self-importance and vanity. I just love the guy, what can I say. He’s so feckin’ human.
The description of Washington’s awkwardness makes me want to cry:
He rose, and all arose also and addressed them. This great man was agitated and embarrassed more than ever he was by the leveled cannon or pointed musket. He trembled, and several times could scarce make out to read, though it must be supposed he had often read it before. He put part of the fingers of his left hand into the side of what I think the tailors call the fall of the breeches, changing the paper into his left hand. After some time he then did the same with some of the fingers of his right hand. When he came to the words all the world, he made a flourish with his right hand, which left rather an ungainly impression. I sincerely, for my part, wished all set ceremony in the hands of the dancing-masters, and that this first of men had read off his address in the plainest manner, without ever taking his eyes from the paper, for I felt hurt that he was not first in everything. He was dressed in deep brown, with metal buttons, with an eagle on them, white stockings, a bag, and sword.
God. Good God. But what really moves me is that after the address, they all walked in procession, led by George Washington, to St. Paul’s Church, for a service.
St. Paul’s Church. (Read that article … it’s a well-known story, of course, but it always bears repeating.) St. Paul’s has always had meaning for us here in New York, because of its long history, but now … it has more meaning than ever. I can’t even think about St. Paul’s without feeling tears come to my eyes. So to think … that that special church, that church that became symbolic (not just to us here, but to people all over the country) of hope, or survival, of healing … would be the place where George Washington prayed for guidance after being sworn in as the first President… I mean, honestly. I don’t even know what else to say about it.
April 30, 1789 … the day this new nation embarked on its unknown and exciting course, with George Washington at the helm.
Here is an image of the first page of this inaugural address, in Washington’s own hand.

Rabbi Victor Caro
J.D. Levy Home
J.D. Levy Clothing Store
Rabbi Issac Moses
Some history of Quincy’s Jewish Community
Quincy’s first permanent Jewish resident was Abraham Jonas, an English-born Jew, who prior to his arrival in 1838 had lived in Cincinnati with other members of the Jonas family, had moved to Williamstown, KY where he was merchant and representative in the Kentucky state legislature, and where he had been the Grand Master of Kentucky Lodge of Masons in 1832. Why Jonas uprooted his family and came to the wilds of Illinois remains unclear. Beginning as a carriage, chair, window, and paint merchant, Jonas quickly plunged into local Masonic and political affairs. In 1840 he was elected the first Grand Master of the Illinois Masonic Lodge and in 1841 he was elected to his only term in the Illinois legislature as a member of the Whig Party. Jonas has characterized as quick in perception, a brilliant debater, and a formidable opponent. It was during this one term that he met Abraham Lincoln and their political friendship was solidified. Historians have said that Jonas was Lincoln’s closest Jewish friend, and it was Jonas who helped propel Lincoln’s candidacy for President.
Two of Jonas’s brothers, Samuel and Edward, followed him to Quincy at the end of 1840 or early 1841. These three English Jews quickly blended into the small town, with Samuel becoming one of the founders of the Quincy Public Library. Abraham studied law and was admitted to the bar. His activities on behalf of the Whig Party resulted in his appointment as Postmaster of Quincy in 1849.
At about the same time the first wave of German born Jews began to settle in Quincy. Several had been peddlers and decided to settle down in Quincy. Men like David Hermann who arrived in 1846 and Moses Jacobs in 1847 became successful merchants. When recalling those early years, Moses Jacobs noted that by 1849 there were enough Jews to conduct high holiday services on an annual basis, usually in someone’s home. By 1851 the little community had collected enough funds to allow Edward Jonas to purchase a parcel of land overlooking the Mississippi River for a cemetery. By 1852 it was reported that “the Israelites of Quincy had commenced a congregational organization, by electing a Schochet…” When Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise made a one day stop in Quincy on July 16, 1856, he noted that “there are about 40 souls of the Jewish persuasion hailing from Germany, Poland and England. They do a flourishing business.” He also wrote that they would have a nice little congregation if they could overcome their business jealousy.
By the end of that year, those jealousies had been set aside as 26 families founded K. K. B’nai Abraham, and one year later Reverend Israel Worenski became their spiritual leader as Chazzan and Schochet. The congregation met in the third floor of the Jonas building at the southeast corner of Fifth and Hampshire, across from the town square. This “traditional” congregation grew as more Jews settled in Quincy because of its economic prospects. By 1859 Moses Jacobs reported that there were thirty members, or about 100 residents of all ages. Regular Sabbath services were led by the Chazzan, and the congregation supported the services of a Schochet.
Until this point there is nothing to show that Jews faced any kind of discrimination, and the onset of the Civil War acted to further integrate Jews into the life of the community. Lincoln appointed Jonas to the position of Postmaster, Jewish men enlisted in the military, and several of Quincy’s Jewish women helped to found and to activate the Needle Pickets to assist families of Union soldiers. However, there were stirrings of secession within the Jewish community. When the congregation met in 1861 to elect a Chazzan and lecturer, and a Schochet, Mohel, and Shamus, eight members, mostly Bavarians, threatened to leave. Differences were set aside and Nathan Hainsfurther, a resident of Winchester, Illinois, who attended high holiday services in 1861, said, “None of the greater congregations of the country could offer any more to the devout mind than is the case here. The place of worship is a nice hall supplied with everything necessary to a synagogue, and was very well attended.”
One year later the members of B’nai Abraham had collected enough funds to begin the process of building their own house of worship. Such a place was found across from Jefferson Square. Edward Jonas solicited more funds through the newspaper The Occident in which he noted 45 paying members comprising two hundred persons, a Chazzan and teacher, and “a location in a beautiful city of 20,000 on the banks of the Mississippi which offers a peaceful and prosperous home.”
The rift in the congregation had not healed and on October 18, 1864, seventeen members held a meeting in their place of worship to elect officers and establish a new congregation. These “reformers” wanted to break from the old ways and establish a congregation that reflected the American way. This congregation called itself K.K. B’nai Sholom, and by 1866 it was renting an old Baptist Church as its home.
Meanwhile, just prior to the high holidays in 1866, B’nai Abraham dedicated its synagogue. Designed to hold 200 persons, the sanctuary was 18 feet high, with seats on both sides of a central aisle, one for men and the other for women. The building was lit with gas and handsomely carpeted. The dedication was service was attended by both Jews and Gentiles, but noticeably absent were members of B’nai Sholom.
Perhaps in an attempt to placate the secessionists, B’nai Abraham in 1868 introduced an organ and choir into its services. But B’nai Sholom was already planning its own synagogue on Ninth Street between Broadway and Spring. None other than Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise dedicated the cornerstone on July 18, 1869. Just prior to this, in May 1869, B’nai Abraham suffered a mortal blow, when fire damaged its wooden synagogue. When Temple B’nai Sholom was dedicated on September 8, 1870, it literally towered over B’nai Abraham. Costing $25,000, this red brick structure followed a neo-Byzantine style of architecture, dominated by six story high Moorish towers. At nine stories in height, this building was easily recognizable in the Quincy skyline. Some traditionalists had left B’nai Abraham to become charter members of B’nai Sholom.
Reasonable individuals began to conduct behind the scenes negotiations, but it took Rabbi Adolph Ollendorf of B’nai Abraham to effect a merger. He gradually introduced reforms in B’nai Abraham and his eloquent speeches probably spurred the members to bring about a merger of the two congregations. On July 29, 1872, the two congregations passed resolutions of merger. The following Friday evening the first joint Shabbat service was held at B’nai Sholom, with the final Shabbat day service at B’nai Abraham the next day. Herman Hirsch wrote that "Peace, harmony and good will now exists among the members of the united congregations…for in union lies strength….”
This moment was the apex of Jewish life in Quincy. Social and economic forces in the wider country were having an effect. Quincy’s river traffic gave way to the railroad, Quincy’s was no longer a frontier community, and Quincy’s younger generation of Jews sought to make their fortunes and find their spouses elsewhere. Orthodox Judaism as a mode of worship for Quincy’s Jews had been cast aside in favor of Reform. The size of the Jewish community inexorably declined, and Rabbi Elias Eppstein, Quincy’s rabbi in the 1890s thought that the community was on the verge of death. But Congregation B’nai Sholom has survived, now numbering approximately 65 members, and its building, although changed in appearance, remain the second oldest continuously used synagogue west of the Allegheny Mountains and the oldest in Illinois.
Web Services by Media Development

XML and Java Servlets
With recent introduction of new APIs and tools for the Java Server Pages (JSP) environment, marrying XML data to Java-based services and applications is easier than ever before. The September 17 release of the JavaServer Pages 1.2 specification (
- The new specification includes better mechanisms for accessing and describing XML data than earlier versions.
- Standard JSP tag libraries support XML based data more efficiently and effectively.
- Lots of third-party JSP tag libraries are popping up that know about all kinds of XML applications and services.
- Better message handling facilities are integrated into the JSP environment, not coincidentally based on XML and the Simple Object Access Protocol, aka SOAP.
Tag libraries permit collections of custom, XML-like tags to be defined and used in Java servlets constructed to invoke such libraries. In other words, a tag library defines a set of Java classes for the custom JSP actions that the tag library supports. Invoking the tag library imports custom processing and actions into the Java environment so a Java runtime environment like JRun 3.0 will know what to do with such tags as they're recognized. Tag libraries are usually packaged as Java archives in JAR files to make custom tag functions available to developers as they create content, and to Java runtime environments and tools as they encounter and react to such custom tags.
The great thing about JSP and Java servlets is that they run on the server side, and can therefore control their environments to a large extent. This makes it possible to grab and interpret XML-based data on the server, and to transform it into plain-vanilla HTML, XHTML, or other formats (PDF, plain text, rich text files, and so forth) for delivery to Web clients. This helps sidestep the kinds of horrible compatibility issues that dynamic content can cause on the user agent side of a Web or other Internet service connection by keeping custom activities entirely on the server side, where they can be carefully implemented, tested, monitored, and controlled without necessarily being exposed to users.
I find it very interesting that what works for effective delivery of XML data in general works equally well as a technique for combining Java and XML to supports all kinds of powerful, dynamic applications and services. For more information on this great topic, please consult:
- Sun's Java Server Pages home (http://java.sun.com/products/jsp/)
- Westy Rockwell's article on "JSP Tag Libraries" at www.informit.com (search on JSP or the entire title for this and lots of other useful references)
- Visit jakarta.apache.org to examine a substantial collection of custom JSP tag libraries.
- www.orionserver.com offers a nice JSP tutorial and another good collection of JSP tag libraries as well.
- Bill Brogden's excellent book Java Developer's Guide to Servlets and JSP does a nice job of introducing servlets and JSP, and covering tag libraries as well.
Have questions, comments, or feedback about this or other XML-related topics? Please e-mail me at email@example.com; I'm always glad to hear from my readers!
Ed Tittel is a principal at LANWrights, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of LeapIt.com. LANWrights offers training, writing, and consulting services on Internet, networking, and Web topics (including XML and XHTML), plus various IT certifications (Microsoft, Sun/Java, and Prosoft/CIW).
This was first published in December 2001

The American Meteorological Society
) promotes the development and dissemination of information and education on the atmospheric
Atmospheric sciences is an umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems. Meteorology includes atmospheric chemistry and atmospheric physics with a major focus on weather...
and related oceanic
Oceanography , also called oceanology or marine science, is the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean...
and hydrologic sciences
Hydrology is the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability...
and the advancement of their professional applications. Founded in 1919, the American Meteorological Society has a membership of more than 14,000 professionals, professors, students, and weather enthusiasts. Some members have attained the designation "Certified Consulting Meteorologist (CCM)", many of whom have expertise in the applied meteorology discipline of atmospheric dispersion modeling
Atmospheric dispersion modeling is the mathematical simulation of how air pollutants disperse in the ambient atmosphere. It is performed with computer programs that solve the mathematical equations and algorithms which simulate the pollutant dispersion...
. To the general public, however, the AMS is best known for its "Seal of Approval" to television and radio meteorologists.
The AMS publishes nine atmospheric and related oceanic and hydrologic journals (in print and online), issues position statements on scientific topics that fall within the scope of their expertise, sponsors more than 12 conferences annually, and offers numerous programs and services. There is also an extensive network of local chapters.
The AMS headquarters are located at Boston, Massachusetts. It was built by the famous Boston architect Charles Bulfinch
Charles Bulfinch was an early American architect, and has been regarded by many as the first native-born American to practice architecture as a profession....
, as the third Harrison Gray Otis House
There are three houses named the Harrison Gray Otis House in Boston, Massachusetts. All were built by noted American architect Charles Bulfinch for the same man, Harrison Gray Otis.-First Harrison Gray Otis House:...
in 1806 and was purchased and renovated by the AMS in 1958, with staff moving into the building in 1960. The AMS also maintains an office in Washington, D.C.
Washington, D.C., formally the District of Columbia and commonly referred to as Washington, "the District", or simply D.C., is the capital of the United States. On July 16, 1790, the United States Congress approved the creation of a permanent national capital as permitted by the U.S. Constitution....
, at 1120 G Street NW.
Seal of Approval
The AMS Seal of Approval program was established in 1957 as a means of recognizing television and radio weather forecasters who display informative, well-communicated, and scientifically-sound weather broadcast presentations. The awarding of a Seal of Approval is based on a demonstration tape submitted by the applicant to six members of a review panel after paying an application fee. Although a formal degree in meteorology is not a requirement to obtain the original Seal of Approval, the minimal requirements of meteorological courses including hydrology, basic meteorology & thermodynamic meteorology including at least 20 core college credits must have been taken first before applying (ensuring that the forecaster has at least a minimal required education in the field). There is no minimum amount of experience required, but previous experience in weather forecasting and broadcasting is suggested before applying. It is worthy to note that many broadcasters who have obtained the Seal of Approval do in fact have formal degrees in Meteorology or related sciences and/or certifications from accredited University programs. Upon meeting the core requirements, having the seal, and working in the field for 3 years that broadcaster may then be referred to as a Meteorologist in the broadcast community.
As of February 2007, more than 1,600 Seals of Approval have been granted, of which more than 700 are considered "active." Seals become inactive when a sealholder's membership renewal and annual seal fees are not paid.
The original Seal of Approval program will be phased out at the end of 2008. Current applicants may either apply for the original Seal of Approval or the Certified Broadcast Meteorologist (CBM) Seal until December 31, 2008. After that date, only the CBM Seal will be offered. Current sealholders retain the right to use their seal in 2009 and onward, but new applications for the original Seal of Approval will not be accepted after December 31, 2008.
Note: The NWA Seal of Approval is issued by the National Weather Association
The National Weather Association is an American professional association with a mission to support and promote excellence in operational meteorology and related activities...
and is independent of the AMS.
Certified Broadcast Meteorologist (CBM) Seal
The original Seal of Approval program was revamped in January 2005 with the introduction of the Certified Broadcast Meteorologist, or CBM, Seal. This seal introduced a 100-question multiple choice closed-book examination as part of the evaluation process. The questions on the exam cover many aspects of the science of meteorology, forecasting, and related principles. Applicants must answer at least 75 of the questions correctly before being awarded the CBM Seal.
Persons who obtained or applied for the original Seal of Approval before December 31, 2004 and were not rejected are eligible for an upgrade of their Seal of Approval to the CBM Seal upon the successful completion of the CBM exam and payment of applicable fees. Upgrading from the original Seal of Approval is not required. New applicants for the CBM Seal must pay the application fee, pass the exam, and then submit demonstration tapes to the review board before being considered for the CBM Seal. While original sealholders do not have to have a degree in meteorology or a related field of study to be upgraded, brand new applicants for the CBM seal must have a degree in meteorology or a related field of study to be considered.
In order to keep either the CBM Seal or the original Seal of Approval, sealholders must pay all annual dues and show proof of completing certain professional development programs every five years (such as educational presentations at schools, involvement in local AMS chapter events, attendance at weather conferences, and other activities of the like).
As of February 2007, nearly 200 CBM seals have been awarded to broadcast weather forecasters, either upgraded from the original Seal of Approval or granted to new applicants.
American Meteorological Society offers several awards in the fields of meteorology and oceanography.
Atmospheric Research Awards Committee
- The Carl-Gustaf Rossby Research Medal
The Carl-Gustaf Rossby Research Medal is the highest award for atmospheric science of the American Meteorological Society. It is presented to individual scientists, who receive a medal...
- The Jule G. Charney Award
- The Verner E. Suomi Award
- The Remote Sensing Prize
- The Clarence Leroy Meisinger
- The Henry G. Houghton
Oceanographic Research Awards Committee
- The Sverdrup Gold Medal
Sverdrup Gold Medal Award - is the American Meteorological Society's award granted to researchers who make outstanding contributions to the scientific knowledge of interactions between the oceans and the atmosphere.-Recipients:...
- The Henry Stommel Research Award
The Henry Stommel Research Award is awarded by the American Meteorological Society to researchers in recognition of outstanding contributions to the advancement of the understanding of the dynamics and physics of the ocean. The award is in the form of a medallion and was named for Henry...
- The Verner E. Suomi
- The Nicholas P. Fofonoff Award
The American Meteorological Society publishes the following scientific journals:
- Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
The Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society.The official organ of the society, it is devoted to editorials, topical reports to members, articles, professional and membership news, conference announcements, programs and...
- Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
The Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society...
- Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology
The Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society....
- Journal of Physical Oceanography
Journal of Physical Oceanography is a peer-reviewed scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society . It was established in January 1971 and is available on the web since 1996...
- Monthly Weather Review
The Monthly Weather Review is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society.Topics covered by the journal include research related to analysis and prediction of observed and modeled circulations of the atmosphere, including technique development, data assimilation, model...
- Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology
The Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology is a scientific publication by the American Meteorological Society.The journal includes papers describing the instrumentation and methodology used in atmospheric and oceanic research including computational techniques, methods for data acquisition,...
- Weather and Forecasting
Weather and Forecasting is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society.Articles on forecasting and analysis techniques, forecast verification studies, and case studies useful to forecasters...
- Journal of Climate
The Journal of Climate is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society.The journal publishes articles on climate research, in particular those concerned with large-scale atmospheric and oceanic variability, changes in the climate system , and climate simulation and...
- Journal of Hydrometeorology
The Journal of Hydrometeorology is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society. It covers the modeling, observing, and forecasting of processes related to water and energy fluxes and storage terms, including interactions with the boundary layer and lower atmosphere, and...
- Weather, Climate, and Society (new journal, to start 2009)
- Earth Interactions
Earth Interactions is a scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society, American Geophysical Union, and Association of American Geographers....
- Meteorological Monographs
Meteorological Monographs is a publication of the American Meteorological Society.The AMS Monograph Series has two parts, historical and meteorological...
The American Meteorological Society produces the following scientific databases:
- Meteorological and Geoastrophysical Abstracts
As a means of promoting "the development and dissemination of information and education on the atmospheric and related oceanic and hydrologic sciences and the advancement of their professional applications", the AMS periodically publishes policy statements on issues related to its competence on subjects such as drought
A drought is an extended period of months or years when a region notes a deficiency in its water supply. Generally, this occurs when a region receives consistently below average precipitation. It can have a substantial impact on the ecosystem and agriculture of the affected region...
Ozone depletion describes two distinct but related phenomena observed since the late 1970s: a steady decline of about 4% per decade in the total volume of ozone in Earth's stratosphere , and a much larger springtime decrease in stratospheric ozone over Earth's polar regions. The latter phenomenon...
and acid deposition
Acid rain is a rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic, meaning that it possesses elevated levels of hydrogen ions . It can have harmful effects on plants, aquatic animals, and infrastructure. Acid rain is caused by emissions of carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen...
In 2003, the AMS issued the position statement Climate Change Research: Issues for the Atmospheric and Related Sciences
- Human activities have become a major source of environmental change. Of great urgency are the climate consequences of the increasing atmospheric abundance of greenhouse gases... Because greenhouse gases continue to increase, we are, in effect, conducting a global climate experiment, neither planned nor controlled, the results of which may present unprecedented challenges to our wisdom and foresight as well as have significant impacts on our natural and societal systems.
- The Maury Project (a comprehensive national program of teacher enhancement based on studies of the physical foundations of oceanography)

An estimated 50,000 to 60,000 farmworkers between the ages of 14 and 16 might be affected by proposed changes to child labor laws.
Stricter regulations bring new training requirements
Producers could soon lose a share of their farmworkers or be subject to big fines if one of those workers sustains a serious injury, or dies, in a farm accident.
The U.S. Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division is now poring over the more than 3,000 comments it received on its proposed changes to the Hazardous Occupations Orders for Agricultural Employment. The changes will affect hired farmworkers between the ages of 14 and 16 regardless of their immigration status. Children working on farms owned or operated by their parents will continue to be exempt from the orders.
While no one knows for sure exactly how many young workers would be affected by the changes, the Department of Labor estimates that between 50,000 and 60,000 hired farmworkers are between the ages of 14 and 16. The most important of the proposed child labor changes—the first in more than three decades—that crop producers need to be aware of include:
- The tractor-safety certification training required for these workers to be able to operate tractors and other farm machinery would be increased from 20 hours to 90 hours. Children enrolled in the program, however, could work and operate farm machinery while taking the training.
- The height at which these children could work would be lowered from the current 20' to 6'.
- They would be banned from working in grain elevators.
- They would not be allowed to use electronic devices such as iPods or cell phones while operating a motor vehicle such as a tractor (GPS is an exception).
- Tractors operated by these workers would need to have rollover protection and a proper seat belt.
"Farmers have big concerns about some of the proposed changes," says Craig Lang, president of the Iowa Farm Bureau Federation and a fifth-generation dairy producer from Brooklyn, Iowa. A lot of kids work for neighbors, and there are certain things parents would like their kids to be able to do when they reach age 14 or 15—including running a tractor and other farm machinery, Lang says.
The proposed change that Lang and others have the biggest objection to is the extended requirement for tractor-safety certification. "There’s no realistic way to financially support the expanded training," says Bob Aherin, an ag engineer specializing in farm safety at the University of Illinois. "There are very few Extension programs that would have the capacity to offer the coursework. It would be great if we could get young people to go through a 90-hour training, but
I just don’t see it happening."
The height restriction is also an issue. "Farmers view this as another intrusion of government into the private lives of citizens," Lang says. "Parents should be able to determine whether it is safe for their child to work for a neighbor and at what height. When does the intrusion of government stop and allow good parenting to take over?"
Greg Rinehart farms 900 acres near Boone, Iowa, with the help of his 10 children. He’s concerned that kids across the country—particularly those in locations far from city centers—will lose out on the opportunity to work on farms if the proposed rules go into effect. "Kids learn great work ethics on farms," Rinehart says. "They learn the value of hard work, work skills and life lessons. We don’t want to limit kids’ exposure to farms and farm work."
The penalty could reach $100,000, the maximum allowed by law, for employers who knowingly violate the orders and employ an untrained child worker in a hazardous job who sustains serious dismemberment or dies. "Minor violations could result in a warning," says Michael Hancock, assistant administrator for policy at the Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division. "The secretary of labor really believes in these regulations. To expect a final ruling in 2012 is not too ambitious. This is a life and death issue for children."
According to study conducted by the General Accounting Office, 4% of all working youth during the 1990s were employed in agriculture, but they experienced more than 40% of the youth occupational fatalities. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that agricultural workers ages 15 to 17 have a risk of dying that’s 4.4 times greater than the average 15- to 17-year-old worker. The greatest risk of death comes from tractor rollovers.
- January 2012

For people living with diabetes, maintaining optimal blood glucose control takes knowledge, dedication, support — and money. According to a study published in the December 2008 issue of the journal Diabetes Care, people recently diagnosed with diabetes spend, on average, $4,174 more each year on medical costs than people who don’t have diabetes — a gap that increases substantially each year following the initial diagnosis.
In our current economic climate, when people are losing their savings, jobs, homes, and health insurance, people living with diabetes can face major health problems if they don’t have enough money to take care of their condition. And how can people with diabetes come up with the money for doctors’ visits, medicines, insulin, monitoring supplies, an insulin pump, and pump supplies when they are struggling to pay their rent or mortgage, make car payments, and afford their rising grocery bills?
The good news is that there is help available — help that many people, including doctors and social workers, are not always aware of. Through a variety of sources, including nonprofit organizations, government programs, discount pharmacies, and direct services from manufacturers, taking care of your diabetes is possible even when your bank account is nearly empty. That said, there is no one-size-fits-all solution to finding what you need; it all depends on your financial situation. It will take a good deal of time, persistence, and self-advocacy to locate the programs that will help you. Having a computer with Internet access will make your search faster and easier, but you can also find the help you need through phone calls and perhaps a visit to your local Health and Human Services office, whose location can be found in the “government” section of your local phone book.
This article leads you through a variety of resources currently available to help people with diabetes afford health care, medicine, and supplies.
In the last decade, as the number of Americans living without health insurance has increased to an estimated 47 million people, a number of nonprofit agencies have been created to help people find insurance or health care or to afford medical supplies without insurance. Some of these nonprofits are specifically aimed at people with diabetes.
The Foundation for Health Coverage Education (FHCE) is an excellent place to begin for anyone who is uninsured, has recently lost benefits, or is struggling to afford insurance premiums. FHCE is an organization that employs trained specialists to help people discover what public and private programs they are eligible for and what their most affordable options are — all for free. By taking a five-question eligibility quiz on their Web site, www.coverageforall.org, you can see all of the programs for which you may qualify in your state. You can then call FHCE’s help line, (800) 234-1317, to discuss your options with a real person.
“Many people will be eligible for two or three programs and not know it,” says FHCE President Ankeny Minoux. For example, in some states, a person who is self-employed may qualify for a group small-business insurance plan, which can be much more affordable than buying into the state’s high-risk insurance pool. These are the kinds of tips that can make all the difference for someone whose budget is tight. FHCE has provided over 536,000 people with such guidance in the last five years.
iPump was founded in 2006 by Lahle Wolfe, a single mother of four who has diabetes, as do two of her children. iPump has shipped supplies to more than 6,000 people with diabetes in its two years of operation, providing critical materials to more than 30 free clinics throughout the United States that were turning away people with diabetes because they lacked basic monitoring supplies and syringes. The group has also provided assistance to get more than 20 people on insulin pumps and plans to do the same for at least 10 more people during the first half of this year.
Wolfe was inspired to start iPump by her own life experience. “As a single mom to four children, who had insurance, I still could not pay all our diabetes-related medical bills. I had to quit college, sell our home, and move across the country to get on a state insurance program because I had exhausted COBRA benefits,” she recalls. “But our premiums and out-of-pocket medical expenses were still more than $25,000 a year — more than my entire income. I often had to choose between food, my own diabetes supplies, and my daughter’s diabetes care.” (The other child had not yet developed diabetes.) “No family should have to go through what we did.”
To apply for help through iPump, visit its Web site, www.ipump.org. iPump accepts donations of all unexpired diabetes and pump supplies and it relies on monetary donations to distribute them: It costs about $700 to place a donated pump with a new client. Donations can be sent to iPump.org, Inc., 2250 Alyssum Avenue, Upland, California, 91784.
A number of other nonprofit organizations can help with prescription medicines, diabetes supplies, and health care. They include the following:
- The Partnership for Prescription Assistance has a Web site, www.pparx.org, and phone service, (888) 477-2669, both of which offer access to hundreds of assistance programs for the uninsured.
- The Charles Ray III Diabetes Association, Inc., provides blood glucose meters, strips, and other supplies to those who can’t afford to pay for them. To apply for assistance, log on to www.charlesray.g12.com.
- The Patient Advocate Foundation Co-Pay Relief Program assists people who have chronic illnesses — including diabetes — and are fully insured but who struggle to afford their insurance co-payments. To apply for assistance, go to www.copays.org or call (866) 512-3861.
- NeedyMeds (www.needymeds.org) is a nonprofit Web site that offers free, anonymous advice to anyone who cannot afford needed medicine or health care. The Web site helps visitors find both low-cost medicine programs and disease-based assistance programs.
Local charitable organizations, including the Lions Club International, Rotary Club, Elks Club, Kiwanis Club, and Shriners, can provide assistance with medical supplies or help with fund-raising for medical expenses. However, local chapters offer different kinds of help, so you should look up your local chapter and contact it directly or check with your local Health and Human Services office for more information.
Health care was one of the hottest topics in the 2008 Presidential election, and it remains to be seen how the new administration will change our current health-care system. At this time, most Americans rely on employer-sponsored health insurance or purchase private policies. However, there are a number of government-sponsored programs that can benefit people with diabetes.
Medicare is a government health insurance program for people ages 65 and over as well as younger people with serious health problems such as kidney failure. Part A of Medicare covers hospital stays and is provided at no cost to those who qualify. Part B covers doctor visits outside of hospitals and requires paying a monthly premium. Medicare Advantage Plans, also called Part C, are health insurance plans that are approved by Medicare but run by private companies. They are available to anyone enrolled in Parts A and B. These plans tend to offer more benefits at a greater cost; details vary from state to state.
Parts A, B, and C now cover blood glucose meters, test strips, lancets, insulin pumps and supplies, therapeutic shoes, glaucoma screenings, flu and pneumonia vaccines, and counseling by registered dietitians and certified diabetes educators under certain conditions. Part D provides prescription drug benefits. This three-year-old program is run by private insurance companies, so the cost and benefits of plans vary. However, all Part D plans “leave a huge ‘doughnut hole’ that requires patients to pay several thousand dollars a year,” says Dr. Richard Grant, an endocrinologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and author of a 2006 study published in Diabetes Care, which reported that nearly 15% of people with diabetes say they have trouble affording their prescriptions. “The trend we reported on in the study has certainly continued to worsen. With the tumbling economy, joblessness, home foreclosures, etc., people are under severe financial pressures.” Because of this gap in drug coverage, some people on Medicare will still need to find help from other sources (such as the nonprofits listed above) to help pay for their diabetes supplies or drugs.
For Medicare eligibility information, call the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services at (800) 633-4227, or visit www.medicare.gov. People who have Medicare for a disability and are still struggling to make their co-payments on prescriptions may be eligible for extra benefits through Social Security, which can be applied for at www.socialsecurity.gov or by calling (800) 772-1213.
Medicaid is a medical assistance program sponsored by both the federal government and state governments, and administered by each state; coverage varies by state. Eligibility is based on income level and several other criteria. Among the groups of people served by Medicaid are low-income parents, children, seniors, and people with disabilities. Medicaid recipients may qualify for full or partial coverage of certain types of diabetes medicines and blood glucose meters and strips.
CHIP is the Children’s Health Insurance Program provided by each state. It is for children whose families earn too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to afford private health insurance. For information, call (877) 543-7669, or visit www.insurekidsnow.gov.
The VA (Department of Veteran Affairs) runs hospitals and clinics for veterans who meet eligibility requirements based on income. To find out more about VA health benefits, call (800) 827-1000 or visit www.va.gov.
The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) requires certain medical facilities to offer free or discounted care to people who meet low-income eligibility requirements (called the Hill-Burton program). For a directory of locations, call (800) 400-2742 or visit www.hrsa.gov/hillburton. HRSA also supports many local health centers specifically aimed at people who are struggling financially. Centers vary greatly from region to region. A major challenge of community-run health centers is that they are often understaffed and can have a waiting list to see a doctor. It may take several attempts to reach someone on the phone to schedule an appointment. While it may be possible to see the same doctor each time you visit a clinic, at many centers this is not guaranteed. As a patient using a community health center, you may need to share your medical history each time you see a new doctor. If you are willing to be a self-advocate and to be persistent about scheduling and showing up for your medical appointments, using the services of a community-run center can be an excellent way to get the medical care you need despite a tough financial situation. To find an HRSA health center in your area, visit www.hrsa.gov/help.
Manufacturers and pharmacies
Diabetes medicines can be expensive, particularly for people with Type 2 diabetes — who often need to take multiple drugs — or for anyone with diabetes who also takes medicine to treat conditions such as heart or kidney disease or high blood pressure. Fortunately, a number of manufacturers have programs that offer free or low-cost medicines and supplies to those in need. These companies include the following:
A longer listing of manufacturers that offer assistance, compiled by the American Diabetes Association, can be found at www.diabetes.org/advocacy-and-legalresources/healthcare/insurance.jsp.
It is a good idea to ask your doctor to prescribe the generic form of any medicine you take, if there is one, and to look for discount pharmacies. A very helpful Web site, www.pharmacychecker.com, lets you compare prices of insulin and other medicines at different online pharmacies. Many people also find that shopping at Wal-Mart pharmacy gives significant savings because of its $4 prescription program and its low-priced ReliOn blood glucose test strips and supplies.
Another fairly new Web site, www.slashdrugcosts.org, offers free advice to people who are seeking ways to lower the cost of their medicines. It is a library of information, offered by a concerned citizen group, about ways to afford medicines without having to lower your income to be eligible for Medicaid or other assistance programs.
Finally, Together Rx is a public service program created and sponsored by some of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies. It provides a free prescription-savings card for eligible residents of the United States and Puerto Rico who have no other prescription drug coverage. To apply, go to www.togetherrxaccess.com. (See “Resources Listed In Text” for a list of all the resources mentioned in this article.)
Don’t go it alone
If you are struggling financially, finding the assistance you need to take care of your diabetes will require time, patience, and persistence. But as you can see from this article, there are many possible resources to help you get through hard economic times. You can also reach out to your doctor, diabetes educator, or social worker, as well as friends and family members, to get the support you need. In nearly all cases, there is a way to get the health care you need to stay well with diabetes.

eso0842 — Science Release
Beta Pictoris planet finally imaged?
21 November 2008
A team of French astronomers using ESO's Very Large Telescope have discovered an object located very close to the star Beta Pictoris, and which apparently lies inside its disc. With a projected distance from the star of only 8 times the Earth-Sun distance, this object is most likely the giant planet suspected from the peculiar shape of the disc and the previously observed infall of comets onto the star. It would then be the first image of a planet that is as close to its host star as Saturn is to the Sun.
The hot star Beta Pictoris is one of the best-known examples of stars surrounded by a dusty 'debris' disc. Debris discs are composed of dust resulting from collisions among larger bodies like planetary embryos or asteroids. They are a bigger version of the zodiacal dust in our Solar System. Its disc was the first to be imaged — as early as 1984 — and remains the best-studied system. Earlier observations showed a warp of the disc, a secondary inclined disc and infalling comets onto the star. "These are indirect, but tell-tale signs that strongly suggest the presence of a massive planet lying between 5 and 10 times the mean Earth-Sun distance from its host star," says team leader Anne-Marie Lagrange. "However, probing the very inner region of the disc, so close to the glowing star, is a most challenging task."
In 2003, the French team used the NAOS-CONICA instrument (or NACO ), mounted on one of the 8.2 m Unit Telescopes of ESO's Very Large Telescope (VLT), to benefit from both the high image quality provided by the Adaptive Optics system at infrared wavelengths and the good dynamics offered by the detector, in order to study the immediate surroundings of Beta Pictoris.
Recently, a member of the team re-analysed the data in a different way to seek the trace of a companion to the star. Infrared wavelengths are indeed very well suited for such searches. "For this, the real challenge is to identify and subtract as accurately as possible the bright stellar halo," explains Lagrange. "We were able to achieve this after a precise and drastic selection of the best images recorded during our observations."
The strategy proved very rewarding, as the astronomers were able to discern a feeble, point-like glow well inside the star's halo. To eliminate the possibility that this was an artefact and not a real object, a battery of tests was conducted and several members of the team, using three different methods, did the analysis independently, always with the same success. Moreover, the companion was also discovered in other data sets, further strengthening the team's conclusion: the companion is real.
"Our observations point to the presence of a giant planet, about 8 times as massive as Jupiter and with a projected distance from its star of about 8 times the Earth-Sun distance, which is about the distance of Saturn in our Solar System ," says Lagrange.
"We cannot yet rule out definitively, however, that the candidate companion could be a foreground or background object," cautions co-worker Gael Chauvin. "To eliminate this very small possibility, we will need to make new observations that confirm the nature of the discovery."
The team also dug into the archives of the Hubble Space Telescope but couldn't see anything, "while most possible foreground or background objects would have been detected", remarks another team member, David Ehrenreich.
The fact that the candidate companion lies in the plane of the disc also strongly implies that it is bound to the star and its proto-planetary disc.
"Moreover, the candidate companion has exactly the mass and distance from its host star needed to explain all the disc's properties. This is clearly another nail in the coffin of the false alarm hypothesis," adds Lagrange.
When confirmed, this candidate companion will be the closest planet from its star ever imaged. In particular, it will be located well inside the orbits of the outer planets of the Solar System. Several other planetary candidates have indeed been imaged, but they are all located further away from their host star: if located in the Solar System, they would lie close or beyond the orbit of the farthest planet, Neptune. The formation processes of these distant planets are likely to be quite different from those in our Solar System and in Beta Pictoris.
"Direct imaging of extrasolar planets is necessary to test the various models of formation and evolution of planetary systems. But such observations are only beginning. Limited today to giant planets around young stars, they will in the future extend to the detection of cooler and older planets, with the forthcoming instruments on the VLT and on the next generation of optical telescopes," concludes team member Daniel Rouan.
Only 12 million years old, the 'baby star' Beta Pictoris is located about 70 light-years away towards the constellation Pictor (the Painter).
 NACO is one of the instruments on ESO's VLT that make use of Adaptive Optics (AO). Such systems work by means of a computer-controlled deformable mirror that counteracts the image distortion induced by atmospheric turbulence (see e.g. ESO Press Release 25/01).
 The astronomers can only see the projected separation between the star and the planet (that is, the separation projected on the plane of the sky).
"A probable giant planet imaged in the β Pictoris disk. VLT/NACO Deep L-band imaging", by A.-M. Lagrange et al., 2008, Letter to the Editor of Astronomy and Astrophysics, in press. (a PDF file can be downloaded here)
The team is composed of A.-M. Lagrange, G. Chauvin, D. Ehrenreich, and D. Mouillet (Laboratoire d'Astrophysique de l'Observatoire de Grenoble, France), D. Gratadour, G. Rousset, D. Rouan and E. Gendron (LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, France), T. Fusco, and L. Mugnier (Office National d'Etudes et de Recherches Aérospatiales, Chatillon, France), F. Allard (Centre de Recherche Astronomique de Lyon, France), and the NAOS Consortium.
Tel: +33 4 7651 4203
Tel: +33 4 7663 5803
Tel: +33 1 4507 7715
Tel: +49 89 3200 6222
Tel: +56 2 463 3123
About the Release
|Legacy ID:||PR 42/08|
|Facility:||Very Large Telescope|

Cheating, Plagiarism, and Academic Dishonesty
Students must be honest and responsible in the completion of their academic work. While parents are encouraged to assist and guide their children, they must allow their children to do their own work. Students must refrain from:
- Copying another student's work or homework
- Plagiarism (submitting another's work as one's own)
Teachers who suspect that a student may have been academically dishonest will report their concern to the Administration. Consequences may range from receiving a zero (no credit) on the assignment to required withdrawal from school.

Party Affiliation: Republican
- He injured his knee trying to tackle eventual Olympic and NFL great Jim Thorpe during Army football's 27-6 loss to Carlisle in 1912. He never played again.
- Dwight Eisenhower was the only president to serve in both world wars, and was promoted to five-star general in the midst of World War II.
- Health was not Ike’s middle name (David was, though). He was a chainsmoker, had between two and seven heart attacks, was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, and died of cardiac arrest in 1969 at the age of 79.
Click image to view the full poster
- He championed and signed the bill authorizing the Interstate Highway System, making your soul-searching cross-country roadtrip possible.
- His mother, a pacifist, cried when he enrolled in West Point. But his 1915 graduating class became known as the “class the stars fell on”, producing 59 generals.
- In response to the panic over Russia’s Sputnik satellite, the Eisenhower administration oversaw the creation of NASA in October, 1958.

[Date Prev][Date Next][Thread Prev][Thread Next][Date Index][Thread Index][Subject Index][Author Index]
Breathing Apparatus in Tyrannosaurines
The subject of various breathing apparati in extant animals as
applied to dinosaurs is interesting, because there are obvious
alternate systems which may be applied, and I think Ruben et al. 1999
did not confront this. Am hoping to get the article today, so bear my
unread comment on that.
Otherwise, there are apparently various breathing systems employed
by modern animals, including:
hepatic: liver is pushed into lungs to force expelling of breath. --
employed by crocs and lizards(?).
continuous circulation: lungs are rigid, air is forced in and out by
powered airsacs manipulated by movement of muscle compression. --
employed by birds.
diaphragmatic: lungs are flexible and are compressed by movement of
ribs, and expelled by reactive movement of diaphragm. -- employed by
mammals and snakes(?).
grastralic: gastralia compress internal organs to force flexible
lungs to expell. -- ?
I am unsure how turtles do it, but they seem to have had rigid lungs
and ribs and would have to rely on other forces to breathe. Ruben et
al. suggest that the first (hepatic) was employed by crocs and
theropods, but what about those dinosaurs that lacked a mobile pubis
or any other way of compressing the liver?
Take it this way: tyrannosaurs have rigid backs, the pubis could not
induce the position of the liver, and the back could not squeeze down
to force the lungs to move; the gastralia or a continuous ventilation
are the only other proposed breathing mechanisms through which it can
"pump" it's lungs (as well as whatever turtles employ). The hepatic
system doesn't work for tyrannosaurs, and unless I'm mistaken, it
wouldn't for other rigid-backed dinosaurs.
- Often, it is the man who is brought
down the path to the end who does
not see his own steps. -
Jaime A. Headden
Qilong, the website, at:
DO YOU YAHOO!?
Get your free @yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com

Humans are strange, thrill-seeking creatures. We crave not just a thrill, but something so terrifying that we think, if only for a moment, that we might not actually survive. For those of us not ready for base jumping in wing suits, roller coasters can fulfill that excitement lust. And the amusement park fixtures may never have existed if not for something decidedly unthrilling (though important!): coal mining.
In the early 19th century, a coal company operator in Pennsylvania named Josiah White decided to allow the locals a ride on the mine's trains after hours. The trip was an intense 9-mile dive down a mountain, and people loved it. Mules carried the cars back up once they reached the bottom.
Several years later, White invented roller coaster's first big innovation: the thing that makes that distinctive click while they climb. To help meet increasing coal demand, White expanded his operation by building a 664-foot vertical track climbing up a nearby mountain. The steep slope meant an increased risk that cars could lose their grip and slide backwards. So White added a third rail in the middle along with cars equipped with ratchets that engaged with the middle track to prevent backsliding.
Trolley companies jumped into the amusement game at the close of the 19th century, adding small parks at the end of their lines. One notable trolley terminal at Coney Island brought roller coaster culture into the mainstream with rapid-fire coaster innovation. A 600-foot, gravity-powered, switchback railway going an astonishing six (!!!) mph, was such a success that its inventor, La Marcus Thompson, recouped the $1,600 bucks he spent on building the ride in just six weeks. Another inventor turned the typically linear tracks into a loop. Yet another in 1885 kicked his ride off with a powered hoist that yanked cars up to the top of a hill before letting them go.
Just 10 years later, Coney Island introduced the vertical loop to the roller coaster design cannon with the Flip-Flap Railway. The 25-foot inversion was physically uncomfortable to say the least, and it only operated for a few years. Then, in 1901, a coaster with a more gentle oval design mitigated the G-forces. Side note: the lap bar had not yet entered the scene. During the upside down parts, G-forces and handles on the side of the cars were the only things holding riders in.
Higher speeds, thankfully, brought better safety precautions-something absolutely necessary when whipping around at 150 mph without even a helmet. (Did you know there is a roller coaster in Abu Dhabi that goes 150mph?!) Flying forward at even half that clip will make your body feel like a twisted slinky, thanks to G Forces in three directions. But here's the thing: engineers have gotten really good at fine-tuning these G-forces to your benefit.
A 5-G force makes a 100-pound person feel like she weighs 500 pounds. Kent Bachmann, the director of design and engineering for Hersheypark in Pennsylvania, says they stop short of 5Gs, "because some people black out—but we flirt with it." Your body will register 5Gs at anything over 200 milliseconds, but if you hit 5Gs for a fraction of a second less than that, your body wont feel it. That dipping in and out of such intensity is all baked into the design. Alleviating some of that force is important, too, and elements like banked turns take the pressure off.
Sudden acceleration, change in direction, and the feeling of weightlessness also add to the thrill. Wooden roller coasters rely in part on that out of control feeling you get while speeding around the track. Older models were decidedly jolty, but more precise construction, thanks to better computer-powered design tools, allow modern "woodies" an experience reminiscent of coasters past, but without the residual head ache.
That particular out of control feeling comes from the materials. "Wood grows and shrinks with the weather, and the distance between the rails changes over time," says Evan Souliere, a design engineer at Great Coasters. "With steel, you're in constant contact with the track; with wood, you're not." It may feel like you're going to fly off the track, but the design ensures you won't. Wooden coaster tracks look like an upside down, inward pointing pair of Ls. On the top of the track, there's a strip of steel that the trains ride on. Just inside that, 90 degrees from the road wheel, is a guide track. A smaller set of wheels runs on this surface facing outward, stopping the cars from moving side to side. A third set of wheels runs on the underside of the track, pointing upwards, keeping the train from going airborne. Because there is movement in the wood, not all the wheels touch all the time-which is what makes us want to pee our pants as they lose contact with the seat.
Steel coasters can take you higher, faster, and offer more upside down time, but they still rely on sensory trickery. Hersheypark's new $25 million "Skyrush" coaster carries riders over an existing wooden looped ride, taking them what seems like arms reach of other park goers.
They've also stripped the 75 mph ride of upper body armor, leaving you free to throw your arms up unencumbered. There's a seat belt and lap bar combo that will keep you safe, but the feeling that perhaps you won't be makes the ride, which opens this summer, that much more terrifying.
Who knows, maybe humans would have invented roller coasters even without coal mining. Even in 15th-century Russia, long before the 100 mph-plus, 4G scream machines we have today, folks got their thrills by schlepping wooden toboggans up 70-foot hills to slide down an ice slope at 50-miles-per-hour. The man-made hills were called "flying mountains," and they sound quite terrifying, not to mention very dangerous—but also, of course, tantalizingly fun.

C. Mackenzie Brown, Professor of Religion at Trinity University, One Trinity Place, San Antonio, TX 78212-7200; e-mail firstname.lastname@example.org.
Avataric evolutionism is the idea that ancient Hindu myths of Vishnu's ten incarnations foreshadowed Darwinian evolution. In a previous essay I examined the late nineteenth-century origins of the theory in the works of Keshub Chunder Sen and Madame Blavatsky. Here I consider two major figures in the history of avataric evolutionism in the early twentieth century, N. B. Pavgee, a Marathi Brahmin deeply involved in the question of Aryan origins, and Aurobindo Ghose, political activist turned mystic. Pavgee, unlike Keshub, used avataric evolutionism in expounding his nationalistic goals for an independent India. His rationale was bolstered by the idea that India was the fountainhead of all science and civilization. Aurobindo saw in avataric evolutionism a possible key to understanding the involution and evolution of the supreme spirit in the realm of matter as taught in traditional Vedanta. This material-spiritual evolution represented for Aurobindo the necessary knowledge for the true liberation of India, transcending purely political independence. Such knowledge he also saw as the means for the spiritual liberation of the whole of humankind. The processes of involution and evolution he claimed were not in conflict with modern science, and Western evolutionary thinking seems to have inspired many of his own evolutionary reflections, even though in the end he rejected the Darwinian transmutation of species. I conclude with an overview and assessment of recent, post-colonial Hindu assimilations of avataric evolutionism.

Dust off Morocco and fires in Portugal
Jeff Schmaltz, MODIS Rapid Response Team, NASA/GSFC
Saharan Desert dust (tan pixels) was spreading northwestward over the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Morocco on September 13, 2003. In this scene, the Canary Islands are visible in the lower left corner while the western tip of the Iberian Peninsula can be seen in the upper right. A thick plume of gray smoke is streaming westward from a large forest fire that had been burning in Portugal since the previous week.
This true-color image was acquired by the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), aboard NASA's Aqua satellite.

Click here to visit the Ignatius Critical Editions website
Written in the sixth century, The Consolation of Philosophy was one of the most popular and influential works of the Middle Ages. Boethius composed the masterpiece while imprisoned and awaiting the death sentence for treason. The Christian author had served as a high-ranking government official before falling out of favor with Roman Emperor Theodoric, an Arian. In the Consolation, Boethius explores the true end of life-knowledge of God-through a conversation with Lady Philosophy. Part prose, part poetry, the work combines Greek philosophy and Christian faith to formulate answers to some of life's most difficult and enduring questions.
About the Editor/Translator:
Scott Goins, Ph.D., is Professor of Classics and Director of the Honors College at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, Louisiana. He received his Ph.D. and M.A. from Florida State University and has published writings on several authors including Virgil and Boethius.
Barbara H. Wyman, M.A., M.F.A., teaches English and Latin at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, Louisiana. Besides Boethius, she has published writings on George Herbert, Hopkins, and others

There are times when I want to create an ad hoc network to share files or a network connection. Here are the steps to create an ad hoc network in Windows 7.
- Click on Start (Windows icon) and type wireless. Click on Manage wireless networks.
- Click on Add to add a network.
- Click on Create an ad hoc network.
- Click on Next.
- Enter a name for your network and configure the security options. Click on Next when you are done.
[Update: 3/21/2009] If you are interested in setting up an ad hoc network with encryption, please see this post.
[Update: 8/17/2010] Please see my latest post about setting an ad hoc network to share an internet connection.

Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin were born on the very same day, February 12, 1809, a fateful day for the world. That their births mean so much to so many 200 years later reflects far more than their amazing life accomplishments. With its love of Great Men, history has turned each into a symbol of a major inflection point in the development of Western Civilization, marking the emergence of the Modern in our world. Lincoln symbolizes the final collapse of slavery as an acceptable practice of Christian people. Darwin symbolizes the final collapse of the traditional Christian explanation of how the world works. These historic changes in worldviews originated centuries before their birthday. Neither Lincoln nor Darwin was a major agent of the change. But each was fated to drive the final nail. Neither Lincoln’s presidency nor Darwin’s writings completed the change, but each turned the tide, making it forever impossible to slip permanently backward.
It is ironic that Lincoln symbolizes vindication of the Christian concept of the dignity of the individual person, with God-given rights, whereas Darwin symbolizes the Modern concept of a remote God uncaring about the lives of individual persons. The triumph of Divinely justified abolition was concurrent with the legitimizing of belief that God, even if God exists, is irrelevant to life as we know it.
Darwin Fish vs. Jesus Fish
Several years ago, I was driving home from work, a bit too lost in my thoughts. I had to brake violently to avoid rear-ending a car stopped at an intersection in my California town. As I recovered my wits and studied the rear-end of the car I nearly smashed, I saw for the first time the Darwin fish – the “Jesus fish” with Darwin’s name instead and little feet underneath, like the familiar figure of a fish sprouting feet to become an amphibian. I laughed! And I continued to laugh as I saw more of these Darwin fish on the rear ends of cars around town. It is a university town, where you expect such clever, irreverent humor. Over time, I saw the growing bumper battle between the Darwin fish and the Jesus fish, with ever more clever designs, culminating in the Darwin fish opening wide to eat the Jesus fish! I became concerned. Too many people are taking this battle seriously, seeing Darwin as displacing Jesus.
This was not the reaction of an offended Christian or shock at such public display of intolerance. I was reacting to the name Darwin coming to symbolize so much other than the man or even his work. The Darwin fish proposes an equivalence between Darwin and Jesus. Darwin the prophet of modernity, Darwin the symbol of Ultimate Truth, Darwin an object of “religious” reverence. This struck me as profound misrepresentation of who was Charles Darwin and what he himself stood for. This was not science versus religion or science versus Christianity but Science as a religion competing with Christianity as a religion. I knew Charles the person would have been appalled.
A Visit to Down House
Two years ago, I spent a March day at Down House, Charles’s home for forty years. No other single house is more closely associated with the work of a great man. It was a weekday, so I nearly had the place to myself. Charles Darwin and his wife Emma and his children and his servants and his experiments and his village came alive in my mind.
I prowled the family rooms, furnished almost as they were 150 years ago, imagining I could hear Emma playing the piano in the parlor. I stood for an hour in his study, just watching Charles in my mind as he worked with total concentration yet smiled when his children came noisily rushing in to find scissors for their project. I returned a few minutes later to imagine Charles Lyell and Joseph Hooker sitting with Charles in rapt conversation. I stood by the dining table to watch Charles holding court as local magistrate to settle disputes among his fellow villagers. Then I saw him alone at the table carefully reconciling the accounts of the Friendly Club he helped start so that local laborers could save for their future needs. I had tea at the kitchen table, where Charles once played a hand of whist for the cook while she tended the stove. I walked the Sandwalk round and round five times as a snow squall swept through the stand of old trees Charles had planted then changed abruptly to pale Kentish sunshine over the fields that once belonged to the neighbor, Sir John Lubbock. On the Sandwalk, I thought for the first time in years about that near-accident in my own town and then about the meaning of the “Darwin fish.”
In Defense of Charles the Person
I am a friend of Charles the person and therefore feel obliged to defend his good name. Not that I knew him in person! My great, great grandfather was born in England the same year as Charles. But I know Charles a great deal better than I know my own ancestor. His voyage on the Beagle inspired me to travel the world, too. His evolutionary theory structured my worldview in university and to this day. To me, however, Charles is more than a voyage and a theory. Charles is a life-long friend – not a mentor or a teacher or a hero or an icon – a personal friend – like the fantasy friend of a child, I suppose – with passions and aversions, strengths and weaknesses, to which I relate my own. He is a person with whom I can sympathize but also criticize. He puzzles yet inspires me. He makes me smile, and he is exasperating. We agree, and we disagree. We walk together in silence. He speaks, I listen. He is a personal friend, no less than my deceased father, who is gone, yet with me. It is a person-to-person connection. In short, I like Charles Darwin a great deal. I know him too well to sit by while the modern world enthrones him as its demi-god. Nor can I idly allow him to be branded the Anti-Christ.
To Understand Charles the Person
The Darwin name will be taken in vain regardless of how hard we try to set the record straight, but those of us who honor intellectual honesty and historical accuracy should have ready access to the real man and what were most likely his true views on the issues that are now so controversial. Surely this better understanding only improves the debate. We also owe this much to such a remarkable, decent and likeable man.
You might ask what more there is to know about Charles Darwin. Surely his life and work are among the best chronicled of any historic figure. What can be added to the numerous biographies based on volumes of personal letters, notebooks, manuscripts, and of course, his many books?
Nonetheless, lots more is being written now, because today is February 12, 2009, the bicentennial of Charles Darwin’s birth. The world is celebrating as it would for no other scientist, because Darwin has become the patron saint of the secular worldview that needs no god for explanation of past, present and future. The commemoration will be the occasion for new assaults in the ongoing culture war between evolution and creationism, more generally between secular and religious worldviews. There will be lectures and symposia, sermons and articles, popular books and television specials revisiting and interpreting the life, times and writings of this iconic figure of the modern (and post-modern) world.
Whether the authors are triumphant or defiant in their attitude toward Charles Darwin, the naturalist of H.M.S. Beagle and author of On the Origin of Species will overshadow Charles Darwin the remarkably likeable countryman of Shropshire and Kent, the loyal friend of leading intellectuals around the world, the loving, playful father of accomplished children, and especially the devoted husband of Emma Wedgwood. The influence of Emma on the career and thinking of Charles goes well beyond her famous roles as hostess and lady of Down House, guardian of his health and spirits, and worrier for his eternal soul as his worldview evolved toward its irretrievable break from Anglican orthodoxy. She was a devout believer, but as a thoughtful Unitarian, not a rote Anglican. She was the sophisticated daughter and granddaughter of great industrialists. She had done the Grand Tour and learned the languages and music of the Continent (in contrast, Charles visited Europe only once, a brief visit to Paris, before his famous voyage, after which he never left England again). She was keenly interested in the politics and current events of the day. And she was Charles’s best friend.
An Online Book Project
As I stood in the parlor of Down House, it occurred to me that Emma and Charles were a couple worthy of a Jane Austen novel. As I did my five turns around the Sandwalk, I started an ambition to achieve a novelist’s level of sympathy with this historic couple, if only to better understand Charles.
What Charles and Emma wrote about their own personal views gives only partial insight. Each had personal biases welling up from assumptions, of which even they were mostly unaware. As we all are, Charles and Emma were children of their time and all that led up to that time. Therefore, to properly interpret what they were thinking and feeling, we have to explore the history and philosophy and culture and society that influenced their thinking and feeling. A daunting task indeed!
In July of last year (2008), I launched DarwinWatch on which I am posting a series of essays and book reviews I am writing as I read and think on this task. Someday I plan to meld these into a book, which I may title Walking Fish: Charles and Emma Darwin on the Question of God. There is no way to know how successful this project might be, but you may find my effort interesting to monitor on occasion. I welcome your comments.
Copyright 2009 by Chris Dunford. May be quoted in part or in full only with attribution to Chris Dunford (www.darwinwatch.wordpress.com)

Agricultural Research Service (ARS) scientists have found environmentally and economically sound uses for the byproducts of biofuel production.
Animal scientist William Dozier, formerly with the ARS Poultry Research Unit in Mississippi State, Miss., has been working with colleagues at the ARS Swine Odor and Manure Management Research Unit in Ames, Iowa, and Iowa State University (ISU) to find ways to supplement animal diets with glycerin. Glycerin, a biofuel byproduct, contains energy-providing nutrients for animals.
Dozier and ISU colleague Kristjan Bregendahl evaluated the use of glycerin supplements in poultry feed. Dozier primarily dealt with broilers, which are chickens raised specifically for meat production, and gave glycerin-supplemented poultry feed to broilers that were 7 to 45 days old.
Dozier evaluated the apparent metabolizable energy (AME) intake—a standard measure of energy—for the study group and for a control group that ate a standard diet. The youngest chicks, aged 7 to 10 days, showed a higher AME intake than the control group. However, the two groups showed no significant differences in the amount of feed they consumed, body weight, or the amount of energy lost in feces and urine (energy excretion).
The second group of broilers, aged 21 to 24 days old, that consumed glycerin feed supplements showed no difference in body weight, energy excretion, and AME. However, their feed intake and the amount of energy provided by the diet intake (gross energy) increased when glycerin supplementation increased. The oldest broilers, aged 42 to 45 days old, showed increases in feed consumption, gross energy, and AME.
Dozier notes that from a nutritional standpoint, this technology can serve as an alternative dietary energy source that could result in lower feed costs. Swine and poultry producers are very interested in supplementing livestock feed with glycerin, in part because the corn grain and soybeans that used to be fed to livestock are now being used for biofuel production. This way, the crops can be used for both biofuels and for livestock feed.

To be sustainable, old cities need new, smarter infrastructures, says HP Labs sustainability visionary Chandrakant Patel
Since arriving at HP Labs in 1991, HP Fellow and director of HP’s Sustainable IT Ecosystem Lab Chandrakant Patel has worked to make IT systems more energy efficient. His early research in microprocessor system design led Patel to pioneer the concept of ‘smart data centers’ – data centers in which compute, power and cooling resources are provisioned based on the need. He now extends his vision of energy efficiency beyond the data center to what he calls ‘City 2.0.’
As nations look to rebuild their aging infrastructures and at the same time take on the challenge of global climate change, Patel argues that resource usage needs to be at the heart of their thinking. And, we must take a fundamental perspective in examining “available energy” in building and operating the infrastructure. Only if we use fewer resources to both build and run our infrastructures, he says, will we create cities that can thrive for generations to come. And we can only build in that way, he suggests, if we seamlessly integrate IT into the physical infrastructure to provision the resources – power, water, waste, etc - at city scale based on the need
Chandrakant Patel recently described his vision of building City 2.0, enabled by a Sustainable IT Ecosystem.
So you started out by addressing energy use in the data center?
That’s right. When we created the Thermal Technology Research Program at HP Labs in the early 90s, our industry was not addressing power and cooling in the data center at all. But we thought the data center should be looked at as a system. And if you look at it that way, there are three key components to the data center: computing, power, and cooling. We felt all of these should be provisioned based on need. Just as you dedicate the right computing instrument to the workload, you supply the power and cooling on an as-needed basis. You use sensors and controls, so that when workload comes in, you decide what kind of workload it is and give it the right level of compute, power, and cooling.
What kind of impact does this have on energy use?
Well, we built a “smart” data center in Palo Alto and a large data center in Southern India as a proof of concept. In the data center in Southern India, we used 7,500 sensors to record the temperature of its various parts, which feed back to a system that automatically controls all the air conditioners. In addition to saving 40% in energy used by the cooling system, the fine grained sensing allowed us to dynamically place workloads and shut machines down that are not being used.
Furthermore, with 7500 sensors polling every few seconds, we are able to mine sensor data to detect “anomalies” so we can extend the life of large scale physical systems such as compressors in the cooling plant. This type of sensing and control is critical for large scale physical installations. One wouldn’t run a house without a thermostat, so why should one run a multi-megawatt data center without fine grained measurement and control? A ceiling fan in a house uses a few hundred watts, and it has a knob so one can change its speed based on the need.
The blowers in air handling units inside a data center use10 kilowatts, and are often running at full speed all the time regardless of the data center’s needs!
How do you apply this kind of approach over the entire IT ecosystem?
First, you need to ask: what is the ecosystem? The world has billions of service-oriented client devices, like our laptops and handhelds. Then it has thousands of data centers, and thousands of print factories. That’s the ecosystem. Then you need to ask if that ecosystem is as energy efficient as it can be. To do that we take a life cycle approach. We look at the energy it takes to build and operate IT products over their life-cycle. If you do that, you can see that you might design, build and operate them in completely different ways – through appropriate choice of energy conversion means and appropriate choice of materials - ultimately leading to least energy, least material designs. Indeed, we believe that taking such an “end to end” view in design and management is required to reduce the cost of IT services that will enable the billions to use IT ecosystem to meet their needs.
Can you give an example?
Take a laptop as an example.
How much energy is required to build a laptop - to extract the material, to manufacture it, operate it and ultimately reclaim it? Using Joules of available energy consumed as the currency, one can examine the supply chain and design the laptop with appropriate choice of materials to minimize the consumption of available energy. Such a technique also allows one to examine the carbon emission across a product life cycle. This type of proactive approach is good for the environment and good for business. Good for business because, in our opinion, such an approach will lead to lowest-cost products and services.
Is there an impact on IT services too?
Absolutely. Today, I can reserve train tickets online for rail travel in India from my home in the US. But most of the 700 million people in India must take a motorized rickshaw to the train station, and spend half a day, to get the ticket. They can ill afford to spend the time. Couldn't we give them appropriately priced IT services so they can do it online? That's what Web 2.0 is about for me -- meeting the fundamental needs of a society. Furthermore, these kinds of services would reduce congestion and reduce consumption of available energy. We can ask - and we need to ask - the same kinds of questions when we are talking about bringing people all kinds of resources more effectively.
How do you get the information you need to make decisions based on energy used over the life of a product?
Firstly, at design time, the IT ecosystem enables us to create a tool for analysis based on scientific principles rather than anecdotes and rules of thumb. Secondly, the IT ecosystem provides us the ability to avail energy and material data for lifecycle analysis in design phase e.g. the available energy used in extracting Aluminum from Bauxite. Next, during operation, you use sensors and controls to manage your resources. Take traffic flow in a city. All you need to manage it is a backbone, the sensors, the data center and a panel where you can collect all that information and manage it. With that we can manage the flow so that available energy is being provisioned based on the need. You can do the same with electricity, water, waste, etc. Thus, you are using the IT ecosystem to have a net positive impact by deconstructing conventional business models – you're creating a sustainable ecosystem using IT.
Is that what you mean by the City 2.0 ?
Yes. We started the Sustainable IT Ecosystem Lab at HP Labs because we wanted to integrate the IT ecosystem into the next generation of cities - what I've called City 2.0. If you had to build a city all over again, how would you build it? Are you going to just build a city with more roads, more bridges? Or are you going to use the IT ecosystem so that more people can use less of those physical resources more effectively? Wouldn't you think it would be better if a data center was there, and it managed all the resources? Wouldn't it be better to harvest the rain that falls in the area and have a lot of local reservoirs? Wouldn't it be good to have a local power grid instead of bringing power from somewhere else? Those are the kinds of questions that we are wrestling with.
How can HP contribute to building the City 2.0?
HP has the breadth and the depth – the billions of service-oriented client devices, the thousands of data centers and the thousands of print factories. HP covers all aspects of the IT ecosystem. And we have a great history in measurement, communication, and computation. What I’d like to see us do is leverage the past to create the future. A future where we address the fundamental needs of society by right provisioning the resources so that future generations can have the same quality of life as we do.
The US and many other countries are in recession. Building the City 2.0 is an expensive proposition, so why is it worth doing?
First of all, I think building a smart infrastructure could revitalize our economy by providing businesses with the opportunity to apply their new technologies for solving age-old problems like water distribution and energy management. And secondly, if governments around the world are going to spend on infrastructure, we probably want to do it in a smart way: not just building things for the sake of building them. We can - and should - do it in a planned, sustainable way where we also create new, high-paying and long-lasting jobs.
More information about HP Labs is available at: www.hpl.hp.com/about/
please sign in to rate this article

A group of researchers have developed a way to identify pirated movies by reducing the original to a signature genetic code. The system can match even videos that have been altered or had their colors changed to the source, an area where many video piracy mechanisms fall short.
Drs. Alex and Michael Bronstein and Professor Ron Kimmel have come up with a way to isolate a certain subset of data from video files that serves an analogous role to a fingerprint at a crime scene. While the creators haven't published research on this exact project in order to guard the proprietary technology, it works by applying a series of grids over the film to reduce it to a series of numbers.
Once the film has been systematically reduced, copyright holders can take the "DNA signature" of the video and scan sites that host pirated videos for it. According to the three researchers, the signature should be able to find correct matches even if the videos' borders have been changed, commercials have been added, or scenes have been edited out, which is a capability that sites that patrol for piracy, like YouTube, currently lack.
There are no details on the limitations of the system, such as video length, style, or quality. "We have a fully working prototype and have established a company that commercializes it," Dr. Bronstein told Ars.
While the website is no more revealing about how the video DNA matching works, Bronstein adds that they've already had a few companies interested in licensing the technology.

In De vita et moribus Iulii Agricolae, Tacitus describes and praises the life of his father-in-law Gnaeus Julius Agricola, an eminent Roman general. It covers briefly the people and geography of Britain, where Agricola was stationed.
- Idque apud imperitos humanitas vocabatur, cum pars servitutis esset.
- Translation: Because they didn't know better, they called it 'civilization,' when it was part of their slavery.
- Book 1, paragraph 21.
- Longer variant: Step by step they were led to things which dispose to vice, the lounge, the bath, the elegant banquet. All this in their ignorance they called civilisation, when it was but a part of their servitude.
- Auferre, trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus imperium; atque, ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant.
- Translation: To ravage, to slaughter, to usurp under false titles, they call empire; and where they make a desert, they call it peace. Oxford Revised Translation (at Project Gutenberg) 
- Translation: They plunder, they slaughter, and they steal: this they falsely name Empire, and where they make a wasteland, they call it peace. — translation Loeb Classical Library edition
- Translation: To plunder, butcher, steal, these things they misname empire: they make a desolation and they call it peace. — translation by William Peterson
- More colloquially: They rob, kill and plunder all under the deceiving name of Roman Rule. They make a desert and call it peace.
- At the end of chapter 30.
- This is a speech by the Caledonian chieftain Calgacus addressing assembled warriors about Rome's insatiable appetite for conquest and plunder. The chieftain's sentiment can be contrasted to "peace given to the world" which was frequently inscribed on Roman medals. The last part solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant (they make a desert, and call it peace) is often quoted alone. Lord Byron for instance uses the phrase (in English) as follows,
- Mark where his carnage and his conquests cease!
He makes a solitude, and calls it — peace.
- Lord Byron, Bride of Abydos (1813), Canto 2, stanza 20.
- Mark where his carnage and his conquests cease!
- Et maiores vestros et posteros cogitate.
- Translation: Think of your forefathers and posterity.
- Chapter 32.
- It belongs to human nature to hate those you have injured.
- Chapter 42; reported in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 10th ed. (1919).
- Tu vero felix, Agricola, non vitae tantum claritate, sed etiam opportunitate mortis.
- Translation: Thou wast indeed fortunate, Agricola, not only in the splendour of thy life, but in the opportune moment of thy death. 
- Chapter 45.
- The Germans themselves I should regard as aboriginal, and not mixed at all with other races through immigration or intercourse. For in former times, it was not by land but on shipboard that those who sought to emigrate would arrive; and the boundless and, so to speak, hostile ocean beyond us,is seldom entered by a sail from our world.
- Chapter 2
- They even say that an altar dedicated to Ulysses, with the addition of the name of his father, Laertes, was formerly discovered on the same spot, and that certain monuments and tombs with Greek inscriptions, still exist on the borders of Germany and Rhaetia.
- Chapter 3.
- On the whole,one would say that their strength is in their infantry, which fights along with the cavalry; admirably adapted to the action of the latter is the swiftness of certain foot soldiers, who are picked from the entire youth of their country, and stationed in front of the line.
- Chapter 6.
- To abandon your shield is the basest of crimes; nor may a man thus disgraced be present at the sacred rites, or enter their council; many, indeed, after escaping from battle, have ended their infamy with the halter.
- Chapter 6.
- Mercury is the deity whom they chiefly worship, and on certain days they deem it right to sacrifice to him even with human victims.
- Chapter 9.
- Quanquam severa illic matrimonia
- Translation: However the marriage is there severe.
- Start of chapter 18.
- This is in the sense that the matrimonial bond was strictly observed by the Germanic peoples, this being compared favorably against licentiousness in Rome. Tacitus appears to hold the fairly strict monogamy (with some exceptions among nobles who marry again) between Germanic husbands and wives, and the chastity among the unmarried to be worthy of the highest praise. (Ch. 18).
- …ibi boni mores valent quam alibi bonae leges.
- Translation: …good habits are here more effectual than good laws elsewhere.
- End of chapter 19.
- No one in Germany laughs at vice, nor do they call it the fashion to corrupt and to be corrupted.
- Chapter 19.
- Indeed, the crowning proof of their valour and their strength is that they keep up their superiority without harm to others.
- Chapter 35.
- Their shields are black, their bodies dyed. They choose dark nights for battle, and, by the dread and gloomy aspect of their death-like host, strike terror into the foe, who can never confront their strange and almost infernal appearance.
- Chapter 43.
- All this is unauthenticated, and I shall leave it open.
- Chapter 46 (last text line).
- It is the rare fortune of these days that one may think what one likes and say what one thinks.
- Book I, 1.
- He possessed a peculiar talent of producing effect in whatever he said or did.
- Book II, 80.
- Once killing starts, it is difficult to draw the line.
- Book I, 39.
- Some might consider him as too fond of fame; for the desire for glory clings even to the best men longer than any other passion.
- Book IV, 6.
- Deos fortioribus adesse.
- Translation: The gods are on the side of the stronger.
- Book IV, 17.
- Corruptissima re publica plurimae leges.
- Translation: The more numerous the laws, the more corrupt the government.
- Variant: The more corrupt the state, the more laws.
- Original Quote: And now bills were passed, not only for national objects but for individual cases, and laws were most numerous when the commonwealth was most corrupt.
- Book III, 27.
- Conspicuous by his absence.
- Book III, 76; Lord John Russell, alluding to an expression used by him ("Conspicuous by his absence") in his address to the electors of the city of London, said, "It is not an original expression of mine, but is taken from one of the greatest historians of antiquity".
- The images of twenty of the most illustrious families—the Manlii, the Quinctii, and other names of equal splendour—were carried before it [the bier of Junia]. Those of Brutus and Cassius were not displayed; but for that very reason they shone with pre-eminent lustre.
- Book III, 76.
- He had talents equal to business, and aspired no higher.
- Book VI, 39.
- He upbraided Macro, in no obscure and indirect terms, "with forsaking the setting sun and turning to the rising".
- Book VI, 52, referring to Tiberius.
- What is today supported by precedents will hereafter become a precedent.
- Book XI, 24.
- So true is it that all transactions of preeminent importance are wrapt in doubt and obscurity; while some hold for certain facts the most precarious hearsays, others turn facts into falsehood; and both are exaggerated by posterity.
- Variant: So obscure are the greatest events, as some take for granted any hearsay, whatever its source, others turn truth into falsehood, and both errors find encouragement with posterity.
- Book III, 19.
- The desire for safety stands against every great and noble enterprise.
- A popular rendering of: “nisi impunitatis cupido retinuisset, magnis semper conatibus adversa”
- Variant: "but desire of escape, foe to all great enterprises, held him back." This of Subrius Flavus’ passing thought of assassinating Nero while the emperor sang on stage.
- Book XV, 50.
Quotes about Tacitus
- Abuse, if you slight it, will gradually die away; but if you show yourself irritated you will be thought to have deserved it.
- Liberty is given by nature even to mute animals.
- Great empires are not maintained by timidity.

'sheaves' by steven banken
at biesbosch national park in the netherlands, the act of cutting reed and willow shoots and bundling them just before winter is an annual event,
making it a natural area for supply material. instead of letting the brush just decay, dutch designer steven banken's reintroduces these sheaves into nature
as furniture pieces, whereby he has developed a simple stainless steel metal clamping bracket to hold bunches of the raw material together,
forming bench seating, that is modifiable in length depending on how the reeds are cut. this gives the dried plant new life, a minimal intervention
that brings the reeds back into the environment as outdoor seating in the summer.
simple metal brackets are used to hold the raw material together
one of today's biesbosch reed cutters (left) and shots of the excessive growth of the plant at the national park

What Is It?
Vitiligo consists of white patches of skin that are caused by the loss of melanin, the pigment that gives skin its color. Melanin is produced by special cells called melanocytes, which are destroyed in people who have vitiligo. Experts are still working out the details to understand why this disease occurs, but evidence strongly suggests that vitiligo is an autoimmune disorder, in which the body's immune system mistakenly targets and injures these specific cells within your own body.
Vitiligo can cause minor changes or extensive changes in the skin. In some people, it may be hardly noticeable, while in others it is obvious. In dark-skinned people the vitiligo patches are obvious since they contrast with normal skin. Light-skinned people may have fewer cosmetic concerns, but patches without pigment can become obvious in the summer because unaffected skin tans but vitiligo skin does not tan.
Vitiligo occurs in about 1% to 2% of the population. Approximately 30% of people with vitiligo have a family history of the condition. About half of people with vitiligo start showing symptoms before age 20.
People with vitiligo have an increased risk of developing certain diseases, such as hypothyroidism (an underactive thyroid), hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid), type 1 diabetes , Addison's disease (a disease that causes a decrease in the function of the adrenal gland) and pernicious anemia (vitamin B12 deficiency). Also, people with these conditions have an increased risk of developing vitiligo. These medical conditions are all problems that involve the immune system attacking cells in the body.
Vitiligo causes patches of white skin that are often symmetrical (even), with dark or red borders. The patches can occur anywhere, but the areas most commonly affected are the backs of the hands, the face, and areas that have skin folds, such as the armpits and genitals. Body openings, such as the lips, eyes, nipples and anus are also common areas for vitiligo, as are areas that have been sunburned.
Vitiligo can occur in bursts, so that sizeable areas of skin may rapidly lose their pigment during the beginning stages of the condition, yet then these whitened skin patches may abruptly stop expanding for months or years.
Vitiligo causes a pattern of skin changes that usually can be recognized easily by a doctor. If the skin changes are in a pattern that suggests other conditions, your doctor might recommend a biopsy of the skin to be certain about your diagnosis. In a biopsy, a small piece of skin is removed and examined in a laboratory. A biopsy usually is not needed to diagnose vitiligo.
In 1 out of every 5 to 10 people, some or all of the pigment eventually returns on its own and the white patches disappear. For most people, however, the whitened skin patches last and grow larger if vitiligo is not treated. Vitiligo is a lifelong condition.
There is no way to prevent vitiligo.
Vitiligo can be treated if it causes emotional or social distress. The goals of treatment are to minimize the contrast in color between your normal skin and skin patches that have lost pigment. If you are light-skinned, part of your treatment may be to protect your normal skin from tanning by using sunscreens with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15.
You can try to get normal skin color to return in the areas affected by vitiligo with treatment called repigmentation therapy, which can take several forms:
- Topical treatments are helpful in most people. These are applied directly to the skin. Steroid creams or ointments are applied once a day for up to several months. These medications are not always effective, and they can thin the skin with continued use. Other medicines that may be helpful include tacrolimus (Protopic) and pimecrolimus (Elidel), but these medicines are used with caution because of a possible link between these drugs and skin cancer or lymphoma.
- Ultraviolet B light treatment is effective for treating vitiligo in at least half of all patients. Ultraviolet light can be provided by a hand-held light box for smaller areas of skin. People who have many areas of skin involved can be treated by putting on goggles and standing inside a closet-sized light box for several minutes. The treatment must be repeated often, usually for three times a week and for at least six months. Side effects, which should be discussed thoroughly with your dermatologist, include itching, pain and sunburn as well as increased risk of skin cancers.
- Psoralen plus ultraviolet A light treatment (commonly called PUVA) causes slightly more pronounced side effects than ultraviolet B light therapy, but it is another effective way to treat vitiligo. Like UVB treatment, this therapy helps at least half of all patients. Psoralens are drugs that cause skin to darken when they react with ultraviolet A light. They can be applied as a cream or taken as pills. After the psoralen medicine is used, you are exposed to ultraviolet light. PUVA treatment is not for pregnant women, women who are breastfeeding or children younger than 10. There is also an increased risk of skin cancers.
- Oral medicines that suppress your immune system can halt vitiligo skin changes and in many cases can allow normal pigment to return. For people who have large skin areas involved, oral steroids sometimes are used instead of steroids applied to the skin. This treatment is seldom used because of potential side effects of oral steroids.
- For people with severe vitiligo, depigmentation can remove the color from normal skin, making all of the skin the same white color. This treatment is rarely used because the skin without pigment is very vulnerable to damage from sun exposure. A bleaching solution is applied daily for up to 12 months. It may be 2 or 3 months before you see any effects. About 95% of people will be depigmented within 12 months, and must then meticulously avoid sun exposure. Side effects can occur in up to 50% of those treated, and include skin redness, dryness, itching and burning, especially on the face.
- Skin grafting removes normal skin from less visible areas and uses this skin to replace white areas in places where the person has the most cosmetic concerns. Skin grafting is used only in a very small number of people with vitiligo.
When to Call a Professional
If you notice that patches of skin appear white, contact your doctor for an examination. Treatment may be most helpful if it can be started when only a small area of skin is affected. It is very important to wear sunscreen to protect the areas affected by vitiligo, since these areas are especially at risk for sunburn and for skin cancers.
For most people with vitiligo, this condition slowly worsens without treatment or needs continued treatment.
American Academy of Dermatology
P.O. Box 4014
Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014

Jan. 22, 2008 Norwegian and Swiss biologists have made a startling discovery about the relationship between organisms that most people have never heard of. The Tree of Life must be re-drawn, textbooks need to be changed, and the discovery may also have significant impact on the development of medicines.
The discovery by Norwegian and Swiss researchers has gained attention from biologists worldwide. The findings come from the largest ever genetic comparison of higher life forms on the planet. Of 5000 genes examined, researchers identified 123 common genes from all known groups of organisms; these common genes have been studied more closely.
Lost a Branch
“The results were pretty astounding. All non-bacterial life on Earth—called eukaryotic life— can now be divided into four main groups instead of the five groups that we have been working with up to now,” says Kamran Shalchian-Tabrizi, an associate professor from the University of Oslo’s Department of Biology who has also worked with the Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and the Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, at the University of Geneva, Switzerland.
The Tree of Life (see illustration) has, through the discovery that the two formerly separated branches share a similar evolutionary history, lost one of its branches, and this will both improve and simplify quite a bit of scientific work in the future.
“Kinship says a lot about shared traits. Our findings can be important in many fields, such as in the study of the development of life and in the manufacture of new medicines” says Shalchian-Tabrizi in an interview with the University of Oslo’s research magazine Apollon.
“Our knowledge of organisms and the development of medicines are often based on comparative studies across species. It is, therefore, essential that we know the relationships between the largest groups in the great diversity of eukaryotes,” he adds.
The research group has, for example, found that brown algae and silica algae, and groups of single cell organisms like the malaria parasite, marine foraminifera, and the green sun animalcule (acanthocystis turfacea) actually belong to the same group. Previously, these species were thought to be completely unrelated.
“The work that we published in the August edition of PLoS One means that the description of the Tree of Life must be revised in new textbooks,” says Professor Kjetill S. Jakobsen from the University of Oslo’s Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES). He is also a member of the Microbial Evolution Research Group (MERG), led by Shalchian-Tabrizi, at the Department of Biology. MERG is one of 16 groups that the Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences believes may have the potential to develop into new Centres of Excellence.
The New Branch
All life on Earth can be divided into two essentially different life forms—eukaryotes and prokaryotes. The eukaryotes gather their genetic material in a nucleus, while the prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) have their genetic material floating freely in the cell. Eukaryotic organisms—such as humans—can, as a result of the new findings, be divided into the following four categories:
- Plants (green and red algae, and plants)
- Opisthokonts (amoebas, fungi, and all animals—including humans)
- Excavates (free-living organisms and parasites)
- SAR (the new main group, an abbreviation of Stramenophiles, Alveolates, and Rhizaria, the names of some of its members)
“The SAR group has to some extent been identified earlier, but we could not know if it was a correct observation because we lacked statistical data. To get that data, we first had to reconstruct the entire eukaryote tree with the help of these 123 genes. Chromalveolates and rhizaria were clearly separate groups until we published our results,” says Shalchian-Tabrizi.
“To make the picture a little less clear, one branch of chromalveolates is still in no man’s land. It may be that these also belong to SAR, but we will require additional genes and genomes to study this. We have set our sights on doing that in the course of the next few years,” he adds.
“The Tree of Life tells the story of life on Earth, and our research can say something about how quickly life developed. Our discovery suggests that there were fewer big “events” than we have previously assumed in the development of higher life forms. The more we know about the branches on the Tree of Life, the more we can find out about life’s Big Bang, the beginning of life on Earth,” says Shalchian-Tabrizi.
Three billion years ago, there was only bacteria and Archaea. Eukaryotic life, which comprises all multi-celled organisms, developed in the sea—probably between 1.2 and 1.6 billion years ago. It was not before about 500 million years ago that the first creatures crept onto land.
“By digging down into the historical layers with the help of phylogenetic reconstruction, where we can find out about kinship between organisms at the genetic level and we can find answers to questions about how new traits developed. We are working, in a matter of speaking, with genetic archaeology. In this manner, we can also discover the cause of the Earth’s biological diversity,” says Jakobsen.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

In 1765, the first census in Puerto Rico was conducted. It produced a count of 44,833 inhabitants, with 5,037 of those black slaves. Details about the free population were not specified in the count. The number of black slaves rose to 51,265 in 1846, one of the last counts before the abolition of slavery. The census of 1765 began a rich history of census taking. Under Spanish rule, the population was counted 13 times.
A year after the United States invasion, the first census under U.S. command was conducted under the supervision of the United States Department of War. This census determined that at the end of the 19th century the island population was 953,243 inhabitants. Beginning in 1910, Puerto Rico was included in the United States Census and since then the Census Bureau, under the United States Commerce Department, on the first of April in years ending in zero, has provided official figures on the number of residents. Under United States rule, 11 censuses have been conducted.
Reaching a level of one million inhabitants took more than 130 years, but the population rose to two million in less than fifty years. Passing three million was an even faster process, taking about four decades. It is expected that the 2010 census will show the Puerto Rico population stabilized around four million, which would imply that reaching the fourth million occurred in less than thirty years.
Autor: gf Ana L. Dávila Román
Published: September 20, 2010.

Erythritol is a sweetener made from sugar alcohols, manufactured to provide a low-calorie substitute for sugar trade, so it is a good alternative when used to sweeten foods without consuming many calories.
However, erythritol may also have certain health problems it is better to know before deciding on a sweetener which on the market.
What is erythritol?
Erythritol is obtained from the fermentation of the natural enzymes contained in the corn and wheat. Because it is a sweetener that the body becomes very slowly glucose, intake not entail risks of alterations in blood sugar, which in turn makes it an artificial sweeteners preferred by diabetics and can not eat sugar.
Negative effects of erythritol
But not everything is beneficial, and erythritol can also cause some health problems. Mainly its laxative reaction, which causes bloating and diarrhea.
While the negative effects depends on the individual and their metabolism, we can say as a general rule that the symptoms you mentioned are more likely in cases of high consumption of the sweetener and infant bodies. It is therefore advisable to pay attention to the recommended amount in each package, and not exceeded in proportion.
At the beginning of the article you were saying that erythritol has a much lower level of calories than conventional sugar and other sweeteners, but this does not mean that it lacks them altogether. It is estimated that each grain of erythritol may contain about 2.6 calories, so this information should also be considered for consumption because of an improperly made, in addition to affecting overall health, can cause weight problems or ruin your diet.
Erythritol and trans fats
You will also have to consider the other components that accompany a commercial sweetener erythritol. This is due to erythritol does not provide the same taste as sugar, so the companies add to the product other ingredients, like trans fat to improve taste and bring a touch sweeter.
This entails that, although we will be consuming less calories than traditional sugar, on the other side will be increasing our intake of fat, with its known harmful effects on the body.
It is best that you inspect each product carefully and read carefully the nutritional tables. Those sweeteners that contain Trans fats, should be discarded immediately, because this single ingredient decompensation other benefits that could have the erythritol.
Enjoy this article?
You might also like

Small Planet Around Kepler -37
NASA's Kepler mission scientists have discovered a new planetary system that is home to the smallest planet yet found around a star similar to our sun. The planets are located in a system called Kepler-37, about 210 light-years from Earth in the constellation Lyra (the general direction of the star Vega). The smallest planet, Kepler-37b, is slightly larger than our moon, measuring about one-third the size of Earth. It is smaller than Mercury, which made its detection a significant challenge.
The moon-size planet and its two companion planets were found by scientists with NASA's Kepler mission to find Earth-sized planets in or near the habitable zone, the region in a planetary system where liquid water might exist on the surface of an orbiting planet. However, while the star in Kepler-37 may be similar to our sun, the system appears quite unlike the solar system in which we live. Kepler-37 is a yellow dwarf, G-type star just like ours.
Astronomers think Kepler-37b does not have an atmosphere and cannot support life as we know it. The tiny planet almost certainly is rocky in composition. Kepler-37c, the closer neighboring planet, is slightly smaller than Venus, measuring almost three-quarters the size of Earth. Kepler-37d, the farther planet, is twice the size of Earth.
The artist's concept image depicts the new planet dubbed Kepler-37b. The planet is slightly larger than our moon, measuring about one-third the size of Earth. Kepler-37b orbits its host star every 13 days at less than one-third the distance Mercury is to the sun. The estimated surface temperature of this smoldering planet, at more than 800 degrees Fahrenheit (700 degrees Kelvin), would melt the zinc in a penny.
The first exoplanets found to orbit a other stars were giants. As technologies have advanced, smaller and smaller planets have been found, and Kepler has shown even Earth-size exoplanets are common.
"Even Kepler can only detect such a tiny world around the brightest stars it observes," said Jack Lissauer, a planetary scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, Calif. "The fact we've discovered tiny Kepler-37b suggests such little planets are common, and more planetary wonders await as we continue to gather and analyze additional data." There are a lot of stars and even more planets.
Kepler-37's host star belongs to the same class as our sun, although it is slightly cooler and smaller. All three planets orbit the star at less than the distance Mercury is to the sun, suggesting they are very hot, inhospitable worlds. Kepler-37c and Kepler-37d, orbit every 21 days and 40 days, respectively. A fairly crowded inner space near the host star.
"We uncovered a planet smaller than any in our solar system orbiting one of the few stars that is both bright and quiet, where signal detection was possible," said Thomas Barclay, Kepler scientist at the Bay Area Environmental Research Institute in Sonoma, Calif., and lead author of the new study published in the journal Nature. "This discovery shows close-in planets can be smaller, as well as much larger, than planets orbiting our sun."
The research team used data from NASA's Kepler space telescope, which simultaneously and continuously measures the brightness of more than 150,000 stars every 30 minutes. When a planet candidate transits, or passes, in front of the star from the spacecraft's vantage point, a percentage of light from the star is blocked. This causes a dip in the brightness of the starlight that reveals the transiting planet's size relative to its star.
The size of the star must be known in order to measure the planet's size accurately. To learn more about the properties of the star Kepler-37, scientists examined sound waves generated by the boiling motion beneath the surface of the star. They probed the interior structure of Kepler-37's star just as geologists use seismic waves generated by earthquakes to probe the interior structure of Earth. The science is called asteroseismology.
Asteroseismology also known as stellar seismology is the science that studies the internal structure of pulsating stars by the interpretation of their frequency spectra. Different oscillation modes penetrate to different depths inside the star. These oscillations provide information about the otherwise unobservable interiors of stars in a manner similar to how seismologists study the interior of Earth and other solid planets through the use of earthquake oscillations
The sound waves travel into the star and bring information back up to the surface. The waves cause oscillations that Kepler observes as a rapid flickering of the star's brightness. Like bells in a steeple, small stars ring at high tones while larger stars boom in lower tones. The barely discernible, high-frequency oscillations in the brightness of small stars are the most difficult to measure. This is why most objects previously subjected to asteroseismic analysis are larger than the sun.
With the very high precision of the Kepler instrument, astronomers have reached a new milestone. The star Kepler-37, with a radius just three-quarters of the sun, now is the smallest bell in the asteroseismology steeple. The radius of the star is known to 3 percent accuracy, which translates to exceptional accuracy in the planet's size.
For further information see Kepler b.
Artist Concept image NASA/Ames/JPL-Caltech.

Bob Seay of WGBH News and James David Jacobs of Classical New England consider the odd history and captivating power of Aaron Copland's Lincoln Portrait.
To hear a performance of Lincoln Portrait with the United States Marine Band, conductor Col. Michael J. Colburn, and narrator Brian Stokes Mitchell, click on "Listen" above.
|Abraham Lincoln, by Alexander Gardner [public domain], via Wikimedia Commons|
Written in 1942, Lincoln Portrait, by Aaron Copland, is a rare musical tribute to an American President. It played an inspirational role when it was written, during the dark, early days of World War II.
But it continued to inspire over the decades, with countless notable narrators giving voice to the words by Abraham Lincoln that Copland chose for his tribute.
Those words, though, were chosen from within a surprising cultural context, as Bob Seay explains:
If Lincoln's words express the highest ideals of American democracy, Copland's music expresses the diversity of sources that have combined to create an American music and culture, as James David Jacobs writes:
|Aaron Copland (source: AP)|
It’s hard in 2012 to appreciate just how original Copland’s Lincoln Portrait was in 1942. There had been other works that combined spoken text with orchestra, but the combination of serious public statement and serious artistic statement, with ceremony, history, and politics coexisting with music, was, and remains, rare.
The music Copland wrote isn’t mere backdrop for the words, the narrator not even speaking until the piece is about half over. That music tells a story, a story of both an individual life and of a nation. It’s also a story of diverse musical influences, reflecting the diverse musical strands that have come together to create an American music.
The beginning of the work is typical Copland, with woodwinds uttering soft three-note mottoes in intervals of fourths and fifths. That serenity, however, is answered by unsettling chords. It’s not unlike Ives’s The Unanswered Question and its dialogue between a stark, angular statement and its muddled response.
There are also subtle references to the music of Native Americans, engaged in what could be considered Lincoln’s other, less celebrated civil war. The dance-like tone of this section can be considered a sort of analogue to the scherzo in Beethoven’s Eroica symphony, representing both the joys and adventures of the individual heroic figure and the energy and the spirit of the nation and its people.
The strands come together, and the music reverts to the unsettled atmosphere of the work’s beginning. Then, just as we’ve almost forgotten about the speaker, he or she begins to speak.
It’s too important, Copland seems to be saying, to hide behind the cloak of artistic license, of interpretation and ambiguity. No, the meaning of this music must be spelled out, and when we hear the words of Lincoln we know why.
Copland has done us a service by providing a frame in which we can ponder these words, which turn out to be as relevant to today’s struggles as they were in the 1860s. The questions posed by the cultural conflicts illustrated in the differing strands of music are still being asked today.
Lincoln and Copland seem to have some things in common. Both pulled off radical, even revolutionary accomplishments while being regarded as accessible and populist. Both took the ideas of acknowledged radicals and made them palatable for a general audience. Both took their roles in the mainstream as serious, important missions, aimed at bringing wildly divergent philosophical camps together. And both were criticized by those selfsame radicals and branded as sellouts or traitors.
Beyond all that, they occupy similar places in our culture: the historical significance of each has been subject to regular cycles of reassessment, a process that began during each man’s own lifetime. Lincoln Portrait gives us the chance to consider them together, with all the resonance each man’s life and work have for us today.
- James David Jacobs
READ MORE AND HEAR LINCOLN PORTRAIT ON-DEMAND
Comment on This Article
News updates from WGBH

Doctors, medical organizations and the government can claim that healthy population medical screenings for various cancers are of value even if the screening test turns out negative. Of course, the value also depends on how many true positive cases of cancer are turned up and whether early detection plays any role in the overall cure of the cancer. What these medical groups don’t tell the public, because often those advising don’t really know, is what is the frequency of false positive results (detecting a “cancer” when there really is none present)and the harm produced as part of further testing or removal of what was thought to be a cancer but was not.
An advance in the knowledge regarding the frequency of false positives picked up in population screening tests and the subsequent harm is now available as an article “Cumulative Incidence of False-Positive Results in Repeated, Multimodal Cancer Screening” by Jennifer Miller Croswell, M.D. and a host of others published in the Annals of Family Medicine
You must read the entire article to fully understand how the data was obtained and its significance, but to get started, here is the Abstract of the article.
PURPOSE Multiple cancer screening tests have been advocated for the general population; however, clinicians and patients are not always well-informed of screening burdens. We sought to determine the cumulative risk of a false-positive screening result and the resulting risk of a diagnostic procedure for an individual participating in a multimodal cancer screening program.
METHODS Data were analyzed from the intervention arm of the ongoing Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial, a randomized controlled trial to determine the effects of prostate, lung, colorectal, and ovarian cancer screening on disease-specific mortality. The 68,436 participants, aged 55 to 74 years, were randomized to screening or usual care. Women received serial serum tests to detect cancer antigen 125 (CA-125), transvaginal sonograms, posteroanterior-view chest radiographs, and flexible sigmoidoscopies. Men received serial chest radiographs, flexible sigmoidoscopies, digital rectal examinations, and serum prostate-specific antigen tests. Fourteen screening examinations for each sex were possible during the 3-year screening period.
RESULTS After 14 tests, the cumulative risk of having at least 1 false-positive screening test is 60.4% (95% CI, 59.8%–61.0%) for men, and 48.8% (95% CI, 48.1%–49.4%) for women. The cumulative risk after 14 tests of undergoing an invasive diagnostic procedure prompted by a false-positive test is 28.5% (CI, 27.8%–29.3%) for men and 22.1% (95% CI, 21.4%–22.7%) for women.
CONCLUSIONS For an individual in a multimodal cancer screening trial, the risk of a false-positive finding is about 50% or greater by the 14th test. Physicians should educate patients about the likelihood of false positives and resulting diagnostic interventions when counseling about cancer screening.
With more and more publicity regarding healthy population cancer screening, particularly regarding its importance and value in early cancer detection and with more commercial patient requested imaging tests, there has been some concerns in the literature about all this. Specifically there are issues involving the safety of the screening test itself (for example, if X-ray procedures are used) or invasive screening exams (such as sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy). There is also concern about the results of the screening. Are there a large number of false positives as outcome of the screening which lead to additional testing or more invasive procedures with their own risks? In addition, do these false positives lead to unnecessary financial costs of medical care? Is there a benefit for early detection in terms of cancer cure which trumps all the costs and harms which healthy population screening can develop? Answers to these questions within the education the public receives about the need for screening is essential if the public is to accept the screening under ethically and legally appropriate informed consent. The question for doctors, medical organizations and the government is “do we really know and understand what we are advising the public?” ..Maurice.
Graphic: "False Results" created by me using ArtRage and Picasa 3.

Is it possible to multiply the frequency of a digital signal using digital components alone, and at the same time, preserve the duty cycle? I could finally come across the circuit below: it doubles ...
I'm trying to scope out what frequencies different common analog signals are. The DPScope design specs provides a list of common lower (sub 1 MHz) frequencies (copied below). audio (20 kHz) ...
I have a clock that is running at 25.175MHz I want to run that signal through some basic logic gates from the 74HC series. I have looked on the datasheet for the 74HC08 (AND Gate), I can't seem to ...
Important note: You are not helping me do my homework. This is for a competition for engineering students, that encourages you to "use your network" ;) I've got this pattern for a frequency divider ...

COMMON SENSE DEFINED
If we’re going to think about common sense I guess we first need to look for a definition. One dictionary’s definition is:
common sense: (kòm¹en sèns) noun: Native good judgment. [Translation of Latin sênsus commúnis, common feelings of humanity.]
I get from the reference “native” that a little common sense comes from experience and a little may be given to each of us by God. When I was a child, after getting caught for something I had done, I lost count of the times my grand-mother said, “Sometimes you don’t show the common sense God gave a jackass!” So, from an early age I was informed that God did give us some kind of sense that is supposed to be “native” to our being and that even jackasses have some of this gift. Once a person reaches an age where conscious thought actually occurs, we continue to show signs of a common sense that apparently comes from God. For example, testing has proven that all children have an inborn fear of heights. Without anyone actually receiving lessons, common sense tells a child that if they fall or jump from a high place, they’re only going to fly straight to the bottom and that, most likely, they will only get to do it once. Then there’s common sense learned from experience. As a child growing up in Florida, I once chased down, and caught in my hand, a rather large, brown spider. Notice I said “once”. Fortunately for me the lesson was only painful and not deadly. No one had ever told me that spiders would bite. However, from that point forward, without ANY outside instruction, I was always aware that anything and everything “might” bite. Viola! …. Another seed of common sense had just been planted to hopefully keep at least one fool from early disaster. Unfortunately, this aspect of developing common sense can be somewhat painful, and takes longer with some than others. It does not take much common sense for most of us to know that running into a brick wall full force will be an uncomfortable and unrewarding experience. I have a wonderful daughter, who for some unknown reason, when she was young, insisted on experiencing many of life’s challenges, first-hand, in an equally similar manner with the usual predictable results. ZOOM! SPLAT! OUCH! More than once, she got her nose bloodied, before her common sense finally began to start showing itself.
I don’t know just how much common sense God actually decided to give the jackass, or if the jackass tried, could he ever improve his station in life beyond being a politician; but I hope and pray that now, as an older adult, I have developed that which the Lord did choose to give me, plus what I have learned the hard way, to a level of being able to help my children and even grand-children, “fine tune” their own common sense, while experiencing fewer bloody noses.

Key: "S:" = Show Synset (semantic) relations, "W:" = Show Word (lexical) relations
Display options for sense: (gloss) "an example sentence"
- S: (n) fire (the event of something burning (often destructive)) "they lost everything in the fire"
- S: (n) fire, firing (the act of firing weapons or artillery at an enemy) "hold your fire until you can see the whites of their eyes"; "they retreated in the face of withering enemy fire"
- S: (n) fire, flame, flaming (the process of combustion of inflammable materials producing heat and light and (often) smoke) "fire was one of our ancestors' first discoveries"
- S: (n) fire (a fireplace in which a relatively small fire is burning) "they sat by the fire and talked"
- S: (n) fire (once thought to be one of four elements composing the universe (Empedocles))
- S: (n) ardor, ardour, fervor, fervour, fervency, fire, fervidness (feelings of great warmth and intensity) "he spoke with great ardor"
- S: (n) fire (fuel that is burning and is used as a means for cooking) "put the kettle on the fire"; "barbecue over an open fire"
- S: (n) fire (a severe trial) "he went through fire and damnation"
- S: (n) fire, attack, flak, flack, blast (intense adverse criticism) "Clinton directed his fire at the Republican Party"; "the government has come under attack"; "don't give me any flak"
- S: (v) open fire, fire (start firing a weapon)
- S: (v) fire, discharge (cause to go off) "fire a gun"; "fire a bullet"
- S: (v) fire (bake in a kiln so as to harden) "fire pottery"
- S: (v) displace, fire, give notice, can, dismiss, give the axe, send away, sack, force out, give the sack, terminate (terminate the employment of; discharge from an office or position) "The boss fired his secretary today"; "The company terminated 25% of its workers"
- S: (v) fire, discharge, go off (go off or discharge) "The gun fired"
- S: (v) fire (drive out or away by or as if by fire) "The soldiers were fired"; "Surrender fires the cold skepticism"
- S: (v) arouse, elicit, enkindle, kindle, evoke, fire, raise, provoke (call forth (emotions, feelings, and responses)) "arouse pity"; "raise a smile"; "evoke sympathy"
- S: (v) burn, fire, burn down (destroy by fire) "They burned the house and his diaries"
- S: (v) fuel, fire (provide with fuel) "Oil fires the furnace"
- S: (v) fire (generate an electrical impulse) "the neurons fired fast"
- S: (v) fire, flame up (become ignited) "The furnace wouldn't fire"
- S: (v) fire, light, ignite (start or maintain a fire in) "fire the furnace"

U.S. Virgin Islands are often referred as 'America's Paradise'. Saint Thomas, Saint John and Saint Croix - the three main islands that constitute U.S. Virgin Islands - are surrounded by North Atlantic Ocean on the north and Caribbean Sea on the south. They form Virgin Islands archipelago together with British Virgin Islands, which lie on their west.
The islands are popular for their sea, surf, sand and sun and are important tourist attractions of America. Christopher Columbus is credited with discovering the islands in 1493. They were held by European colonial powers such as Spain, Britain, the Netherlands, France and Denmark-Norway one after the other. The Islands were purchased by the United States from Denmark in 1917.
Saint Thomas is the busiest and the most cosmopolitan of U.S. Virgin Islands. Charlotte Amalie in Saint Thomas is the Caribbeans' most popular cruise ship hub. Saint Thomas pampers its visitors with a wide choice of beaches, each having its own specialty. Magens Bay, St. Thomas' most visited beach, has calm waters and is ideal for swimming and children. Water sports opportunities include boating and kayaking.
Palm tree-lined beach of Lindberg Bay is picturesque and is perfect for relaxing. There are facilities for a range of water sports. Coki Point is an excellent beach for snorkeling. Saint Thomas is also a shoppers' paradise. One can have bird's eye view of the U.S. Virgin Island from St. Thomas Skyride, a cable car system.
Saint John is the smallest of U.S. Virgin Islands, but has the best beaches. Trunk Bay is a picturesque beach famous for its white sand and beautiful water. The beach is a popular snorkeling spot. Honeymoon Bay, featuring white sand and crystal clear water, is a quieter beach compared to Trunk Bay.
Hawknest Beach, Great Cruz Bay, Maho Bay and Salomon Beach are just some of the other beaches that Saint John offers. The island, of which a large part is covered by Virgin Islands National Park, has spectacular landscape with lush mountains and beautiful beaches. One can get a peek into Saint John's history and heritage by visiting ruins of sugar plantation sites and rock carvings.
Saint Croix is the largest of three main U.S. Virgin islands. This island is known for its historical sites, rainforest, beaches and hills. There are plantation villages of yesteryears and other sites related with with the plantation agriculture, which made Saint Croix a major sugar producing island. Colonial architecture coexists with modern buildings across towns of the islands. Palm-lined sunny beaches of Saint Croix present unmatched beauty. Protestant Cay, Mermaid Beach and Shoy's are some of the popular beaches of this island.

This patient support community is for discussions relating to general health issues, adolescents, babies, child health, eating disorders, fitness, immunizations and vaccines, infectious diseases, and senior health.
In October, 2010 I was told by my doctor that I had a vitamin d deficiency. My level was 13. My hair was falling out, I was having a lot of back pain, trouble sleeping at night, and I was experiencing memory and concentration problems among other things. Since then I have been taking prescription strength vitamin d at 100,000 IU's per week. I've been on this high dosage for nine months. At one point my level vitamin d level went up to 32. However, they just tested me again (July 26, 2011) and my level has dropped to 26. My doctor now wants me to double my dose to 200,000 UI's for the next three months. Can you tell me why my levels are not going up, and if I should be asking for more blood work? If I need more blood work, what should I request? Any information that you can provide me with will be much appreciated. Thank you in advance.
Did your doctor administer a 25-hydroxyvitamin test to determine if you have optimal levels of Vitamin D in your blood? In order to get the proper amount of Vitamin D your body requires, you need to be able to find a healthy balance of sunlight, but still reduce your risk of skin cancer, particularly Melanoma. Wear sunscreen every time you are in the sun and keep your sun exposure to 20 minutes at a time.
Low vitamin D levels occur because of less intake of vitamin D, less exposure to sunlight or as side effects of some diseases. Toxic substances, harmful chemicals, side effects of certain medicines can also give rise to such condition that the level of vitamin D goes down the normal level. It is a rare occurrence that the vitamin D levels is low because of some hereditary diseases. Following are some of the causes for low levels of vitamin D.
Lack of Exposure to Sunlight
The layer under the skin produces vitamin D using sunlight. People of certain geographical locations like those in the northern hemisphere have living conditions such that their exposure to sunlight is minimum. Aged people and small babies often do not get enough exposure to sunlight. Aging skin of elderly people needs more time to prepare vitamin D. People with the condition of lupus are sensitive towards sunlight. So, they are advised not to stay out under direct sunlight for a long time. Under all these conditions, the factors responsible for low vitamin D, is absence of sunlight.
There are very few food substances that contain naturally occurring vitamin D. Some of the food items that provide us vitamin D are beef liver, fleshy part of the fish, egg yolk, fish oils and cheese. Therefore, vegetarians are more prone to low vitamin D levels.
Another very important element that is usually overlooked by conventional doctors is that you need to take magnesium to get the vitamin D to work properly. Usually, just a normal amount of magnesium is all that is required to get the vitamin D to synthesize properly.
I strongly recommend going to the Vitamin D Council's website to find more information about the magnesium and other supplement connection to vitamin D absorption. Yes, there were other minerals mentioned, but magnesium seems to be the most important one. I urge you to also sign up for their newsletters. Vitamin D deficiency is not funny, because it can kill. It almost killed me. Mine was only 8 when I started out.
In addition to that last post. The amount your are stating you are taking is it really that high or did you mean 1,000 or 2,000 IU? That is an incredibly high amount and seems out fo the ball park. Our experience is that we were low but not as low as you are we were around 20 to 30. The recommended daily intake is about 2,000 I.U. but you have to test your blood a few times to get it right and it takes some months for the level to go up. So I tend to absorb it well and only need 1,000 I.U. to get the Vit D to be normal but I was tested every 3 months until the level was at the right amount. My husband has to take 4,000 I.U. in order to be normal. Yes sunlight does help but you need to get out there (with sunscreen on) and it didn't go up for me after walking an hour a day in the sun. So, it depend on your diet and ability to absorb. As the last post said you need magnesium to help.
The Content on this Site is presented in a summary fashion, and is intended to be used for educational and entertainment purposes only. It is not intended to be and should not be interpreted as medical advice or a diagnosis of any health or fitness problem, condition or disease; or a recommendation for a specific test, doctor, care provider, procedure, treatment plan, product, or course of action. Med Help International, Inc. is not a medical or healthcare provider and your use of this Site does not create a doctor / patient relationship. We disclaim all responsibility for the professional qualifications and licensing of, and services provided by, any physician or other health providers posting on or otherwise referred to on this Site and/or any Third Party Site. Never disregard the medical advice of your physician or health professional, or delay in seeking such advice, because of something you read on this Site. We offer this Site AS IS and without any warranties. By using this Site you agree to the following Terms and Conditions. If you think you may have a medical emergency, call your physician or 911 immediately.

In 1929, the wild financial speculation of the Roaring Twenties came to a sudden halt in October when the stock market began to slide.
Banker's Committee Stops Panic of '29 Worries spread through the economic community about the passing of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act. Tariffs had always been a point of contention among Americans, even spurring South Carolina to threaten secession over the Tariff Act of 1828. Producers such as farmers and manufacturers called for protective tariffs while merchants and consumers demanded low prices. The American economy soared while post-war Europe rebuilt in the '20s, and the Tariff Act of 1922 skimmed valuable revenue from the nation's income that would otherwise have been needed as taxes. The country barely noticed, and the economy surged forward as new technological luxuries became available as well as new disposable income.
Meanwhile, however, the nation faced an increasingly difficult drought while food prices continued to drop during Europe's recovery. Farmers were stretched thinner and thinner, prompting calls for protective agricultural tariffs and cheaper manufactured goods. In his 1928 presidential campaign, Herbert Hoover promised just that, and as the legislature met in 1929, talks on a new tariff began. Led by Senator Reed Smoot (R-Utah) and Representative Willis C. Hawley (R-Oregon), the bill quickly became more than Hoover and the farmers had bargained for as rates would increase to a level exceeding 1828 for industrial products as well as agricultural. A new story by Jeff ProvineThe revenue would be a great boon, but it unnerved economists, who wondered if it could kill the economic growth already slowing by a dipping real estate market.
The weakened nerves shifted from economists to investors, who took the heated debate in the Senate as a clue that times may become rough and decided to get out of the stock market while they could. Prices had skyrocketed over the course of the '20s as the middle class blossomed and minor investors came into being. Another hallmark of the '20s, credit, enabled people to buy stock on margin, borrowing money they could invest at what they hoped would be a higher percentage. The idea of a "money-making machine" spread, and August of 1929 showed more than $8.5 billion in loans, more than all of the money in circulation in the United States. The market peaked on September 3 at 381.17 and then began a downward correction. At the rebound in late October, panicked selling began. On October 24, what became known as "Black Thursday", the market fell more than ten percent. On Friday, it did the same, and the initial outlook for the next week was dire.
Amid the early selling in October, financiers noted that a crash was coming and met on October 24 while the market plummeted. The heads of firms and banks such as Chase, Morgan, and the National City Bank of New York collaborated and finally placed vice-president of the New York Stock Exchange Richard Whitney in charge of stopping the disaster. Forty-one-year-old Whitney was a successful financier with an American family dating back to 1630 and numerous connections in the banking world who had purchased a seat on the NYSE Board of Governors only two years after starting his own firm. Whitney's initial strategy was to replicate the cure for the Panic of 1907: purchasing large amounts of valuable stock above market price, starting with the "blue chip" favorite U.S. Steel, the world's first billion-dollar corporation.
On his way to make the purchase, however, Whitney bumped into a junior who was analyzing the banking futures based on the increase of failing mortgages from failing farms and a weakening real estate market. He suggested that the problems of the new market were caused from the bottom-up, and a top-down solution would only put off the inevitable. Instead of his ostentatious show of purchasing to show the public money was still to be had, Whitney decided to use the massive banking resources behind him to support the falling. He made key purchases late on the 24th, and then his staff worked through the night determining what stocks were needlessly inflated, what were solid, and what could be salvaged (perhaps even at a profit). Stocks continued to tumble that Friday, but by Monday thanks to word-of-mouth and glowing press from newspapers and the new radio broadcasts, Tuesday ended with a slight upturn in the market of .02 percent. Numerically unimportant, the recovery of public support was the key success.
With the initial battle won, Whitney spearheaded a plan to salvage the rest of the crisis as real estate continued to fall and banks (which were quickly running out of funds as they seized more and more of the market) would soon have piles of worthless mortgaged homes and farms. Banks organized themselves around the Federal Reserve, founded in 1913 after a series of smaller panics and determined rules that would keep banks afloat. Further money came from lucrative deals with the wealthiest men in the country such as John D. Rockefeller, Henry Ford, and the Mellons of Pittsburgh. Businesses managed to continue work despite down-turning sales through loans, though the unemployment rate did increase from 3 to 5 percent over the winter.
The final matter was the question of international trade. As the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act continued in the Senate, economists predicted retaliatory tariffs from other countries to kill American exports, but Washington turned a deaf ear. Whitney decided to protect his investments in propping up the economy by investing with campaign contributions. Democrats took the majority as the Republicans fell to Whitney's use of the press to blame the woes of the economy on Congressional "airheads". Representative Hawley himself lost his seat in the House, which he had held since 1907, to Democrat William Delzell. President Hoover, a millionaire businessman before entering politics, noted the shift, but remained quiet and dutifully vetoed the new tariff.
By 1931, it became steadily obvious that America had shifted to an oligarchy. The banks propped up the market and were propped up themselves by a handful of millionaires. If Rockefeller wanted, he could single-handedly pull his money and collapse the whole of the American nation. Whitney took greater power as Chairman of the Federal Reserve, whose new role controlled indirectly everything of economic and political worth. As the Thirties dragged on, the havoc of the Dust Bowl made food prices increase while simultaneously weakening the farming class, and Whitney gained further power by ousting Secretary of Agriculture Arthur Hyde and installing his own man as a condition for Hoover's reelection in '32.
Chairman Whitney would "rule" the United States, wielding public relations power and charisma to give Americans a strong sense of national emergency and patriotism during times like the Japanese War in '35 (which secured new markets in East Asia) and the European Expedition in '39. He employed the Red Scare to keep down ideas of insurrection and used the FBI as a secret police, but his ultimate power would be that, at any point, he could tamper with interest rates or stock and property value, and the country would spiral into rampant unemployment and depression, dragging the rest of the world with it.

Silica fume is a highly pozzolanic material that is used to enhance mechanical and durability properties of concrete. It may be added directly to concrete as an individual ingredient or in a blend of portland cement and silica fume.
Interest in the use of silica fume resulted from the strict enforcement of air-pollution measures designed to stop release of the material into the atmosphere. Initial use of silica fume in concrete was mostly for cement replacement,along with water-reducing admixtures. Eventually,the availability of high-range water-reducing admixtures(superplasticizers) allowed new possibilities for the use of silica fume to produce high levels of performance.
* Reduces concrete permeability
* Increases concrete strength
* Improves resistance to corrosion

What is a Mediator?:
Heavy court caseloads and rising legal costs have prompted many people to settle their legal disputes outside the courtroom through a process known as alternative dispute resolution (ADR). Mediators, also known as arbitrators and conciliators, guide the ADR process and help resolve conflicts between disputing parties.
Job Duties of Mediators:
Mediators facilitate negotiation and settlement between disputing parties by providing direction and encouragement, working collaboratively with the parties and finding creative ways to reach a mutual solution. Specific duties vary widely depending upon practice setting but may include facilitating discussion and controlling the direction of negotiations; preparing court reports, social case histories, correspondence and other documents; implementing legislative enactments and court rules relating to a case; and keeping abreast of current trends, rules and legislation.
Although many mediators are lawyers and former judges, non-lawyers from all backgrounds are entering the profession. To date, no formal licensing or certification process exists in the U.S. for mediators. Training for mediators is available through independent mediation programs, national and local mediation membership organizations, and postsecondary schools, according to the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Colleges and universities in the United States are beginning to offer advanced degrees in dispute resolution and conflict management.
Superior communication, negotiation, problem-solving, analytical and conflict resolution skills are essential. Mediators must have the ability to maintain confidences, exercise sound judgment and discretion, work collaboratively with others and foster effective working relationships with clients, courts, judicial staff, community agencies and the general public. In addition to a high level of competence, successful mediators are intuitive and able to help meet their clients’ emotional needs. Neutrality, honesty, creativity and patience are also crucial to the mediator’s role.
According to the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, earnings for mediators range from $28,090 to $102,202 per year with median annual wages estimated at $49,490. Hourly rates range from a low of $13.50 to a high of $49.05 with a median hourly wage estimated at $23.80. Most mediators are employed by the state and local government, schools and universities, legal service providers, insurance carriers and corporations.
As individuals and businesses seek to avoid the delays, publicity and high costs inherent in litigation, alternative dispute resolution is becoming an increasingly popular alternative to lawsuits. As a result, mediators are expected to experience above average growth in employment.
The American Arbitration Association and the American Bar Association Section for Dispute Resolution provide a wealth of information relating to the dispute resolution field.Mediate.com maintains a list of international, national and state conflict resolution organizations.

Cannibalism: The Ancient Taboo in Modern Times
Sexual cannibalism is considered to be a psychosexual disorder, which involves a person sexualizing the consumption of another person's flesh. This does not necessarily suggest that the cannibal achieves sexual gratification only in the act of consuming human flesh, but also may release sexual frustration or pent up anger. Sexual cannibalism is considered to be a form of sexual sadism and is often associated with the act of necrophilia (sex with corpses). There have been several high profile cases, which have involved sexual cannibalism, including that of Andrei Chikatilo, Edward Gein, Albert Fish, Armin Mewes and Jeffrey Dahmer.
During the 1920's Americans were confronted with the horrors of Albert Fish who was said to have raped, murdered and eaten a number of children. Fish was a sexual cannibal in the truest sense of the term and claimed to have experienced enormous sexual pleasure when he imagined eating a person or when he actually indulged his fantasies.
Andrei Chikatilo, a Russian serial killer, was responsible for the murders of scores of young boys and girls. During most of his life, Chikalito suffered from impotency and was only able to achieve sexual gratification from the torture and murder of other people. He would often mutilate and then consume the flesh of his victims, including the breasts, genitalia and internal sex organs, as well as other body parts. It is possible that he also achieved sexual gratification when cannibalizing. Chikatilo claimed that he was disgusted by the "loose morals" of many of his victims, who served as painful reminders of his own sexual incompetence. Moira Martingale writes in Cannibal Killers that many of the murders Chikatilo committed came after viewing sexually explicit or violent videos.
Edward Gein, a farmer from Plainfield, Wisconsin was as believed to have killed at least three people including his brother, a bar keeper named Mary Hogan and the owner of the local hardware store, Bernice Worden. In 1957, police searched Gein's home and found the body of Worden along with the remains of over fifteen other women. A majority of the remains found at the crime scene were robbed from a nearby cemetery. Gein was believed to have had sexual contact with the corpses.
He was also an admitted transvestite, who found delight in dismembering the bodies and peeling away the skin of the corpses so that he could wear them around the house. Gein was known to have cannibalized some of the bodies, including Worden's whose heart was in a pan on the stove at the time police conducted their search of the house. Whether Gein sexualized the consumption of his victims was unclear. However, there was a strong relationship between his necrophilia and cannibalistic behavior.
Intriguingly, some people that claim to be cannibals have admitted to feeling a sense of euphoria and/or intense sexual stimulation when consuming human flesh. In an article written by Clara Bruce titled Chew On This: You're What's for Dinner, anthropophagists compared eating human flesh with having an orgasm. The experience was further believed to cause an out-of-body-experience causing effects comparable to taking mescaline.
According to Lesley Hensel, author of Cannibalism as a Sexual Disorder, eating human flesh can cause an increase in levels of vitamin A and amino acids, which can cause a chemical effect on the blood and in the brain. This chemical reaction could possibly lead to the altered states that some cannibals have claimed to have experienced. However, this theory has not been substantiated by scientific evidence.
In Fascination with Cannibalism has Sexual Roots, Josh Cannon writes about psychologist Steven Scher and his team who conducted one of the only known studies on sex and cannibalism at Eastern Illinois University in 2002. The study surveyed several groups of people who were asked questions pertaining to cannibalism and sexual interests. The results of the study found that people were more likely to eat someone that they were sexually attracted to than not. This suggests that there might be a significant sexual component in the practice of cannibalism.

BP still has to pay the government for that little slip-up that happened last year. The Clean Water Act imposes punitive damages for any act of pollution carried out in US waters, with fines proportional to the magnitude of the environmental impact. For oil spills, damages are calculated according to the amount of hydrocarbons leaked into the water column. The Macondo well hemorrhaged oil for 89 days. That’s a whole lotta fine dollaz. Damages look set to total between $5.4 and $21 billion dollars, depending government’s final estimate of oil spilled.
But Congress has to decide how that money gets spent – and thankfully, the House and Senate are trying to move quickly to pass the bill. The fine money is tentatively set to be divided amongst five areas:
- 35 percent would be divided equally among the five Gulf states for economic and ecological recovery activities along the coast.
- 30 percent would be dedicated to the development and implementation of a comprehensive restoration plan. A new Gulf Coast Restoration Council — made up of representatives from all five states — would dictate the scope of that plan.
- 30 percent would be disbursed by the council to Gulf Coast states, with the allocation dictated in part by spill impact.
- 5 percent would go to a new long-term science and fisheries endowment and to a Gulf Coast research, science and technology program.
Last October, President Barack Obama established the Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force to come up with a plan to not only restore ecosystems damaged by the spill but also to repair decades of past damage done by efforts to reengineer the Mississippi River and expand oil and gas drilling in gulf marshes. The task force, made up of senior federal officials and representatives from the five Gulf Coast states of Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas, held a series of public meetings over the past year and sought input from a wide range of scientists.
The result is a set of sweeping but relatively general recommendations aimed at bolstering both the science and the political support needed to tackle some highly complex restoration challenges. It sets out four major goals—restoring and conserving habitat, restoring water quality, replenishing and protecting living coastal and marine resources, and enhancing community resilience—along with 19 “major actions” needed to accomplish the goals.
The need for better science gets plenty of ink—including calls for more comprehensive gulf monitoring and data-collection systems. But the report also notes that “the dire state of many elements of the Gulf ecosystem cannot wait for scientific certainty and demand immediate action.” To avoid delays, the panel proposes an “adaptive management” process of “learning by doing, wherein flexibility is built into projects, and actions can be changed based on” new science and progress toward goals.

- Definition of syncopation in the Online Dictionary. Meaning of syncopation. Pronunciation of syncopation. Translations of syncopation. syncopation synonyms, syncopation antonyms. Information about syncopation in the free online English. — “syncopation - definition of syncopation by the Free Online”,
- Also, if the musician suddenly does not play anything on beat 1, that would also be syncopation. Playing a note ever-so-slightly before or after a beat is another form of syncopation because this produces an unexpected accent. — “Syncopation - Definition”,
- Syncopation. In music, syncopation includes a variety of rhythms which are in some way unexpected in that they deviate from the strict succession of regularly spaced strong and weak but also powerful beats in a meter (pulse) In music, syncopation includes a variety of rhythms which are in some. — “Syncopation”,
- Syncopation definition, a shifting of the normal accent, usually by stressing the normally unaccented beats. See more. — “Syncopation | Define Syncopation at ”,
- Syncopations can happen anywhere: in the melody, the bass line, the rhythm section, the chordal accompaniment. Ragtime, for example, would hardly be ragtime without the jaunty syncopations in the melody set against the steady unsyncopated bass. — “Syncopation”,
- Syncopation Software is a leading provider of decision support software tools including decision ***ysis software, risk ***ysis Founded as a spin-off from a first-tier consulting organization, Syncopation develops products that go beyond the basics to give you exceptional insight into real-world. — “DPL Decision Tree & Business Risk ***ysis Software”,
- More simply, syncopation is a general term for a disturbance or interruption of the Syncopation is used in many musical styles, and is fundamental in black-influenced styles. — “Syncopation - Simple English Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia”,
- (Click to enlarge) syncopation from Mozart's Symphony no. 25 syncopation n. Music . A shift of accent in a passage or composition that occurs when a. — “syncopation: Definition from ”,
- Welcome to ! Practicing Smart • Musical Theory • Musical Syncopation • Improvising on the Piano • Laurel Webster. Copyright2010 Loraine & Chris Plante. All Rights Reserved. website design by C. — “Musical Syncopation”,
- Syncopation.TV is the means by which we exhibit, ***yze and discuss the fascinating world of music across genre, cultural, age and national boundaries. This is the place where you can further explore music and the men and women dedicated to this art and craft. — “Syncopation.TV - Home”, syncopation.tv
- Syncopation ( pronounced SINK-o-PAY-shun) is hearing the beat when you don't expect to. When notes begin before or after a strong beat, you have syncopation. Listen to this rhythm in Example 1. The notes fall on the beats. This is not syncopation. Now listen to Example 2. — “Syncopation”, empire.k12.ca.us
- I've been testing out Syncopation using the new iTunes release from Apple and have found Syncopation 2.2 to be fully compatible with iTunes 10. Syncopation has been thoroughly tested on Snow Leopard, and I'm happy to say that no compatibility issues have been found. — “Sonzea - Home”,
- In music the word syncopation has a very specific meaning. Actually, the main syncopation in cha-cha happens on beat two (usually the first part of a rock step), I'll explain why shortly. — “Syncopation in dance and music”,
- on | off. enter. — “Syncopation Official Web Site”,
- For other uses of the same name, see Syncopation (disambiguation). In music, syncopation includes a variety of rhythms which are in some way unexpected in that they deviate from the strict succession of regularly spaced strong and weak but also powerful beats in a meter (pulse). — “Syncopation - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia”,
- Syncopation is a musical process that involves adding an unexpected element to the basic beat of a musical composition. At times, the syncopation adds more beats, while at other times it delays or changes the sense of a particular beat in the line of rhythm. — “What Is Syncopation?”,
- Dynamic Syncopation music profile on Yahoo! Music. Find lyrics, free streaming MP3s, music videos and photos of Dynamic Syncopation on Yahoo! Music. — “Dynamic Syncopation on Yahoo! Music”,
- Syncopation Makes It Move. Introduction. Syncopation is the wonderful effect which is created when notes which are supposed to fall in a certain place surprise the ear and fall somewhere else. When the accent falls off the beat, or if there is silence on the beat, then syncopation occurs. — “Music Concepts Online: Syncopation Lecture”, neiu.edu
- Syncopation. Syncopation is a disturbance or interruption of the regular flow of rhythm. Syncopation shifts this emphasis, or, to put it another way, it places the accent on the wrong syllable. — “Syncopation: Excerpts from The NPR Classical Music Companion”, kennedy-
- syncopation in a folk context, check out the examples below. In this example, there is a syncopated melody over a simple quarter-note bass part, which. — “Syncopation”,
- Syncopation is used in many musical styles, including classical music, but it is fundamental in such styles as reggae, ragtime, rap, jump blues, jazz and often in dubstep. In the form of a back beat, syncopation is used in virtually all contemporary popular music. — “Syncopation - New World Encyclopedia”,
- The Elite Syncopation quintet has been touring the United States from coast to coast for over a decade, Elite Syncopation tours nationally, giving dozens of concerts a year, both locally in Connecticut and throughout the rest of the country. Click here for booking information. — “Elite Syncopation: Who We Are”,
related images for syncopation
- Divine Syncopation Body Being Neighbor and Conscience
- Mara Galeazzi
- Divine Syncopation Being detail
- Home | Browse | About Previous
- Avoid playing these exercises by ear or by simply following the rhythmical sense Look carefully at your notes and follow the peculiar division of time Observe the syncopation Emphasize the time well Notice the change in the position of the hand also the fingering
- SYNCOPATION2 1 jpg t=1227738298
- carefully at your notes and follow the peculiar division of time Observe the syncopation Emphasize the time well Notice the change in the position of the hand also the fingering
- Divine Syncopation Body detail
- Syncopation Semale jpg
- ROOM VIEWS FOR DISPLAY PURPOSES ONLY MAY NOT BE TO SCALE
- SYNCOPATION4 jpg t=1227738273
- html 24 Jul 2008 17 55 thumbs 04 Dec 2007 03 59 Syncopation2 jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 136k JAZZ TRUMPET II jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 140k
- PARTITURA 4 4 BODHRAN
- technique syncopation003B gif
- SYNCOPATION2 jpg t=1227738243
- PARTITURA 4 4 BODHRAN
- SYNCOPATION3 jpg t=1227738257
- After sufficient discussion has taken place a verdict can then be passed based on a majority vote Band Syncopation Genre Vocal Jazz Website
- I ll make it easy for y all
- I ve been struggling to figure out an efficient way to share music with other people in my household for a while now Until now my solution has been to copy files on to Time Capsule so that
- SYNCOPATION1 1 jpg t=1227738314
- Syncopation Screen
- Syncopation Mixed media on 140 Arches Watercolor Paper 5 5 x 7 5 Click here for larger image $100
- box cover costume jewelry rusty metal objects plastic doll s eye embossed wall paper 1962 dictionary text reproduction 1864 newspaper and acrylic paint Closer view of figure Left side of box
- LRendezvous jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 140k Le Jongleur jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 141k Syncopation1 jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 141k Claire de Lune jpg 25 Jun 2007 17 21 141k
- Pobrań 1 Powiększ obrazek
- seemed that the paint work was peeling near the first window at the bow end just on the gunnel It seemed to be a to large area to be cruising damage and the primer coat seemed to be exposed Regards
- 100 Schick Hybriden Syncopation 1999 1645 17 Temptress 1997 622 3
- This is what it took back in the day when Russ first gained the Syncopation Broach
- Syncopation Fresh Start
- PARTITURA 4 4 BODHRAN
- 183 X
- Paragon s Syncopation Jenna Breeder Owner Handler Mary Fedders
- BANJO BANJO BANJO PLECTRUM BANJOS TENOR BANJOS BANJO BOOKS BANJO LESSONS BANJO CHORDS BANJO SONGS
related videos for syncopation
- Syncopated Rhythm Linedance
- But Not For Me - Syncopation iTunes: Syncopation vocal jazz quartet performs "But Not For Me" in Boston, Massachusetts, March 30, 2009. Aubrey Logan, Lee Abe, David Thorne Scott, and Christine Fawson perform.
- Drum Online - Bass drum syncopation Clip from the forthcoming 'Drum Online - Drum tuition vol 1' dvd. Matt Parker demonstrates quarter note grooves incoporating bass drum syncopation.
- Syncopation + Improvisation Just playing around using some syncopated grooves and fills.
- Aces of Syncopation - His Eye is on the Sparrow Aces of Syncopation (Netherlands) featuring MACHTELD CAMBRIDGE AND BROOKS TEGLER Robert Veen,sax; Paul Habraken, sousaphone; Johan Lammers, banjo, Harry Kanters, piano; special guests: Brooks Tegler, drums and Machteld Cambridge, vocals. Recorded by (Thanks!) at: Gospelservice Jazzweekend Berg en op Zoom, May 18-2008 Aces of Syncopation - Netherlands
- 12/8ths African Drum Beats With Syncopated Ride Cymbals : 12/8ths African Drum Beats With Syncopated Cymbals: Part 1 Learn to play 12/8ths African drum patterns with syncopated ride cymbal patterns and conga off the beat or on the beat. Free video drum lessons featuring a professional drummer and drum teacher!
- Elite Syncopations - Scott Joplin Another piece by Scott Joplin I like to play!
- English Country Garden-syncopated piano cover Dan's interpretation of the childhood classic "In an English Country Garden" with syncopation.
- Mirrwatnga used E yidaki | Adam Marrilaga | slow syncopation Jonathon Mirrwatnga made this yidaki, a very rustic and simple-looking instrument. But give it a blow and you'll be surprised that it punches above its weight. Quite extraordinary considering its modest size and shape, and that it has been 'bandaged' in parts with duct tape... I like the slow syncopation that Adam Laga plays on this yirdaki especially the first few seconds: dith-du, ditj-du, ditj-du-drong-ditj-du, ditj-du, du-du-ditj-du-du... This instrument is for sale for those who are interested in yidaki of the highest cultural integrity. It isn't the prettiest thing but it is the real deal: .au
- Dynamic Syncopation & Massinfluence - 2 Tha Left from Xen Cuts.
- Chuck Rainey (examples of his syncopation) My rendition of his trademark bouncy feel from "Coalition" he made with Cornell Dupree, Eric Gayle, Richard Tee and I think, Bernard Purdie. This style of syncopation became the theme for Carol Kaye bass books
- Hal Galper Master Class - Rhythm and Syncopation and please check out Hal's Trio recording, E Pluribus Unum - Live in Seattle http And: From a clinic at the University of Colorado in Boulder, April 2, 2010
- Lee Ritenour - Sweet Syncopation From the album First Course
- Julianne Johnson with syncopation For use with the Beyond Bum-Ditty lesson. Julianne Johnson played slowly twice and then at speed, using the syncopation discussed in the lesson. The original lesson has two parts: Part 1: Part 2: --Cathy Moore
- Tango Lesson: Syncopated Snake Walk + Sustained Volcada Homer and Cristina Ladas perform a didactic demo at the end of an argentine tango class.
- Elite Syncopations by Scott Joplin Ben Washburn, age 15, playing Elite Syncopations by Scott Joplin. This is the second Scott Joplin piece I have learned on the piano.
- Dynamic Syncopation - No Qualms Various Artists : "Ninja Cuts Vol. 3 - Funkungfusion"
- Hugo and Fritz Kreisler Syncopation Hugo Kreisler on cello, Fritz Kreisler on violin, and Charlton Keith on piano playing Fritz Kreisler's "Syncopation"
- Life Syncopation - Jazztronik Life Syncopation by Jazztronik from the album Love Tribe (2007)
- Dynamic Syncopation - The Plan Ninja Tunes - Dynamic Syncopation - The Plan music video.
- Fritz Kreisler: Syncopation This is Fritz Kreisler´s own (and very rare) arrangement of "Syncopation", originally for violin and piano. Recorded 02/2010. Piano tro: MusicA Tre: Ernst Ueckerman, piano; Stephan Knies, violin; Birgit Boehme, cello. More info about MusicA Tre at
- Dynamic Syncopation - Veteran's Leg Dynamic Syncopation - Veteran's Leg Dynamism (1999) Ninja Tune
- Syncopation Emphasizing the offbeat and the unexpected weak beats can be more fun than most realize. This video also builds upon the concept of independence between the offbeat bass drum and the on beat snare with the ride/hihat hand...
- Scott Joplin-Elite Syncopation A Rag Time Piano solo
- Billy Ocean - Syncopation - 1984
- How Music Works: Rhythm - Accent & Syncopation "Humans are naturally musical." In this segment of Howard Goodall's 2006 documentary, a major exponent of why we enjoy music is explained in very clear and concise points. He traces the roots of syncopation back to Africa, long before the West could grasp the concept, and explains the evolution of the shifting of accents in Western music using Philip Glass's "Akhenaten" vs. Handel's "Zadok the Priest" to illustrate.
- West Coast Swing Ladies Syncopations ! West Coast Swing Ladies Syncopations & Variations with Laurie Schwimmer!
- Syncopation - It's Jazzy
- Dynamic Syncopation - The Essence Dynamic Syncopation - The Essence from Dynanism
- Dynamic Syncopation - The Plan (feat. Juice Aleem) Dynamism '1999
- West Coast Swing Syncopations That Sizzle Michael Kiehm & Janelle Walton.
- Both Sides Now- Syncopation Syncopation performs "Both Sides Now" at Spookappella at TCAN. Aubrey Logan, Christine Fawson, David Scott, Tsunenori "Lee" Abe
- Modern Blues Harmonica - syncopation 1 (Gussow.089) Jungle rhythms, bathtub gin, and white girls gone bad: harpist Adam Gussow evokes the origins of "sinful syncopation," using ***ogies from stock car racing, and shows you how to "advance the spark" to boost the horsepower on your own harp playing. Blues Harmonica Secrets Revealed! DVD
- Dynamic syncopation ft. yeshua da poED - the essence dropped 1999 on ninja tune produced by dynamic syncopation
- Syncopation - Anna Piotrowski Syncopation by Fritz Kreisler performed by Anna Piotrowski at the 2008 Preludio Kreisler Concert, Ithaca NY
- Reggae rhythm guitar lesson pt3 syncopation Reggae strumming guitar lesson pt3 I use No, No, No by Dawn Penn to show reggae rhythm on the guitar. I play a G&L tribute asat special electric guitar. The chords I use are mainly Am and D and I slide down to the C and to G Free MP3's of my stuff at http
- Syncopation by Fritz Kreisler
- Free Guitar Lessons: Country Blues Fingerpicking : All About Syncopation & Blues Fingerpicking Learn about syncopation as you learn how to fingerpick the blues on the guitar, from a professional guitar player in this free video music lesson. Expert: Amanda Claire Bio: Amanda Claire is a leather artist currently living in Austin, Texas, where she specializes on custom pieces that blend traditional technique with modern designs. Filmmaker: MAKE | MEDIA
- syncopation.wmv In answer to a Banjohangout thread, I use a guitar and a banjo to discuss the syncopation of a melody
- Acid house from 1958 ... Tom dissevelt & Kid Baltan ( Dick Raaijmakers ) syncopation In 1958, Philips tried to make "popular" electronic music. For a couple of years "room 306" of the Philips laboratory in Eindhoven was allowed to make records like this. It did not catch on. You could say they were 30 years ahead of their time... klassieke muziek remix
twitter about syncopation
Blogs & Forum
blogs and forums about syncopation
“Syncopation November 14, 2008. In Knitting, My designs | 1 comment. Bet you didn't think I'd actually get this done today, did you. Pattern: Syncopation, of my own devising. Model: Rowanspun DK. Yup, this yarn is discontinued. I have it on good authority”
— Syncopation | Fiber Dreams,
“Guitar Noize is a guitar blog focussing on guitar news, crazy guitar designs, Syncopation experiment”
— Syncopation experiment,
“Forum Intro. Greeley Central Drumline Forum. http://syncopation.aimoo. and Exercises. Schedules. Sectionals >> Go to Greeley Central Drumline Forum. Similar Forums”
— Greeley Central Drumline Forum - Aimoo,
“Myspace profile for Syncopation. Find friends, share photos, keep in touch with classmates, and meet new people on Myspace”
— Syncopation on Myspace Music - Free Streaming MP3s, Pictures,
— Pandora FAQ,
“Before starting to explain what musical syncopation is, it is response, or trackback from your own site. Posted in Music by Mickys-Blog No Comments Yet. Leave a Comment”
— What is Musical Syncopation And How Does It Work?,
“Syncopation. Saturday, 27 October 2007. If you are Pagan and have a blog, then we would To join Syncopation's Pagan Blog List: You must display one of the buttons which are on”
“Songwriting and Music Forum > Community Blog > Songstuff Stuff > syncopation. off. Subscribe to Songstuff Our resident drumming expert Tom Hoffman introduces Syncopation and discusses why it is so important for drummers”
— Songwriting and Music Forum -> Songstuff Stuff,
“Submitted by syncopation on Thu, 03/29/2007 - 9:43pm. Related topics: Submitted by syncopation on Thu, 03/29/2007 - 5:31pm. Related topics: love. poem. poetry”
— syncopation's blog | The Icarus Project,

Commemorations for Kiahk 15
This day marks the departure of St. Gregory, the Patriarch of the Armenians who was a martyr, without bloodshed (A Confessor). This saint, as it was mentioned on the 19th day of the Coptic month of Tute, was tortured by Tiridates, the Armenian king, in the year 272 A.D. for disobeying the king and refusing to worship the idols. The king cast the saint into an empty pit where he lived for 15 years, during which God took care of him.
Near the pit lived an old widow, who saw, in a vision, someone telling her to make bread regularly and cast it into this pit. She continued to do so for 15 years. Because of the length of time, no one in his congregation knew if he was alive or dead.
When the king killed Arbsima, the virgin, and all the virgins who were with her, he also ordered that their bodies be cast away on the mountains. Later on he regretted what he did for he wanted to marry Arbsima.
When the king's family and close advisers saw how he grieved for killing St. Arbsima, they advised him to go out for hunting to recreate himself. While he was riding his horse the Devil jumped on him and cast him on the ground. King Tiridates became possessed with an evil spirit and assumed the appearance and manners of a wild boar, to an extent that no one was able to go near him safely. Many of the people of his kingdom had the same fate. Great fear and crying was heard all over the palace and the kingdom as a result of what had happened to the king and many others as a result of what the king did to the virgins.
The king's sister saw a vision on three consecutive nights. A man was telling her that unless she brought St. Gregory out of the pit, the King would not be saved nor would be cured. The people were surprised, since they believed that he was dead. They went to the pit and dropped a rope and called his name. When the saint moved the rope, they knew that he was still alive, they asked him to tie the rope around him and they pulled him out.
The people took the Saint with great honor to the palace. They asked him to heal the king of his sickness. The Saint asked him if he would go back to his evil deeds. When the king expressed no intention of going back to his evil works, the saint prayed for him, and the evil spirit departed from him. His personality and his mind were restored, but he was not completely cured. The nails of his hands and feet remained like those of a boar as a punishment and as a reminder to him of what he was and in order for him not to go back to his evil works.
The saint inquired about the whereabouts of the bodies of the virgins. He went and found them undecayed and he placed them in an honorable place.
St. Gregory cured all who were sick and cast out many devils. The king and his people believed. He taught and baptized them. He built many churches, ordained bishops and priests for them and he instituted laws for them to follow.
When he completed his strife, he departed in peace.
His prayers be with us and Glory be to our God forever. Amen.

In the era of Facebook and Twitter, it's clear we love talking about ourselves—indeed, the topic makes up 40% of our everyday conversation. Now scientists can explain why: Doing so stimulates the brain the same way sex, food, and cash do. Researchers scanned subjects' brains and found that parts linked to those pleasures lit up when subjects chatted about themselves.
Researchers also offered study subjects up to 4 cents per question to talk about topics other than themselves, like President Obama. Turns out "people were even willing to forgo money in order to talk about themselves," says a researcher. Subjects would part with 17% to 25% of the potential cash for an opportunity for self-disclosure, the Wall Street Journal reports.

Israel was born as a sanctuary for a people banished from their homeland, harassed in exile and ultimately subjected to mass murder. But there is more than one population here that meets this description. For, the Jewish state is home to another dispersed, insular and tradition-bound nation that has suffered through the trauma of exile and one of the most devastating genocides of modern times.
Some 1.5 million Circassians were killed in the Caucasian War of the mid-to-late 19th century, and another million — fully 90% of the population — were deported from their land in the Caucasus Mountains. Today, roughly 4,000 Circassians live in Israel, where they constitute the country’s only Sunni Muslim community that sends each of its sons to the military.
Read post on Arty Semite blog about Israeli museums’ spotlight on Circassians.
“We’ve traditionally been friends with both Jews and Arabs, even when they were fighting among themselves,” said Zoher Thawcho, the 39-year-old co-founder of the Circassian Heritage Center in Kfar Kama. “We don’t see everything Israel does as holy, nor what the Arab states or Palestinians do…. It’s not as if we say, ‘From now on we’re with you, so we’re enemies of the other.’”
Most Circassians (sur-CASH-ins) took refuge in the lands of the Ottoman Empire. Today, 2 million of the world’s 7 million Circassians live in Turkey, with another 120,000 in Syria and 100,000 in Jordan. Circassians were Christian for 1,000 years, but from the 16th to the 19th century became Islamized under the influence of Crimean Tatars and Ottoman Turks.
In Israel, the community is spread across two villages in the green hills of the Galilee: Kfar Kama — 13 miles southwest of Tiberias, population 3,000; and Rehaniya — nine miles north of Safed, population 1,000. In the 16th century, the Circassians also founded Abu Ghosh, now a famous restaurant town located west of Jerusalem, but their progeny long ago adopted the Arabic language and culture of their surroundings.
“Circassians are like a prism that shows just how polarized Israeli society is,” said Chen Bram, an anthropologist who is currently working as a professor at the University of Florida. “It’s as if someone who doesn’t fit into the category of either Jew or Arab is from another planet. They’re neither here nor there.
“In terms of their day-to-day lives, both politically and ideologically, they’re closer to Jewish society. But in recent years, on the margins, there has also been more identification with their Islamic identity. I attribute that to a reaction to various racist remarks that have been thrown their way.”

Severe dyslexia is caused by disorientation, which for dyslexic people means that they have an innacurate perception of the words. That is, they might see the letters of the words jumbled around in all sorts of different ways. There is no way that a dyslexic person who suffers from this sort of disorientation can ever remember a word, because the word seems different every time they look at it.
There is no single pattern of difficulty that affects all dyslexic people. A dyslexic person might have any of the following problems:
- She might see some letters as backwards or upside down;
- She might not be able to tell the difference between letters that look similar in shape such as o and e and c ;
- She might not be able to tell the difference between letters that have similar shape but different orientation, such as b and p and d and q ;
- The letters might look all jumbled up and out of order;
- The letters and words might look all bunched together;
- The letters of some words might appear completely backwards, such as the word bird looking like drib
- The letters and words might look o.k., but the dyslexic person might get a severe headache or feel sick to her stomach every time she tries to read;
- She might see the letters o.k., but not be able to sound out words -- that is, not be able to connect the letters to the sounds they make and understand them;
- She might be able to connect the letters and sound out words, but not recognize words she has seen before, no matter how many times she has seen them -- each time she would have to start fresh;
- She might be able to read the words o.k. but not be able to make sense of or remember what she reads, so that she finds herself coming back to read the same passage over and over again.
The dyslexic people might see the letters of the words jumbled around in all sorts of different ways.

Talking to Your Doctor About Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
You have a unique medical history. Therefore, it is essential to talk with your doctor about your personal risk factors and/or experience with
generalized anxiety disorder
(GAD). By talking openly and regularly with your doctor, you can take an active role in your care.
Here are some tips that will make it easier for you to talk to your doctor:
- Bring someone else with you. It helps to have another person hear what is said and think of questions to ask.
- Write out your questions ahead of time, so you don't forget them.
- Write down the answers you get, and make sure you understand what you are hearing. Ask for clarification, if necessary.
- Don't be afraid to ask your questions or ask where you can find more information about what you are discussing. You have a right to know.
- Tell your doctor about your constant worry and tension, or any other signs of GAD, such as aches and pains for no reason, or trouble sleeping.
- Tell your doctor if these problems keep you from doing everyday things and living your life.
- Ask for a checkup to check for other illnesses.
- Ask your doctor if he or she has helped other people with GAD. Special training helps doctors treat people with GAD. If your doctor doesn't have special training, ask for the name of a doctor or counselor who does.
- What treatment options are available for GAD?
If your doctor prescribes medicine, ask:
- How long will it take to work?
- What benefits can I expect?
- What side effects should I watch for?
- Can you recommend a counselor who treats people with GAD?
If you decide to try counseling, interview counselors and find one with whom you feel comfortable discussing your problems. You should ask the counselor about:
- His training and experience in treating anxiety disorders
- His basic approach to treatment
- The length of treatment
- The length and frequency of treatment sessions
- What health insurance is accepted
- Fee schedules and sliding scale fees to accompany various financial circumstances
Ask your doctor or counselor about lifestyle changes that could help you reduce your anxiety and stress symptoms. Examples may include:
- Caffeine and alcohol use
- Getting adequate sleep
- Relaxation and stress management techniques
- What are my chances of recovering from GAD with treatment? Without treatment?
- Will I have a recurrence of GAD and related conditions? What can I do to prevent these?
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Anxiety Disorders Association of America website. Available at:
. Accessed October 29, 2008.
Generalized anxiety disorder.
National Institute of Mental Health website. Available at:
. Update June 2008. Accessed October 29, 2008.
Hahn RK, Reist C, et al.
Psychiatry. Laguna Hills, CA: Current Clinical Strategies Publishing; 2006.
Last reviewed September 2012 by Rimas Lukas, MD
Please be aware that this information is provided to supplement the care provided by your physician. It is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. CALL YOUR HEALTHCARE PROVIDER IMMEDIATELY IF YOU THINK YOU MAY HAVE A MEDICAL EMERGENCY. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition.
Copyright © EBSCO Publishing. All rights reserved.

- Historic Sites
The Winter Soldiers,
December 1973 | Volume 25, Issue 1
That was the end of the campaigning in 1776. Washington went into winter quarters and waited for a spring that would bring new hardships. Most of his soldiers went home, to be replaced by unpromising recruits. But now, for the rest of the war, there would be among these green men a leavening of veterans who had seen Hessians surrender and British regulars run from a pitched battle and who would not forget the sight. As Ketchum writes, “The Americans’ revolution survived—survived in some mysterious way that no one could quite fathom—in no small part because of what George Washington and his soldiers achieved against all the odds that nature and a vastly superior military force could pit against them. … Because of their accomplishments, the waning days of 1776 were not the end of everything, but a new beginning.”
The Winter Soldiers is the story of the men who brought about that new beginning; it is a story that cannot be told too often and has rarely been told so well.

|Paradise in Peril: Chilkoot's Brown Bears|
by Lincoln Larson
March 10, 2004
: The Chilkoot Brown Bear Project
I uttered the habitual salutation as I began the trek down from my isolated research cabin to the banks of Southeast Alaskaís Chilkoot River. Although I saw no evidence of recent bear activity through the light of my headlamp, I had no intention of startling a 700-pound sow with cubs in the predawn of that cold, rainy September day. At 5:00 AM, I was the only human being walking along the river.
As I approached my observation post, I heard splashing nearby. Straining my eyes in the darkness, I struggled to find the source of the commotion. Through my binoculars, I could just a make out the silhouette of a subadult grizzly devouring salmon carcasses on the riverís far bank, 60 meters away. At that distance, I was in no danger. Suddenly I froze. A large, dark form shot into my field of view, no more than 10 meters away. Even in the dark, I immediately recognized the shape of a large female brown bear. As I slowly and quietly backed away, two cubs ran up the bank and onto the road where I was standing. I managed to move behind the trunk of a spruce tree. My trembling fingers clutched the cannister of bear spray fastened to my beltóa last resort in case of a grizzly charge. The bears were obviously aware of my presence, but upwind, and in the dark, they were unable to locate my exact position. After over a minute of intense sniffing and scanning, the large sow eventually decided to saunter off downriver. The cubs bounded off behind her, and I breathed a heavy sigh of relief. I had emerged unscathed and transformed after my closest grizzly encounter while working on the Chilkoot Brown Bear Project.
Chilkoot Study Area
Inquisitive Subadult Bear
: Studying the Chilkoot Bears
The Chilkoot River flows about one mile out of Chilkoot Lake and into Lutak Sound, 10 miles north of Haines, Alaska. Every year, four different species of salmon (pink, sockeye, chum and coho) return to the river to spawn. The largest run occurs in September, when over 100,000 pinks and sockeyes (see note below) enter the icy waters to breed. The abundance of salmon attracts many predators to the Chilkoot each fall, including bald eagles and grizzly bears. Hundreds of fishermen and tourists also follow the salmon upstream to capitalize on the extraordinary angling and wildlife-viewing opportunities. This unique situation, a wild Alaskan River with easy road access, raises multiple conservation issues centered on the preservation of Chilkootís grizzly bears.
Taking advantage of the ideal setting, the Brown Bear Project focuses on bear foraging ecology and habitat use patterns in relation to the riverís human activity. For two months beginning in mid-August, the research team observed and recorded bear and human behavior along the river corridor. We were stationed at designated points along the river for three-hour shifts at sunrise and sunset (mixed with the occasional midday observation). Though spectators avoided the river on cold, rainy days, adverse weather conditions did not deter the bears or the researchers. We logged many hours huddled in freezing rain, inspired by the rapture of field biology and our majestic surroundings. The observation posts were concealed and did not obstruct bear access routes to the river. As a result, both tourists and bruins were rarely aware of our presence. Using video cameras, binoculars, and tape recorders, we documented human and bear activity throughout the three-hour periods.
From August to October, we viewed 16 different bears (not counting cubs) foraging along the Chilkoot River. Each of these bears was either an adult female (some with litters of up to four cubs) or a subadult (age 2-3 years). The large males presumably stayed deeper in the mountains, farther from the threats posed by hunters and civilization.
During the project, I became very familiar with all the individual bears and their idiosyncrasies. The grizzlies displayed a variety of different fishing techniques. While many of the subadults ran, jumped, and futilely flailed at fish in the swiftly moving water, the older bears had clearly refined their skills. One mother preferred snorkeling for salmon, another opted to wait patiently before plunging on unfortunate passersby, and another had mastered a herding technique, chasing fish into pools with no outlets. The cubs enthusiastically attempted to imitate their mothersí tactics, but experienced little success. They often left the water and frolicked on the riverbanks, anxiously awaiting the delivery of their next meal.
As the season progressed, the bears began to consume fish carcasses at a higher rate. Live fish offer a richer energy content but, with hibernation looming, bears desperate to pack on the pounds seemed to prefer quantity instead of quality. Individual bears developed certain routines that made their spatial and temporal habitat use patterns very predictable. One adult female emerged from the same spot in the forest at exactly the same time (virtually down to the minute) for five consecutive days, constantly fishing the same segment of the river. With many bears in a relatively small area (up to seven bears were sometimes visible along a 100 meter stretch of river), confrontations and chases between grizzlies unwilling to share fishing spots often occurred. Sows with cubs dominated the riverís feeding hierarchy, and smaller subadults were frequently forced to retreat. All the bears faced one common obstacle, however: human disturbances.
NOTE: Fish counts are conducted at the Weir, a man-made structure composed of a series of closely-spaced bars designed to block fish movement upstream while permitting the free flow of water. A few bars are lifted several times a day, creating a small opening through which fish can pass. Fish & Game Officials count the salmon as they swim by. After spawning, the salmon die and their bodies float downstream. Bears often congregate at the Weir early in the morning to pick the fish carcasses off the bars.
Fishing Along the Chilkoot
Subadult Feeding on Carcasses
: The Impacts of Human Activity
Evidence indicates that human activity greatly influences brown bear activity. Bears were most active in the extreme early morning and late evening, corresponding to the minimum in angler and vehicle densities. Bears in more remote locations, such as Alaskaís Katmai National Park, prefer to fish during the daylight hours when live fish capture rates are much higher. The Chilkoot grizzlies, however, choose to forage in the dark to eliminate human disturbances. With humans in the vicinity, the bears experienced decreased fishing success and often resorted to eating fish carcasses while maintaining constant vigilance. In some instances, vehicle traffic along the road was so heavy that bears were denied access to the river.
Sows with cubs generally showed less tolerance for humans, possibly due to the recent shootings of several young bears that some members of the local community perceived as threats. In most cases, these cubs discovered garbage that had not been properly disposed, and they began to associate humans with food. Food-conditioned bears are reluctant to exploit the valuable salmon resource of the river, electing to scavenge trash cans and fishermenís coolers in search of an easier meal. As people from around the world flock to the Chilkoot River each fall to witness the amazing bear-feeding spectacle, the number and intensity of bear-human interactions will continue to grow. Men and bears are capable of coexistence, but the volatile situation along the Chilkoot demonstrates that proper management techniques are necessary to ensure a relationship beneficial to both species. We must give the animals some space in order to encourage and appreciate their natural behavior.
As my experience with the Chilkoot brown bears confirms, the common perception of grizzlies as menacing monsters and man-killers is completely unwarranted. While the bears certainly offer an imposing, commanding presence, they are generally benign, intelligent creatures that should be revered, not feared. The Chilkoot River System provides an excellent case study for wildlife management techniques around Alaskaís salmon streams. If we can understand the effects of human habitat use and recreation in this river ecosystem, we can begin to develop strategies for protecting bears in other areas.
Special thanks to Lori and Anthony Crupi, founder and
director of the Chilkoot Brown Bear Project.
About the author:
Lincoln Larson is a recent graduate of Duke University (Durham,
North Carolina) and an aspiring field biologist.

I love the fall and how the leaves change from deep greens to reds and orange and gold. This natural riot of color takes place wherever there are trees with leaves and there’s almost no place better to watch the leaves change than in the Northeast. This part of the four-seasoned ritual of life attracts tourists from far and wide and tugs at me to make a special trip to our home in the mountains there. And this reminds me every year about the natural changes that are a constant in our lives.
Ever wonder why and how the leaves change colors?
• As summer ends and autumn comes, the days get shorter and shorter. This is how the trees "know" to begin getting ready for winter. The trees will begin to rest and live off the food they stored during the summer. The green chlorophyll disappears from the leaves. As the bright green fades away, we begin to see yellow and orange colors. Small amounts of these colors have been in the leaves all along - we didn’t them in the summer because they were covered up by the green chlorophyll. The bright reds and purples we see in leaves are made mostly in the fall. In some trees, like maples, glucose is trapped in the leaves after photosynthesis stops. Sunlight and the cool nights of autumn cause the leaves to turn this glucose into a red color. It’s the combination of all these things that makes the beautiful fall colors we enjoy each year.
Ever hear of Thomas Cole’s The Voyage of Life series? In 1840 he did this series of paintings that represent an allegory of the four stages, or seasons, of human life:
• In childhood, the infant glides from a dark cave into a rich, green landscape.
• As a youth, the boy takes control of the boat and aims for a shining castle in the sky.
• In manhood, the adult relies on prayer and religious faith to sustain him through rough waters and a threatening landscape.
• Finally, the man becomes old and the angel guides him to heaven across the waters of eternity.
In each painting, accompanied by a guardian angel, the voyager rides the boat on the River of Life. The landscape, corresponding to the seasons of the year, plays a major role in telling the story. And in those paintings you can clearly see the leaves changing colors in the season (manhood) that represents the fall of the voyager’s life.
So what’s this mean to you and me? Things change! Always! Life is full of changes and most of us are creatures of habit. And because we don’t know what’s next, we tend to cling to what we already have and know and are comfortable with. We reminisce about and cherish the past because it’s familiar, it’s already happened and we know how the movie ends. And while that’s generally true, it’s the half of the story that we tend to recognize. The other half is that the things we learn from the past should continually be updating our knowledge of life, and how to process the new things we see and experience, and how to better understand the meaning of who and what we are – that’s the harder part of the story to accept.
With each passing season, and the changes that occur, we need to grow and become wiser. And that wisdom should create the stuff we need to constantly be better, to do the things we’re called upon to do each day better, and to help those around us to become better. But you won’t learn anything or get better if you’re not open to the changes – natural or man-made – that occur every day.
I wish you could join me here at our camp to look across the lake at the beauty that is unfolding. The scene is constant; the colors let me know that time is marching on. On the one hand I could worry that the seasons of my life are marching on, or, on the other, I could be challenged by the things I’ve learned this year that will help me to be wiser and more thoughtful in the future. One stunts natural growth; the other invigorates a sense of wonder about the world around us and the endless possibilities that potentially exist. The choice is ours. And while these leaves will begin to fade and fall soon, the inspiration that they trigger should last a lifetime. That’s the voyage of life, and I’m sure glad to be on it!
My message this week is about being inspired to dream about improving our lives:
“You are never too old to set another goal or to dream a new dream.” -C.S. Lewis
Clive Staples Lewis (1898 – 1963), commonly referred to as C. S. Lewis and known to his friends and family as "Jack", was a British novelist, academic, medievalist, literary critic, essayist, lay theologian and Christian apologist from Ireland.
Got any new dreams today? Not the ones you try to remember and think about when you wake, but the kind that have you excited to try something really new. Everyone can dream, but not everyone has the curiosity, energy, courage and stamina to try to attempt and achieve their dreams. Most want things to be smooth and easy, with no surprises or challenges that can potentially make you look silly. Fact is, without those challenges or knowing how to recover from looking silly you’ll never get to experience what it is to learn from trying something new. You can tell the ones who are into this – the twinkle in their eye, the bounce in their step, the way they carry themselves. If that’s you, and you’ll know if it is, then set another goal today, dream another dream today and make a pledge to be creative and innovative today. Go ahead – you’re never too old!
Friday, September 30, 2011
at 5:24 AM
Friday, September 23, 2011
“Everyone wants to be true to something, and we’re true to you” - that’s the marketing tagline for Jet Blue’s travel rewards program. I know because it kept scrolling across the little screen on the back of the seat in front of me when I recently flew across country. It’s okay in the context of what they’re trying to promote, but it also might apply to more than just loyalty programs. And it may be that because people naturally want to be ‘true blue’ to so many things, it becomes overused and almost trite. That’s too bad. Because being ‘true blue’ can be a good thing.
First: ever wonder where the term ‘true blue’ comes from?
• Loyal and unwavering in one's opinions or support for a cause or product.
• 'True blue' is supposed to derive from the blue cloth that was made at Coventry, England in the late middle-ages. The town's dyers had a reputation for producing material that didn't fade with washing, i.e. it remained 'fast' or 'true'. The phrase 'as true as Coventry blue' originated then and is still used (in Coventry at least).
• True Blue is an old naval/sailing term meaning honest and loyal to a unit or cause.
• And dictionaries say that true blue refers to “people of inflexible integrity or fidelity”.
And second: does ‘true blue’ really mean anything in this era of fast food and slick advertising?
There are lots of loyalty programs – hotels, airlines, slot clubs, retail stores, pop food brands, credit cards, clothing, wine, restaurants, movie theaters, travel sites, theme parks, computer games and countless more – and they all try to get you to stick with them by rewarding you in all kinds of ways: points, miles, free gifts, shows, food and on and on. But it seems a bit contrived, as if there’s some Oz-like character behind a curtain trying to entice you with these awards (read: bribes).
Imagine if this kind of thing were done with going to school or work, singing in a choir, participating in some community event, volunteering your time to some worthy cause, remaining friends or staying in a relationship… doesn’t seem as appropriate in those, does it? Think of someone or something you really like: do you really and truly like them or it, or do you need to be bribed with rewards to feel that way. Of course you don’t. So why do the airlines and hotels and all those other things we purchase have to bribe us like them?
But – there are companies out there that do understand what it takes to win your loyalty:
• Southwest Airlines was one of the first companies that made having fun and using common sense part of their strategy for success. Singing the safety jingle, devising a different boarding routine and setting the record for on-time departures set them apart and won over customers. They got it!
• Zappos doesn’t give you anything extra to make you want to come back – they believe that great service plus free shipping and returns will do that. Everyone said that nobody would buy shoes online – wrong. Zappos gets it!
• Apple wins and keeps their customer’s loyalty by incubating and introducing cool new ideas and products all the time. And they’re just about the biggest and most successful and most admired company on the planet. They get it!
But for every Southwest Airlines-type great experience there are hundreds of others that under perform and underwhelm. So they sign you up and hope that rewarding your loyalty overcomes the other things they do that destroys your loyalty. Seems to me they just don’t get it?
Jet Blue says they give you more leg room – that’s true if you pay extra for those few rows that have it. How come they just don’t make eye contact and smile more? How come they can’t get the bags to the conveyor in less than 30 minutes (which may not seem like much to them but after a cross country flight an extra 30 minutes is painful). How come they don’t get it? I want to join their loyalty program so I can get another trip with them like I want to have my teeth drilled. And then they spend so much time and energy trying to give you that free round trip ticket if you apply for their credit card – you know, the one that has annual fees and high interest rates. How come they don’t get it? Why can’t they just treat me like a loyal and valued customer, like someone they genuinely like and appreciate, like they’d like to be treated if they had to fly on someone else’s airline. Seems to me they just don’t get it.
Most of the good things in life are rooted in quality, trust and respect. People you work with and for, family that you live with and love, things you do for fun and relaxation, games you gladly play with others, friendships you’re lucky enough to have, clubs you join and actively participate in, activities you sign up for – they’re all based on the simple premise that things that are good are that way because they are genuinely good and fun and worthwhile. And that’s why you stick with them loyally.
But all these other kinds of loyalty programs are contrived. And yet we sign up for them like they’re free and worthwhile. They’re not free – we pay for the increased costs of these rewards. And they’re not worthwhile - we’re treated poorly by those who have the attitude that the cheap rewards they give are enough to overcome the thoughtless and robotic service they go through the motions of providing. Next time someone asks if I’ve signed up for their loyalty program I’m going to give them a tip: treat me nicely, treat me fairly, treat me respectfully, act like you really do care, thank me like you really mean it and treat me like you really do want me as a customer – and I’ll come back as often as I can or need to, willingly and freely. When are all these marketing geniuses going to wake up? When are they going to be ‘true blue’ to the Golden Rule?
My message this week is about how excellence can lead to greatness:
”If you want to achieve excellence, you can get there today. As of this second, quit doing less-than-excellent work.” -Thomas J. Watson
Thomas John Watson, Sr. (1874 – 1956) was president of International Business Machines (IBM) and oversaw that company's growth into a global force from 1914 to 1956. Watson developed IBM's distinctive management style and corporate culture, and turned the company into a highly-effective selling organization. He was called the world's greatest salesman.
Do you want to achieve excellence? Some people don’t – they’re content to work alongside others, doing just enough to get by and satisfy their basic needs, content to have a few toys, take life easy and not make waves. But is that what you want – would that be enough for you? If not, then you’ve got to decide right now to start going farther, looking to help others, caring more, trying harder, and being more of what you can be today. You’ve got to take it to the next level – in commitment, in energy, in enthusiasm, in being a role model, in paying closer attention to details, in always striving to do and be all that you’re capable of. As of this second, you’ve got to quit doing less-than-excellent work. That’s how YOU can achieve excellence - (note: the emphasis is on YOU)!
at 5:34 AM
Friday, September 16, 2011
Where were you on 9/11? For most of us the answers are permanently etched in our minds. Like the attack on Pearl Harbor and VE Day for our parents, or the moment John Kennedy was shot or Armstrong set foot on the moon for the baby boomers, 9/11 has become one of the iconic moments in time for all who were alive then.
I remember exactly where I was, what I was doing, who told me and how I felt the day Kennedy was killed; and like most people I was watching on our little black and white TV when Ruby shot Oswald the next day. I remember my teacher bringing me into the assembly hall to watch when Armstrong took “one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind”. There have been literally trillions of moments in my life, but these iconic ones stand out, frozen in time and in my mind. And then there was 9/11.
In these weekly blogs I try to write about things that catch my attention. These stories tend to take on meanings beyond the specific incidents I mention, meanings that relate to life’s larger issues and that can possibly teach us something. But this one goes way beyond any of the moments and incidents that caught my attention - 9/11 caught the attention of everyone on the planet. There aren’t many things that reach that level, things that stop time, that leave indelible memories about where we were and who we were with, that immediately bring back visceral feelings and emotions of a long ago but clearly remembered moment in time. 9/11 does all of those things and more.
My wife and I were in NYC: preparing to get on the George Washington Bridge to go into Manhattan when the first plane hit; coming to a complete stop on the road and in our lives; watching in fear and confusion as the second plane hit; staring in horror as first one and then the other building fell; hearing about the other plane crashes in Washington and Pennsylvania; staying glued to the radio and then the television while the world stood still.
We drove away from the City that day in fear and confusion – trying to get as far away as possible and to make sense of how and why this happened. As we drove we came upon a rise in the road where all the cars were stopped; people were standing beside their cars and looking back in the direction we came from, so we stopped too. In the distance there was smoke where the towers so recently stood; nobody was talking; everyone was crying. We eventually made it to our home in the Adirondack Mountains, safe and overwhelmed by the fear and confusion that enveloped the world as we knew it. I can see and feel that day now as if were yesterday. I guess that’s what an iconic moment is: something we remember – clearly and forever.
And now, in what seems like no time at all, ten years have passed and the memorial to those killed has been unveiled. The reading of the names this past Sunday stopped and stunned us all over again. The tolling of the bells in New York, Washington and Shanksville brought us back to that moment in time. The sight of the grieving families and friends as they touched and etched the names of their fathers, brothers, mothers, sisters, relatives and friends brought us together now as we were back then. The pettiness and partisanship that dominates the news was pushed aside for just a moment as we all stood in solemn and shared tribute to something that transcended all the comparatively meaningless stuff that normally seeks to grab our attention. As sad as the memories are, the togetherness helps us get through the memories now like it did when this terrible tragedy first happened. Why can’t we make that feeling last?
A man named Al DiLascia from Chicopee, Mass. wrote a letter to the editor of the New York Times this week that summed this up:
For one brief moment on September 11, 2011, time seemed to stand still. People sought family members and recognized the importance of family. Acts of charity were plentiful. There was an assessment of life and what is really important. Places of worship were full. People unashamedly prayed. For one brief moment...
Let’s try to remember – not just the events that make up these iconic moments, but what they really mean, and what’s really important. Don’t let a day pass that you don’t tell those you love how much you care and to show it in thoughtful and meaningful ways, to touch the people and things that are most important to you, to reach out and give to those in need, and to quietly count and give thanks for all the blessings that are in your life. Do whatever you have to do to make the meaning of your iconic moments last!
My message this week is about being loyal to the people and things that are important in your life:
“Loyalty is something you give regardless of what you get back, and in giving loyalty, you're getting more loyalty; and out of loyalty flow other great qualities.”
Colonel Charles Edward ("Chuck") Jones (1952 – 2001) was a United States Air Force officer, a computer programmer, and an astronaut in the USAF Manned Spaceflight Engineer Program. He was killed in the attacks of September 11, 2001 aboard American Airlines Flight 11, the first plane to hit the first World Trade Center building at 8:46am.
All of the great values we read and write about seem to be interconnected, and loyalty may be the one at the hub of them all. Think of the people and things you’re loyal to, and then note the other great qualities that come from that loyalty. Friendship, success, pride, humility, professionalism, integrity, team spirit and passion are a few that immediately come to mind. These are the qualities and values that you hope to find in others, and certainly they’re the ones to which you should always aspire. But to get loyalty you need to give it, and that means you must be true to your work and family and friends, forgiving in your nature, humble in your approach to others, sincere in your dealings with all, and understanding in the complex and competitive world that we live in. Look for ways to give loyalty today without attaching any strings for reciprocity. And don’t be surprised if you then start to get loyalty and all the other great qualities flowing back to you in return.
Stay well. And please say a prayer for these heroes and all the others in your life who’ve passed.
at 6:20 AM
Friday, September 9, 2011
Vacation homes in the Adirondacks are commonly referred to as camps – my family is fortunate to have one and, as you know from some of my previous blogs, we’ve spent a lot of time there this year. These are not to be confused with day and overnight camps that parents send their kids to. This is about the second kind of camp.
I went to an overnight camp as a kid and loved it, but that’s a story for another time. This tale begins at Camp Nazareth (that’s the name of the overnight camp at the end of our lake). Its run by the local Catholic Diocese which has had little success in recent years attracting enough kids. More often than not, this wonderful facility – it can hold up to 300 kids at any one time - is terribly under used. Fortunately, it seems that they’ve now discovered ways to attract alternate users like family reunions, corporate retreats and, just this past week, a high school crew team (Google “rowing sport” to learn more about this sport on Wikipedia). And that crew team caught our attention.
Our family’s camp (we call it “The Point”) is on the water and we can easily see when anyone is on the lake. While sitting on our dock one morning we were surprised to see this crew team go by. If you’ve never seen a crew team before, they operate in long narrow boats (like large kayaks) that are referred to as “sculls” – these are two to eight-person boats that are rowed by that many team members, each of whom operates one oar. In this case, there were two eight-person sculls (one with all men and the other all women) that were practicing. Mind you, this is not an everyday sight – there are a few motorboats and a lot of canoes and kayaks on our lake, so the sight of these two sculls was a bit of a surprise. Alongside these two sculls was a small motorboat in which sat the coach who had a megaphone and was giving instructions and commands. On the first day of what appeared to be one of their initial practice sessions, these two sculls were having what was obviously some beginner’s training. And here’s another key bit of information: the team has to row in very close order for the boat to move along smoothly. If any of the rowers is out of synch (even a little) the boat can very easily (and visibly) miss a beat. And if any of those misses are overly pronounced the boats can stop altogether or even capsize. So at the beginning of this training the coach definitely wanted to take it slow.
As the week progressed, however, the boats began to move more smoothly, and over time they got smoother and faster. And since the object of crew is to beat the competition, smooth and fast is definitely better. In order to get smoother and faster, the individual team members all have to practice at learning not only how to improve their own skills but also how to be in better synch with all the other members of their team. In crew, as in so many other aspects of life, both are critical (as in one without the other is not worth much).
As we watched this unfold before us, we started to reflect on how the basic lessons being learned out on the lake apply to just about everything we do in life (and here I need to confess that my wife realized this before I did). Being effective and functional at anything – playing with friends on the school yard, getting along as a family, working with colleagues, participating on a sports team, singing in a choir, building something with others, participating in community events – really is about learning how to improve your own skills while also performing in concert with others. Learning anything alone is one thing, learning it together and then interacting with others is a whole different thing. The key to life is learning both, because one without the other is really not worth much. And here was a live metaphor for this right on the lake in front of us – and just like that my whole professional life flashed before me as I watched this training unfold.
Each of these young athletes was working hard to learn how to be the best they could be, they and their team mates were learning how to interact with each other more effectively, the coaches were seeing the results of their hard work and practice, and those of us on the sidelines were rewarded by seeing how things can and should work when effective instructions, practice and coaching all come together. We don’t often get to see things so clearly, or watch how the rituals of cause and effect play out so clearly. Simply put: this was a real lesson about life. And, in part because of where we were, and also because of what we saw and then realized, we were again moved to exclaim “that’s the Point!
My message this week is about finding things you can be passionate about, because they define who and what you are.
“I know that I have found fulfillment. I have an object in life, a task ... a passion.”
Amantine Lucile Aurore Dupin, later Baroness Dudevant (1804 – 1876), best known by her pseudonym George Sand, was a French novelist and memoirist.
Have you found fulfillment? Not just a momentary or fleeting sense of accomplishment, but a lasting and on-going feeling that “this is it”. We all do lots of little and mostly disconnected things – chores, work, hobbies – and these achieve short-term goals or complete individual assignments. But every now and then one big thing comes along that is more about defining our style or purpose, and these make us who and what we are. Now it could be a car or a job – those certainly say a lot about you. But to find fulfillment – to know that something is really about the “you” that is truly you – that’s a real find. And that’s the kind of thing that passion is truly built upon. Something you love deeply, that you can’t stop thinking about, that you can’t wait to get up and do each day, and that you truly care more about than almost anything else. That’s the kind of passion that is truly a treasure – and that’s the kind of object in life that you want to be on the lookout for – today and every day. That’s the Point!
at 5:14 AM
Friday, September 2, 2011
Last week was something else – an earthquake and a hurricane and tornados and sunshine and hot and cold… I'm having trouble remembering where I am.
I grew up in upstate New York and experienced four distinct seasons each year – but there were no earthquakes or tornados. I later moved to Nevada for nearly a quarter century and experienced dry heat – but there were never any hurricanes or tornados. I then moved to the beaches of California where the sun shines 300+ days a year, the temperature rarely gets above 75 and earthquakes and wild fires are a nuisance – but there are no tornados or hurricanes. And now I’m back in New York (city and upstate) and just about everything but wild fires have hit here in the past 8 months. What’s going on?
I didn’t own a winter coat – and the record snow falls and cold last winter drove me to Land’s End with a singleness of purpose. I didn’t own boots or an umbrella, and the wet snow and rains taught me a lot about what it means to stay dry. I’m used to driving wherever I want to go and not having a car here to help navigate through the varying weather patterns has made me a fan of the Weather Channel. I never thought about the weather, never worried about what I’d wear or looked at the skies for clues to what’s coming, and now that the weather changes in the blink of an eye I am obsessed with meteorology.
But last week, depending where you were in the path of all this weather, meteorologists either got it right, mostly right, or wrong. Hey – they’re human so maybe we shouldn’t hold them to such a high standard as always being right. I mean, is anybody always right? Maybe we should take what they say and apply some old fashioned lore to this inexact science – such as:
Red sky at night, sailor's delight,
Red sky in the morning, sailors take warning.
When the wind is blowing in the North
No fisherman should set forth,
When the wind is blowing in the East,
'Tis not fit for man nor beast,
When the wind is blowing in the South
It brings the food over the fish's mouth,
When the wind is blowing in the West,
That is when the fishing's best!
When halo rings the moon or sun, rain's approaching on the run.
When windows won't open, and the salt clogs the shaker,
The weather will favor the umbrella maker!
No weather is ill, if the wind be still.
When sounds travel far and wide,
A stormy day will betide.
If clouds move against the wind, rain will follow.
A coming storm your shooting corns presage,
And aches will throb, your hollow tooth will rage.
I wouldn’t normally be thinking about these things, but all this crazy weather has me spooked. Is it global warming or just the fact that weather seems unpredictable? Were the winters way more intense when we were kids, or did it just seem that way because we were kids? Can weather really be predicted correctly all the time by these meteorologists, or should we take what they say with a “grain of salt”? Or should we rely more on our own common sense as aided by some of these old fashioned sayings?
Here in New York last week the mayor and the meteorologists got it wrong – but not by much. The winds blew and the rains fell and, though there was less flooding and damage than predicted here, they made damn sure we were prepared by scaring the daylights out of us with their dire warnings. Now some people are complaining because they scared us; but those same people complained when they didn’t scare us before last winter’s massive snow storm, or that they didn’t scare others enough before Katrina.
Fact is, lots of people are never happy, especially if they’re inconvenienced. But potentially saving lives is better than trying to apologize for not saving lives: isn’t that what ‘better safe than sorry’ is all about? Maybe we expect too much from the elected officials who we don’t really like or trust anyways (especially when they are inconveniencing us). I guess they’re damned if they do and damned if they don’t. I’ve even read some editorials about how this should make us either for or against big government. Come on, it was just a storm. And even though lots of people got flooded out, and there was lots of damage to homes and fields and trees and power lines, and lots of high water and wind, I’m relieved because it was less than predicted here on my street. I’m really sad for those to whom it was as much or more than predicted. And even though I don’t blame anyone, I sure as hell would like to know what all this crazy weather means, and whether a red sky at night really does mean a sailor’s delight?
My message this week is about loyalty, and whether we need to think about how loyal we are to others and how loyal we need to be to ourselves:
“Loyalty to petrified opinion never yet broke a chain or freed a human soul.” -Mark Twain
Mark Twain achieved great success as a writer and public speaker. His wit and satire earned praise from critics and peers, and he was a friend to presidents, artists, industrialists, and European royalty.
Loyalty can be both good and bad. People often remain loyal long after the reason for doing so has ended. If the reason you became loyal has petrified then you need to re-examine your motives and goals; you need to break free when the times demand it and it’s the right thing to do. Loyalty should be given to the best ideas, the highest principles, the most ethical leaders, the greatest challenges, and to the most extraordinary opportunities. But sometimes we remain loyal just because we are afraid to appear disloyal or we’re afraid to re-examine that loyalty. This conflict can be a Catch 22, or it can be a moment of re-commitment and rebirth. And just like a plant that’s been sitting for a long time, it’s a good idea to re-pot our beliefs to make sure that our roots continue to grow deeper and stronger. So look at your loyalties today and make sure they’re where they should be.
Stay warm, dry and well!
at 5:36 AM

The founders explicitly rejected direct democracy — in which citizens vote on every issue — in favor of representative democracy. The idea was that legislators would convene at a safe remove from voters and, thus insulated from the din of narrow interests and widespread but ephemeral passions, do what was in the long-term interest of their constituents and of the nation. Now information technology has stripped away the insulation that physical distance provided back when information couldn’t travel faster than a horse.Yes, one wonders what the Framers might have thought of free speech.
February 3, 2010
Says Robert Wright:

In Think: The Life of the Mind and the Love of God John piper shows us the intricate continuity between the Christian faith and intellectual development. Focusing on the life of the mind helps us to know God better, love him more, and care for the world around us in thoughtful ways.
While we must value the experiential an emotional elements of our faith, the intellectual aspects are far too often neglected and as Piper says in this book, we also need to practice careful thinking about God. Piper contends that "thinking is indispensable on the path to passion for God." So how are we to maintain a healthy balance of mind and heart, thinking and feeling?
Piper urges us to think for the glory of God. He demonstrates from Scripture that glorifying God with our minds and hearts is not either-or, but both-and. Thinking carefully about God fuels passion and affections for God. Likewise, Christ-exalting emotion leads to disciplined thinking.

Christine Duncan, MD
Sickle cell disease (SCD) affects as many as 100,000 Americans, and a comprehensive understanding of SCD is essential for pediatric and adult hematologists. This common disease will be explored in depth in an Education Program Session today at 7:30 a.m. and again at 2:00 p.m. in rooms 393-396 of the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center. The session is designed for all hematologists who treat patients with sickle cell syndromes, including general adult and pediatric hematologists and those who practice in tertiary care centers.
Gene therapy offers promise as a curative therapy for SCD but is not yet a reality. Stem cell transplantation has successfully cured many severely affected patients, but it is limited by the availability of donors and by transplant-related toxicity. As a result, we are still searching for effective and tolerable alternative therapies for this common disease.
In today’s session, Drs. Kenneth Ataga of the University of North Carolina and Russell Ware of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital will review existing and innovative therapies for SCD.
Dr. Ataga will describe treatments aimed at decreasing sickle hemoglobin polymerization directly, and therapies that target aspects of sickle cell pathobiology other than hemoglobin (e.g., vascular adhesion or cellular hydration).
Dr. Ware will then examine the use of hydroxyurea in SCD, a treatment widely used by clinicians since landmark clinical trial results were reported in the 1990s. While hydroxyurea cannot be considered a novel therapy, it is receiving increased attention, and there is renewed enthusiasm for the drug. The 2008 NIH consensus statement regarding the use of hydroxyurea in patients with SCD cites strong evidence for the efficacy of the drug in adult patients and compelling data for its use in children.
The NIH consensus statement that examined the use of hydroxyurea also addressed the need for patients with SCD to have a primary health care provider. The statement suggests that providers either specialize in the care of patients with SCD or maintain contact with a hematologist with expertise in SCD. This recommendation highlights the often overlapping arenas of SCD management and primary care, which Dr. Joshua Field from Washington University, St. Louis, will emphasize in his discussion of two commonly co-exisiting conditions that have complex interactions: SCD and asthma. As Dr. Field explains, "We do not fully understand if these are two separate disease processes or if the asthma is a manifestation of sickle cell disease. The diagnosis and treatment of patients with sickle cell and airway disease is not straightforward. The same rules used to diagnose a patient with asthma in the general population may not apply to a child with sickle cell disease. Sickle cell comorbidities may make it harder to diagnose and to treat a patient with asthma and SCD."
Dr. Duncan indicated no relevant conflicts of interest.
back to top

Art. XXIX.—The Older Gravels of North Canterbury.
[Read before the New Zealand Institute, at Christchurch, 4th—8th February, 1919; received by Editor, 24th February, 1919; issued separately, 16th July, 1919.]
|General Description of the District where the Beds are best developed||269|
|Description of Typical Localities||270|
|Grey River, East Branch||270|
|Grey River, West Branch||273|
|Okuku River and Mairaki Downs||274|
|Kowai River, North Branch||274|
|Kowai River, South Branch||274|
|Lower Warpara Gorge||278|
|Other Canterbury Localities||279|
|General Conclusions as to the Origin and Age of the Beds, and Relation to the Gravels of the Canterbury Plains||280|
Widely distributed along the base of the Southern Alps lies a series of unfossiliferous sedimentary beds, consisting for the most part of well-stratified gravels, sands, and clays, with occasional lignite, whose position has hitherto been somewhat doubtful. Haast (1879, p. 316, and map, p. 370) included them in his Pareora formation, and mentioned the occurrence of lignite-beds (p. 318) in the “Moeraki” Downs, at the mouth of the Waipara River, and in the Broken River basin, but hardly mentions the locality where they attain their maximum development—viz., the Mount Grey Downs and the vicinity of the two branches of the Kowai River. Hutton (1885, p. 211) considered them as equivalent to the Wanganui system of the North Island, but remarked that they were difficult to distinguish from the upper gravels of the Pareora system. Park (1910, p. 252) considered them older fluvio-glacial drifts. Thomson (1917, p. 411) refers to them more fully, but is extremely doubtful whether they shall be assigned to his Notocene or Notopleistocene set of deposits.
Owing to the practical absence of fossils it is difficult to determine their position accurately, but they nevertheless represent an interesting series, and the following account is intended to bring out their chief features. In addition to the difficulty noted by Hutton, there is the additional one that in their lithological content as well as to some extent the conditions under which they were laid down they resemble the beds that overlie them, and this makes it at times impossible to separate them from subsequent gravel and sandy beds.
General Description of the District Where the Beds Are Best Developed.
The chief area where they are developed lies to the south-east and south of Mount Grey, between the Waipara and Okuku Rivers, but they attain their greatest development in the basins of the Southern Kowai and the Grey Rivers. Important outliers also occur to the west of the Okuku, on
the lower slopes of Mount Thomas, and south of the Ashley River, where they form the Mairaki Downs (= Moeraki Downs of Haast). The beds form a kind of frontal apron to the higher greywacke hills, such as Mount Grey and Mount Karetu; but still they rise in places to well over 1,000 ft. above sea-level. The downs country has been dissected to some extent, and on the front facing south-east consequent streams have cut deep narrow channels, with high precipitous banks, whereas in the north-eastern portion the tributaries forming the Northern Kowai tend to develop valleys along the strike. The same is also true of the east branch of the Grey. The character of the drainage points to recent and rapid uplift, perhaps in agreement with that of which there is distinct evidence on the coast farther north (McKay, 1877, p. 177; Hutton, 1877, p. 55; Speight, 1918, p. 99). On the sides of the steep banks, especially those running with the dip, numerous good sections are exposed; and it will be best at this stage to give a more detailed description of typical sections, preferably those illustrating the relationship between the underlying Tertiary beds and the overlying gravels. Although the beds are typically developed in the basin of the Kowai River, and I have selected the name of that locality as the one most appropriate to designate the series, yet the most instructive sections are to be seen in the basin of the Grey River, and these will therefore be taken first.
Descriptions of Typical Localities.
Grey River, East Branch.
The eastern or chief branch of the Grey River rises in the country between Mounts Grey and Karetu, flows south therefrom in a deep wooded gorge, and then gradually turns to the south-west and follows along the north-western edge of the Mount Grey Downs till it enters on the plains and joins the Okuku River in the neighbourhood of White Rock Station. The first part of its course has been cut in greywacke, but on leaving the higher country it crosses the marginal fringe of Tertiary sedimentaries at an angle of about 45° with their strike, so that when the stream runs in the direction of the dip the cross-section of its channel is narrow and trench-like, but when it runs along the strike the valley opens out somewhat, with dip slopes bordering the stream on its north-western side and steep scarp slopes on its south-eastern side. The latter are in places very bold and precipitous, and show clear-cut sections. Especially is this the case at the Horseshoe Cliff, about a mile below the gorge, where the north-western slope of the downs has been scored by a deep washout, and the strata are clearly exposed for 500 ft.
In the lower part of the river-gorge there is a most interesting occurrence of the lower members of the Cretaceo-Tertiary series, analogous to that seen in the Waipara and Weka Pass sections. These beds when followed along the strike run in the direction of the greywacke mass of Mount Grey; and unless they turn round on approaching it, as they do on the north-east slope of the mountain, the junction between the two sets of beds will in all probability be a fault contact. To the west of the gorge, however, the junction between the two sets of beds is a normal unconformity.
The following is a description of the beds here exposed, the sequence being in ascending order:—
Greyish sands and sandy shales, glauconitic, concretionary in places, and stained with sulphur; succeeded by light-coloured argillaceous and slightly glauconitic sands—all striking north-east and dipping south-east at 45°.
Greenish glauconitic sand passing up into glauconitic limestone, the glauconitic material being disposed in irregular patches and lenses, giving the rock a somewhat streaky appearance; it is also full of worm-borings filled with glauconitic material. This passes up into
Amuri limestone, 25 ft. thick, with less glauconite than 2. The passage beds between this and the lower bed consist of fragments of Amuri limestone in a greensand matrix, the limestone finally taking on the facies of the typical Amuri stone, being white and jointed into quadrangular blocks. The strike is as before, but the dip is less, being about 30°.
Glauconitic limestone, 20 ft. thick, comparable with the Weka Pass stone as it approaches a shore-line (Speight and Wild, 1918, p. 77), but passing up into a more sandy facies.
Marl, slightly sandy, with concretionary layers and rounded concretions. This is the stratigraphical equivalent of the “grey marl” in the Weka Pass district. It has the same strike and dip as the limestone, and its thickness is about 70 ft.
Thus far the sequence is quite clear and conformable, but for a time the exposures are obscured and the relations to the underlying beds are not plain.
Just below the gorge there is a well-marked bed, striking north-north-east, with slightly flatter dip than the limestone, and containing numerous specimens of Ostrea ingens. Farther down-stream, but higher in the series, is a sandy conglomerate followed by sands with broken shells. These pass up into sands with a layer of oyster and other shell fragments, and then follow the beds of the Kowai series.
These are first exposed at the mouth of the gorge, just above the site of the old sawmill. They consist of sands and sandy gravels containing shell-fragments and showing intraformational unconformities, but no clear evidence, given by sections, of an unconformity between the Kowai series and the lower Tertiaries. Almost everywhere in the case of gravels resting on sands or other finer detrital beds the upper surface of the latter has suffered some erosion, but in no case in this branch of the Grey does this, in my opinion, amount to sufficient to be considered a major unconformity.
On the next bluff down-stream, and higher in the sequence, the beds exposed consist of greenish-grey sands (weathering light-brown) and sandy gravels, with sandy carbonaceous shales and impure lignite. These are capped unconformably by terrace-gravels belonging to the early history of the Grey River. This sequence is repeated on the next bluff, but the gravel beds of the Kowai series become more important, one very heavy band of gravel near the top of the cliff being divided into two parts by a layer of carbonaceous shale. In the bed of the river, at the base of this cliff, is a section which shows an unconformable junction between a greenish sand and an overlying bed of gravel. After a careful consideration of the circumstances of this case I have come to the conclusion that it must be considered only as an intraformational unconformity, due to the erosion of the bed of sand by marine currents in the interval between its deposition and that of the succeeding layer of gravel.
These beds strike north-east, and dip south-east at an angle of 20°.
As the sections are followed down-stream their character does not change except that the gravels become increasingly important, a feature that is well exemplified at the Horseshoe Cliff, on the face of which gravels greatly predominate, some layers being from 50 ft. to 70 ft. in thickness. Well-defined sandy layers also occur. The regular stratification of the beds
towards the base of the cliff points to their having been deposited in shallow water in close proximity to a shore-line, and not on a land-surface; but at the higher levels the stratification becomes more indistinct and the pebbles become coarser and more subangular in shape, so it is almost certain that the closing beds of the series were laid down on a land-surface. The presence of lignite in the lower beds clearly indicates estuarine or deltaic conditions.
It should be noted that on the high banks of the Grey River there is a still more recent series of gravels belonging to the history of the stream. They are similar in lithological features to the gravels of the Kowai series, but they are neither so well stratified nor so well cemented. They are undoubtedly river and not sea deposits. Where contacts can be seen they are easily differentiated, but elsewhere, especially on the lower slopes of the downs, it is difficult to separate them from the upper members of the lower set of beds, which were also laid down on a land-surface.
Grey River, West Branch.
The general stratigraphy of the beds in the basin of the western branch of the Grey River is similar to that in the eastern. The following is a general description of the strata exposed above the greywacke as disclosed on the sides of the gorge of the stream:—
Sands and greensands.
Limestone, full of bryozoan remains, but only a few feet thick in the gorge of the stream, thickening, however, to the east and to the west. There is a marked difference in the features of this limestone as compared with that in the eastern branch, and as they are in apparent continuity it might be assumed that the stone in the western branch represents a shallower-water facies. I am by no means certain that this is the true explanation, and the question of the identity as regards their stratigraphical position must be reserved for further investigation.
Marls, greenish in colour, with rounded concretions and concretionary bands, passing up into greyish sands with fragmentary fossil shells.
In the river these beds strike E. 25° S. and dip south at an angle of 30°, but they have suffered some deformation, and the strike changes to north-east on the ridge between the two branches of the Grey, and also as the beds are traced round to White Rock and the Okuku River. The upper surface of the sands was distinctly eroded before the next bed was laid down. This consists of a heavy band of cemented gravel. The following beds are then encountered, in ascending order:—
Gravel bed just referred to.
Sandy clays and gravels.
Sandy clay and carbonaceous shale, repeatedly alternating. One bed of shale is from 12 in. to 18 in. thick.
Sandy gravel, well cemented with iron oxide.
Greenish-grey sands, sandy shales, and gravels, rapidly alternating, totalling over 200 ft. in thickness, the strike gradually becoming east-north-east, and the dip flattening out from 30° to 10°.
Gravels, sandy and with occasional thin layers of sandy clay, lying flat or with slight dip to the south-east. These are at least 500 ft. thick, and are well exposed on the ridge between the western Grey and the stream near the White Rock Station.
The section in this river thus shows that there is a distinct series in which gravels are the dominant beds lying unconformably on marine Tertiaries. It should be noted that in the western branch there are no gravel beds below the unconformity. Either they have never been deposited or they have been removed by erosion. There is a strong suggestion from the eastern branch that gravel beds are present among the higher members of the underlying marine series, so that their presence cannot be taken as decided evidence that beds containing gravels in this locality necessarily belong to the Kowai series.
Okuku River and Mairaki Downs.
Similar gravels occur on the banks of the Okuku, especially on the western side, where they form low hills fringing the base of Mount Thomas, and stretching westward towards the Garry River and Glentui. Towards the Ashley they are masked by more-recent gravels, but they reappear on the south bank of the river, forming the Mairaki Downs. The strata here consist of thick sandy gravels, sandy clays, and occasional layers of carbonaceous shale. Opposite the mouth of the Garry they strike north-east and dip north-west at an angle of 20°, forming the south-eastern wing of a syncline which is developed farther west, while farther east, towards Rangiora, the structure is anticlinal. The country directly between the Mairaki and Mount Grey Downs is probably a syncline, but the surface is completely masked by recent gravels and clays belonging to the Ashley and Okuku Rivers and to the lower course of the Grey and Makerikeri Rivers, the latter draining a considerable area on the south-western flank of the Mount Grey Downs.
Kowai River, North Branch.
An excellent idea of the structure and general features of the northern part of the downs area can be obtained by examination of the high banks of the North Kowai, and especially of a tributary which rises in Mount Brown itself and flows in a south-easterly direction across the strike of the beds, thus exposing all the members of the series present in this locality. The following is a general description of the beds encountered, starting with the Mount Brown beds and following up to the highest members of the series:—
At the contact with the upper members of the Mount Brown series the latter consist of sands, and marine gravels with shells, striking north-east and dipping south-east at an angle of 10°. The Mount Brown beds are here capped unconformably with sandy gravels containing rounded and sub-angular greywacke pebbles, and belonging in all probability to the high-level terrace-gravels of the present Kowai River. Lower down sands, sandy clays, and sandy gravels dipping south-east at very low angles are exposed on the banks of the stream and in the deep gullies on the northern side. There is certainly a disagreement in dip between these beds and the underlying Mount Brown beds, suggesting an unconformity, but nowhere could I see an actual contact in order to determine this point precisely. The slight escarpment of the downs which faces Mount Brown at this point is determined by the presence of the gravel beds which occur at this horizon. It is noteworthy that there is an entire absence of the gravel beds with broken-shell layers which cover the Mount Brown beds in the vicinity of Weka Pass, a point which increases the probability that the beds forming the downs rest on the Mount Brown beds unconformably.
Farther down-stream the beds lie almost flat, with an east-south-east strike and a dip to the north-north-east at very low angles (less than 5°). On a high bluff a series of well-stratified sands and sandy gravels is exposed. Near the base of the cliff, under a sandy bed cemented in its lower part with iron oxide, lies a narrow band of sandy carbonaceous shale, 6 in. to 8 in. thick, containing pieces of lignified wood, and passing down into sandy clay with interstratified irregular lenses of lignite. Under these lie sands and sandy gravels, and then bluish-green and brown sands. A little below this the strike swings round to north-north-east, with an easterly dip, and in a narrow gully on the south side of the stream an interesting section is exposed. Here both the bluish-green sands and the sandy gravels have been eroded, and on the eroded surface have been deposited sands and sandy gravels containing fragments of the lower beds. A similar occurrence is to be observed on the face of a cliff in the main stream, the lower beds dipping 10° and the upper lying flat across them. A thin layer of broken-shell fragments was observed high up on the face of the cliff in an inaccessible position.
Higher in the series are rapidly alternating sands and fine sandy gravels, in layers down to 1 in. in thickness, and these are succeeded by sands, sandy-gravel beds, and bluish-grey and brown sands, the former with broken-shell layers. In the gravels are numerous fragments of limestone, which must have been derived from a surface of the Amuri limestone exposed to decided erosion. The fragments are generally less than 2 in. in length, but are sometimes longer, and are usually flattened like beach shingle. There is no doubt as to the interstratification of these beds in the series under consideration, as the same feature was observed in a deep gully to the north of the stream in its proper stratigraphical position. The presence of these fragments is positive proof of the presence of an unconformity between these beds and the Amuri limestone, and supports the stratigraphical evidence from the Grey River. In the bluish-green sands there are occasional shell-fragments.
For some distance below this spot there are no clear sections, but sand is probably the major constituent of the beds. At the junction with the Kowai River, however, there are high cliffs on the northern side, where the strata are clearly visible for half a mile. The lowest beds exposed in this locality are sands with interstratified gravels, in which limestone-fragments form a most important constituent. The beds with the limestone-fragments are at least 50 ft. thick, and may be thicker. Higher up the limestone constituent gets less and less, and the pebbles are entirely of greywacke. No other included material, such as fragments of Mount Brown limestone, was noted at this spot, which might indicate the date of the break between the Amuri limestone beds and those under consideration. It is possible that these gravel beds are unconformable to the greenish marine sands, since for some distance no exposures are visible which enable their relations to be precisely determined, and there is evidence from other parts of the area that these upper gravels are unconformable to greenish sands—e.g., in the Grey River (see p. 272) and also in No. 2 Creek (see p. 276). These gravel beds are fairly well stratified, with occasional beds of sandy clay and thin carbonaceous shales, their total thickness being about 1,000 ft., and the whole thickness of the series from the junction of the Mount Brown beds upward being about 1,500 ft., though this may include two series—viz., the Motunau and the Kowai series.
The course of the main stream above its junction with the tributary follows almost along the strike of the beds, so that the structure is not so well displayed. The beds exposed consist of marine sands, which are remarkably
current-bedded, and loose and cemented sandy gravels with numerous fossils similar to the beds exposed in the Lower Waipara Gorge. The highest bed of this series exposed in the valley of the stream consists of greenish sandy clay, which weathers a light brown, and contains fossil shells. Its upper surface has been distinctly eroded, and on it rests a heavy layer of cemented gravel, and following this are sandy clays and gravel beds dipping south-east at angles of 10°. These beds pass upward into the gravel beds exposed on the cliffs of the river below the junction with the tributary. In the tributary mentioned above I could find no indication of an eroded surface analogous to that in the main stream, and so it may be an unconformity of local character similar to those recorded elsewhere, but it may indicate a decided unconformity between the Motunau and the Kowai series.
It is owing to the typical development of these gravels and the beds associated with them in the Kowai River, not only in this locality but in the south branch as well, that I have called them the Kowai series. It is possible, however, that the lower part of this group of beds may be equivalent to the upper part of the Motunau series, and subsequent investigation may show the term to be unnecessary.
In No. 2 Creek, a southern tributary of the North Kowai, there is a very important section. Just below the high bluff on the north side, about four miles above the junction, the stream has exposed the following beds:—
Greenish sands, becoming more clayey in the upper portions and passing up into sandy shale.
Lignite, very impure, 10 in. thick, striking east-north-east and dipping north-north-west at 5°.
Argillaceous sands, decidedly clayey above the coal but becoming more sandy and greenish in colour higher up. The thickness exposed is about 6 ft., but it is eroded, and sandy gravels rest on it unconformably. An eroded surface appears just below this in the bed of the stream, with an angular mass of green sandy clay embedded in the gravel.
In close proximity to the erosion surface there is another section showing the same features, but with only 3 ft. of bed 3 interposed between the coal and the gravels.
Just over the dividing-ridge between this and the South Kowai River there are high cliffs, facing south, composed of similar beds, with gravels more strongly developed in the higher levels, and dipping south at angles about 5°. Thus an anticlinal axis runs east-north-east along the ridge in close proximity to the road which runs along the crest.
Just at the point where the stream turns after leaving the steeper slopes of Mount Grey, and assumes a north-easterly course, coal and associated beds are exposed in its actual channel and in the bank of a small gully on the southern side. They consist of—
Greenish sands, passing up into sandy clays.
Clays succeeded by greenish sandy clays.
Gravels, mixed with sand, cemented with iron oxide.
Greenish sandy clays.
These beds strike north-east, and dip north-west at an angle of 5°.
When followed up-stream there is an alternation of sands and gravels, apparently conformable to the beds just enumerated, exposed in the slips
on the river-banks; but the dip becomes steeper till, on the face of a high bluff below the bush, it reaches 20°. Here are alternating sandy clays and gravels, the former greenish-yellow in colour, which are capped unconformably by somewhat irregular sands and gravels, lying almost horizontally across the denuded edges of the lower set. The upper series evidently forms the distinct ridge which leads down-stream past the point where the undoubted unconformity described above was observed.
Similar beds are observed in places on the banks of the stream higher up, but the covering of bush and soil is too complete to attempt a correlation with those lower down. Owing to this covering it is likewise impossible to say whether the junction between the greywackes of Mount Grey is a simple unconformity or a fault contact.
Kowai River, South Branch.
The high banks of this river rise in places to a height of 500 ft. above its bed, frequently with precipitous faces, and thus excellent sections are exposed. The strata are also folded into gentle anticlines and synclines, so that in the cores of the former the lower beds are exposed. They consist of the following in ascending order:—
Sands with concretionary layers, with broken-shell beds in the lower part, at least 80 ft. thick.
Green sandy clays and gravel beds, the latter finer in grain and thicker in the lower part, and cemented with iron oxide.
At higher levels there are rapidly alternating gravel and sandy beds, the former composed of subangular pebbles, which point to deposit either on a land-surface or on a shore-line in close proximity to the source of supply. No limestone pebbles were seen in these beds. In places they exhibit intraformational unconformities, such as one would expect when rapid changes in the conditions of deposit take place, especially when the change is from a sand to a gravel, and vice versa. The gravel beds frequently form steep cliffs; and their hard bands determine the dividing-ridges between the tributary streams running into the main river, especially on the south side, and they also determine an important reach of the river itself, although its direction is primarily across the strike, and therefore of consequent character.
A specially good section is to be seen where the river makes a right-angle turn, and changes from the subsequent to the consequent direction. The beds are here bent up into a rather sharp anticline with a north-east strike and a dip to the north-west at an angle of 50°. On the seaward side of the anticlinal axis the dip is much less, the angle being about 10°, the succession being similar. But farther down-stream the strike swings round till it is north-north-east, then north-north-west, and finally north-west, following for a time the direction of the main river. This allows the lower members of the series to be exposed again in the bed and banks of the river. They consist here of sands and sandy clays, greenish-blue in colour and weathering brown, containing fossils, some of the sands with concretionary layers and associated with thin gravel beds. The shells consist of Siphonalia, Glycymeris, and Ostrea, but in a fragmentary condition.
Farther down-stream the greenish-blue beds are still exposed, but the strike gradually becomes north-east with a dip to the south-east, and gravel beds form the greater part of the high bluffs which face the river on the north above the Mount Grey Station.
Opposite the right-angle turn of the river referred to above, and immediately to the west of the axis of the anticline, there is distinct evidence of the presence of an unconformity between the gravels just referred to and a higher series. The beds here consist of sands and sandy gravels which are lithologically indistinguishable from the higher members of the lower series. On a bluff facing the river the beds in contact with the gravels of the lower series are exposed lying across their denuded edges at low angles, and immediately to the north-west they show a reversal of dip and are inclined to the south-east at angles of from 5° to 7°. This dip is in agreement with that which can be observed in sections in the upper basin of the Southern Kowai, and notably to the south of the anticline which runs to the south-east of No. 2 Creek and parallel with it. Thus there is evidence of an unconformity in the Southern Kowai in close proximity to that in the No. 2 Creek in the drainage area of the Northern Kowai.
It will be noted that the lowest members of the series present in the two branches of the Kowai consist of sandy beds with marine fossils, whereas these do not appear with certainty in the Grey River. The gravel beds are, however, equally developed in each area. This difference is perhaps of no special stratigraphical importance, since the gravel beds in both areas are undoubtedly marine, and in the Grey area conditions may not have been favourable for the preservation of fossil remains. As far as I can see at present, there is no evidence of a major unconformity between the gravel beds and the lower marine beds, although minor, intraformational unconformities undoubtedly exist. There is, however, distinct evidence of a discordance at a higher level in the Kowai series between beds of similar lithological character both above and below the unconformity, but not such a discordance as necessitates the higher beds being placed in another distinct series. The whole area and its vicinity no doubt experienced a fairly rapid elevation, probably of a differential character, so that erosion went on in one part of the area while deposition was continuous in an adjacent part. If subsequent deposition over the denuded area then ensued this special stratigraphical feature can be satisfactorily explained.
In Fox's Creek, the next stream south of the Kowai, there is an excellent section of the gravels forming the great mass of the downs area. This stream rises in the centre of the area and flows east, being bounded on the north for the middle part of its course by precipitous banks, in places up to 500 ft. in height above the stream. The beds here exposed consist of sandy gravels, sands, and sandy clays, with occasional thin, discontinuous layers of sandy carbonaceous shale. The sands are frequently blue-green in colour, and without fossils as far as I could see. In this part of the course of the stream the beds lie flat, with a slight dip to the north, but on the eastern margin of the downs the dip increases to 10° and its direction becomes south-east. In the adjacent valleys to the north and south there are similar beds with similar dip.
Lower Waipara Gorge.
Just where the river crosses the western end of the Limestone Range, beds of the Motunau series are exposed, consisting of marine sands, sandy clays, and sandy gravels frequently cemented with calcareous material and containing numerous fossil shells (Speight, 1912 and 1914). They are
involved in anticlines and synclines, and sometimes dip at steep angles—as high as 55° to 60°. They do not contain, as far as my observation goes, any limestone-fragments such as might have been shed from the Weka Pass or Amuri limestone beds, and this suggests that they are not unconformable to the beds containing those limestones, a conclusion which is supported by general stratigraphical evidence. These Motunau beds are capped unconformably by gravels containing numerous fragments of limestone, and from their lack of distinct stratification it may be concluded that they are high-level terrace-gravels of more recent date. Similar gravels occur on the downs just east of the Amberley—Waipara Railway, covering a considerable extent of country, as they are occasionally exposed in the sides of deep washouts and cap the cliffs cut by the river in making its gorge.
Along the north bank of the river below the Teviotdale Bridge there is also a series of Motunau beds, consisting of sands, sandy clays, and gravels, some of which are very fine and smooth and are evidently of marine origin. These beds contain fossil shells at various levels, which point to the age being Mio-Pliocene or Pliocene (Speight, 1914). On the south bank of the river the beds are much obscured by slip-material and vegetation, so that in no place is the contact clearly displayed. On the terrace near the mouth of the river the following section is exposed:—
Yellowish sands, exposed at river-level and for 6 ft. upwards.
Sandy lignite, with well-marked woody structure and containing crystals of gypsum in stellate and columnar groups, 4 ft. in thickness.
Sandy clay (fireclay?), with occasional pieces of bituminized wood.
Lignite, full of bituminized wood, 6–8 in.
Sand and sandy clay, with pieces of wood, 4 ft.
Gravel, 6 ft.
Farther up-stream the lignite-beds are exposed in similar stratigraphical position, succeeded by yellowish clays and sandy gravels, and at one place there is an exposure under the lignite of well-stratified and rounded marine shingle.
These beds all strike east-south-east and dip west-south-west at very flat angles, and it is impossible to tell on stratigraphical grounds whether the gravels overlying the lignites are conformable or not, or whether they belong to the Kowai series or to recent terrace-gravels. The locality furnishes evidence of the ease with which conformity may be simulated under certain circumstances. If level beds are planed by the sea, and no irregularity left on their being depressed and covered with a veneer of sediments, apparent conformity may occur over considerable distances, and especially will this be the case if the beds in contact are of a sandy or gravelly nature. A suggestion of unconformity is given in this case by the presence in the lowest layer of gravel of large pebbles, up to 8 in. in diameter, and more or less subangular, indicating strong currents on a land-surface or on a sea-bottom in close proximity to land, and that the beds were deposited under conditions entirely dissimilar from those obtaining when the better-rounded gravels were laid down.
Other Canterbury Localities.
There are other localities in this part of the South Island where similar gravels occur, among which may be cited the Isolated Hills in the Culverden
Basin; the cliffs at Gore Bay, where well-cemented gravels are involved in a syncline; the western side of the Trelissick Basin, specially in the Hog's Back Creek; between the Pudding Stone and the North Ashburton River; and in South Canterbury between the Tengawai and Pareora Rivers. It is probable, too, that the deeper gravels encountered in the bore at Chertsey belong to this series, the indications of petroleum coming from plant-remains which elsewhere have formed lignite.* Just below the Rakaia Gorge, where great thickness of gravels has been exposed, there is an underlying set of beds which are more strongly oxidized than the covering strata, and they may perhaps be assigned to a series older than the prevailing shingle beds of the plains. Although this criterion is perhaps an unsatisfactory one on which to base a determination of relative age, yet it has been applied in Switzerland in order to differentiate the gravels of the older glacial series of that region.
General Conclusions as to the Origin and Age of the Beds, and Relation to the Gravels of the Canterbury Plains.
The materials of which these gravels are composed have been derived almost entirely from original greywackes. No limestone was noted among them except in the case of the beds in the North Kowai. Occasional pebbles of basalt also occur, such as might have been derived from areas where such rocks are known to exist. A siliceous sandstone, white in colour and forming rounded masses, which could not be traced to its source, also occurs freely in the gravels of the Mount Grey district. These are perhaps masses of sandstone which have been loosely cemented by processes analogous to those which have formed the sarsen stones, or “Chinamen,” as they are called by miners, of the schist areas of Central Otago.
The subangular nature of the pebbles shows that the greywacke land must have been in close proximity to the area of deposit. The absence of large pebbles suggests that it was of moderate relief, though it might have been the outlying portion of a more elevated tract. The gravels contain, however, no suggestion of a glacial or fluvio-glacial origin; they are just such gravels as might have been brought down by the present Ashley or Waipara Rivers, which have no connection with glaciers. The origin of the limestone constituent can be traced exactly, as exposures of limestone of similar nature occur within a short distance of the area where they have been deposited; but these limestone pebbles occur low down in the series and disappear at higher levels, so that the uppermost beds must have been derived from areas where limestone does not exist. Although the lower members of the series are undoubtedly marine, the upper members were in all probability deposited under estuarine conditions or actually on a land-surface.
The determination of the age of the Kowai series is a matter of some difficulty. The unconformity in the Grey River shows that it is certainly post-Miocene, and in the Lower Waipara Gorge beds occur under the gravels with a fossil content which shows them to be upper Pliocene (Speight, 1914, p. 300)—that is, beds which form the upper part of the Motunau series. Therefore we may reasonably infer that the Kowai series is either upper Pliocene, if no unconformity exists between two sets of beds, or Pleistocene, if an unconformity is demonstrable. The Pliocene beds of the lower Waipara are perhaps the uppermost beds of a conformable Cretaceo-Tertiary series.
[Footnote] * Pieces of carbonized bark have recently been obtained from a depth of 1,900 ft. in this bore.
Therefore if an unconformity can be proved between the Kowai series and any member of the lower series it will be unconformable to all. As the presence of included fragments of limestone in the gravel beds of the Kowai demonstrates the existence of a clear unconformity between the gravels and the limestones, and the undoubted erosion-surface in the Grey River demonstrates the presence of one at a higher level still, we may therefore infer that the gravels of the Kowai series must be of Pleistocene age. If, however, the Cretaceo-Tertiary series is broken up eventually into subordinate unconformable elements, then this argument fails, and the matter will depend on the relation of the Kowai series to the fossiliferous marine beds of the lower Waipara and the Northern Kowai, as being the highest beds on which the Kowai series undoubtedly rests. The relation of the two sets of beds is somewhat obscure, though, judging from the evidence in the latter locality, probably unconformable. Therefore all that can be definitely stated is that the Kowai series overlies undoubted upper Pliocene beds and must be of a later age, and is most probably Pleistocene.
This must be earlier than the gravels forming the Canterbury Plains, for these have suffered no deformation by folding movements, whereas the gravels of the Kowai series are at times folded somewhat acutely. They would therefore antedate the last period of glaciation to which the region had been subjected.
A point which bears on the conformity of the Tertiary sequence should be noted—viz., that in neither of the two branches of the Grey River are the typical Mount Brown beds developed, thus suggesting an unconformity between the Motunau series, or the Kowai series, and the Mount Brown beds in case the absence is due to erosion, or between the Mount Brown beds and the “grey marls” in case the overlying beds, together with the Mount Brown beds, are part of a conformable series. As there appears to be no evidence of unconformity between the Mount Brown beds and the “grey marls” in the typical locality, whereas there is some evidence of an unconformity between the Motunau series and the Mount Brown beds, it seems more likely that the absence of the Mount Brown facies in the Grey River is due to erosion of these beds after deposition. This, however, is a point which requires further investigation.
Haast, J. von, 1879. Geology of Canterbury and Westland.
Hutton, F. W., 1877. Rep. Geol. Explor. during 1873–74, pp. 27–58.
— 1885. Sketch of the Geology of New Zealand, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., vol. 41, pp. 191–220.
McKay, A., 1877. Rep. Geol. Explor. during 1874–76, pp. 172–84.
Park, J., 1910. The Geology of New Zealand, Whitcombe and Tombs, Christchurch.
Speight, R., 1912. A Preliminary Account of the Lower Waipara Gorge, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. 44, pp. 221–33.
— 1914. Additions to the List of Fossils from the Lower Waipara, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. 46, p. 300.
— 1918. Structural and Glacial Features of the Hurunui Valley, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. 50, pp. 93–105.
Speight, R., and Wild, L. J., 1918. The Stratigraphical Relationship of the Weka Pass Stone and the Amuri Limestone, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. 50, pp. 65–93.
Thomson, J. A., 1917. Diastrophic and other Considerations in Classification and Correlation, and the Existence of Minor Diastrophic Districts in the Notocene, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. 49, pp. 397–413.

Researchers in Britain have developed a drug they say could revolutionize the effectiveness of radiation on cancer. Radiotherapy is used to destroy cancer cells by zapping their DNA, thus disrupting their ability to function and reproduce. But like other cells in the body, cancer cells have a sort of DNA repair kit that can minimize these effects. The new drug disables the DNA repair process and allows radiotherapy to target tumors with “deadly accuracy.”
From Newcastle University:
New drug could help target cancer cells with deadly accuracy
A new drug that could revolutionise the impact of radiotherapy on cancer and make treatment much more effective, has been developed by Cancer Research UK scientists at Newcastle University.
The drug, developed by the charity’s clinical unit at the University, has been designed to destroy the protection enjoyed by cancer cells.
Radiotherapy kills cancer cells by causing damage to DNA. But the DNA damage repair kit ? the body’s Sir Lancelot which is present in all cells ? rides to the rescue of the beleaguered cells and can get in the way of effective treatment.
The new drug will, in turn, disable the DNA repair process and allow radiotherapy to target tumours with deadly accuracy, according to research leader Professor Hilary Calvert, speaking at Cancer Research UK’s first annual conference in Kenilworth, Warwickshire.
Professor Calvert explains: ‘Our DNA is damaged all the time during life’s daily routine. One cell sustains about 30,000 incidents of DNA damage every day through the oxygen and chemicals circulating in the body. Therefore the DNA damage repair process is invaluable and keeps us from dissolving into a blob of jelly.’
But the downside of this is that the DNA repair kit also comes to the rescue of cancer cells when they are under attack. This has led scientists to search for a weapon to prevent the repair kit from working on tumours.
The most promising prospect in the armoury is a class of drugs known as PARP inhibitors which block the action of DNA repair enzymes called PARPs*. In pre-clinical studies researchers have found that these drugs are highly effective at sensitising cancer cells to radiotherapy.
Professor Calvert says that one of the problems with radiotherapy ? which is the most common way of treating cancer apart from surgery ? is that the dose needed to kill large tumours is often too toxic to be sustained by the body.
‘We have been trying to find something to make tumours more sensitive to radiotherapy. And we hope the PARP inhibitor will prove an effective radiosensitizer which would be a huge benefit to cancer patients.
‘Clinical trials of radiosensitizers have always posed a particularly difficult problem of design because we have to ensure that they are not increasing any side effects to normal tissue,’ he says. ‘Many of the side-effects of radiotherapy are very late and can occur many months or years after the original treatment.’
Professor Robert Souhami, Director of Clinical Research for Cancer Research UK, says: ‘The development and production of the PARP inhibitors mean we have a potentially very exciting new approach to cancer treatment.
‘But there is still much work to be done. We hope clinical trials will start soon but these would take several years to complete before any drug could be licensed for general use.’

Forgetfulness: Knowing when to Ask for Help
Maria has been a teacher for 35 years. Teaching fills her life and gives her a sense of accomplishment, but recently she has begun to forget details and has become more and more disorganized. At first, she laughed it off, but her memory problems have worsened. Her family and friends have been sympathetic but are not sure what to do. Parents and school administrators are worried about Maria's performance in the classroom. The principal has suggested she see a doctor. Maria is angry with herself and frustrated, and she wonders whether these problems are signs of Alzheimer's disease or just forgetfulness that comes with getting older.
Many people worry about becoming forgetful. They think forgetfulness is the first sign of Alzheimer's disease. Over the past few years, scientists have learned a lot about memory and why some kinds of memory problems are serious but others are not.
Age-related changes in memory
Forgetfulness can be a normal part of aging. As people get older, changes occur in all parts of the body, including the brain. As a result, some people may notice that it takes longer to learn new things, they don't remember information as well as they did, or they lose things like their glasses. These usually are signs of mild forgetfulness, not serious memory problems.
Some older adults also find that they don't do as well as younger people on complex memory or learning tests. Scientists have found, though, that given enough time, healthy older people can do as well as younger people do on these tests. In fact, as they age, healthy adults usually improve in areas of mental ability such as vocabulary.
Keeping your memory sharp
People with some forgetfulness can use a variety of techniques that may help them stay healthy and maintain their memory and mental skills. Here are some tips that can help:
Other causes of memory loss
Some memory problems are related to health issues that may be treatable. For example, medication side effects, vitamin B12 deficiency, chronic alcoholism, tumors or infections in the brain, or blood clots in the brain can cause memory loss or possibly dementia (see more on dementia, below). Some thyroid, kidney, or liver disorders also can lead to memory loss. A doctor should treat serious medical conditions like these as soon as possible.
Emotional problems, such as stress, anxiety, or depression, can make a person more forgetful and can be mistaken for dementia. For instance, someone who has recently retired or who is coping with the death of a spouse, relative, or friend may feel sad, lonely, worried, or bored. Trying to deal with these life changes leaves some people confused or forgetful.
The confusion and forgetfulness caused by emotions usually are temporary and go away when the feelings fade. The emotional problems can be eased by supportive friends and family, but if these feelings last for a long time, it is important to get help from a doctor or counselor. Treatment may include counseling, medication, or both.
More serious memory problems
For some older people, memory problems are a sign of a serious problem, such as mild cognitive impairment or dementia. People who are worried about memory problems should see a doctor. The doctor might conduct or order a thorough physical and mental health evaluation to reach a diagnosis. Often, these evaluations are conducted by a neurologist, a physician who specializes in problems related to the brain and central nervous system.
A complete medical exam for memory loss should review the person's medical history, including the use of prescription and over-the-counter medicines, diet, past medical problems, and general health. A correct diagnosis depends on accurate details, so in addition to talking with the patient, the doctor might ask a family member, caregiver, or close friend for information.
Blood and urine tests can help the doctor find the cause of the memory problems or dementia. The doctor also might do tests for memory loss and test the person's problem-solving and language abilities. A computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan may help rule out some causes of the memory problems.
Amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Some people with memory problems have a condition called amnestic mild cognitive impairment, or amnestic MCI. People with this condition have more memory problems than normal for people their age, but their symptoms are not as severe as those of Alzheimer's disease, and they are able to carry out their normal daily activities.
Signs of MCI include misplacing things often, forgetting to go to important events and appointments, and having trouble coming up with desired words. Family and friends may notice memory lapses, and the person with MCI may worry about losing his or her memory. These worries may prompt the person to see a doctor for diagnosis.
Researchers have found that more people with MCI than those without it go on to develop Alzheimer's within a certain timeframe. However, not everyone who has MCI develops AD. Studies are underway to learn why some people with MCI progress to AD and others do not.
There currently is no standard treatment for MCI. Typically, the doctor will regularly monitor and test a person diagnosed with MCI to detect any changes in memory and thinking skills over time. There are no medications approved for use for MCI.
Dementia. Dementia is the loss of thinking, memory, and reasoning skills to such an extent that it seriously affects a person's ability to carry out daily activities. Dementia is not a disease itself but a group of symptoms caused by certain diseases or conditions such as AD. People with dementia lose their mental abilities at different rates.
Symptoms may include:
Two of the most common forms of dementia in older people are Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. These types of dementia cannot be cured at present.
In Alzheimer's disease, changes to nerve cells in certain parts of the brain result in the death of a large number of cells. Symptoms of Alzheimer's disease begin slowly and worsen steadily as damage to nerve cells spreads throughout the brain. As time goes by, forgetfulness gives way to serious problems with thinking, judgment, recognizing family and friends, and the ability to perform daily activities like driving a car or handling money. Eventually, the person needs total care.
In vascular dementia, a series of strokes or changes in the brain's blood supply leads to the death of brain tissue. Symptoms of vascular dementia can vary but usually begin suddenly, depending on where in the brain the strokes occurred and how severe they were. The person's memory, language, reasoning, and coordination may be affected. Mood and personality changes are common as well.
It's not possible to reverse damage already caused by a stroke, so it's very important to get medical care right away if someone has signs of a stroke. It's also important to take steps to prevent further strokes, which worsen vascular dementia symptoms. Some people have both Alzheimer's and vascular dementia.
Treatment for dementia
A person with dementia should be under a doctor's care. The doctor might be a neurologist, family doctor, internist, geriatrician, or psychiatrist. He or she can treat the patient's physical and behavioral problems (such as aggression, agitation, or wandering) and answer the many questions that the person or family may have.
People with dementia caused by Alzheimer's disease may be treated with medications. Four medications are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat Alzheimer's disease. Donepezil (Aricept®), rivastigmine (Exelon®), and galantamine (Razadyne®) are used to treat mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (donepezil has been approved to treat severe Alzheimer's disease as well). Memantine (Namenda®) is used to treat moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. These drugs may help maintain thinking, memory, and speaking skills, and may lessen certain behavioral problems for a few months to a few years in some people. However, they dont stop Alzheimer's disease from progressing. Studies are underway to investigate medications to slow cognitive decline and to prevent the development of Alzheimer's disease.
People with vascular dementia should take steps to prevent further strokes. These steps include controlling high blood pressure, monitoring and treating high blood cholesterol and diabetes, and not smoking. Studies are underway to develop medicines to reduce the severity of memory and thinking problems that come with vascular dementia. Other studies are looking at the effects of drugs to relieve certain symptoms of this type of dementia.
Family members and friends can help people in the early stages of dementia to continue their daily routines, physical activities, and social contacts. People with dementia should be kept up-to-date about the details of their lives, such as the time of day, where they live, and what is happening at home or in the world. Memory aids may help. Some families find that a big calendar, a list of daily plans, notes about simple safety measures, and written directions describing how to use common household items are useful aids.
What you can do
If you're concerned that you or someone you know has a serious memory problem, talk with your doctor. He or she may be able to diagnose the problem or refer you to a specialist in neurology or geriatric psychiatry. Health care professionals who specialize in Alzheimer's can recommend ways to manage the problem or suggest treatment or services that might help. More information is available from the organizations listed below.
People with Alzheimer's disease, MCI, or a family history of Alzheimer's disease, and healthy people with no memory problems and no family history of Alzheimer's disease may be able to take part in clinical trials. Participating in clinical trials is an effective way to help in the fight against Alzheimers. To find out more about clinical trials, call the Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center toll-free at 1-800-438-4380 or visit the ADEAR Center website at www.nia.nih.gov/Alzheimers. More information is available at www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
For more information
Here are some helpful resources:
Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center
P.O. Box 8250
Silver Spring, MD 20907-8250
The National Institute on Aging's ADEAR Center offers information and publications in English and Spanish for families, caregivers and professionals on diagnosis, treatment, patient care, caregiver needs, long-term care, education and training, and research related to Alzheimer's disease.
225 North Michigan Avenue, Floor 17
Chicago, IL 60601-7633
National Library of Medicine
For more information on health and aging, contact:
Visit NIHSeniorHealth (www.nihseniorhealth.gov), a senior-friendly website from the National Institute on Aging and the National Library of Medicine. This website has health information for older adults. Special features make it simple to use. For example, you can click on a button to have the text read out loud or to make the type larger.
National Institute on Aging
National Institutes of Health
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Page last updated March 29, 2010

|Skip Navigation Links|
|Exit Print View|
|Oracle Solaris Administration: ZFS File Systems Oracle Solaris 11 Information Library|
This chapter provides step-by-step instructions on setting up a basic Oracle Solaris ZFS configuration. By the end of this chapter, you will have a basic understanding of how the ZFS commands work, and should be able to create a basic pool and file systems. This chapter does not provide a comprehensive overview and refers to later chapters for more detailed information.
The following sections are provided in this chapter:

Machu Picchu, Peru
Everything about Machu Picchu makes you marvel that it ever came to exist. The lost city of the Incas is built on a saddle-shaped ridge slung between two giant peaks. Near-vertical slopes drop away on either side, down to a massive bend in the Urubamba River. What could have motivated the Incas to undertake such a construction at this remote location in the Andean cordillera? Machu Picchu, built over 700 years ago and hidden by jungle since the 16th century, was rediscovered in 1911. It consists of about 200 buildings, which include dwellings and temples, a central plaza and a royal palace, all flanked by terraces for farming.
The stone for the buildings was mined from a quarry and shaped using bronze tools, then smoothed with sand in order to fit tightly together. No mortar was used in the construction. Even after many centuries of wear and tear, the precision is amazing; It would be impossible to slide a piece of paper between many of the blocks. Machu Picchu is notable for the way that existing rock features were incorporated into the design. Inevitably the craftsmanship on sacred buildings is the finest. For spectacular views, make the steep climb up to Wayna Picchu, the mountain behind Machu Picchu. Alternatively, climb to the top of the less crowded Machu Picchu peak, which catches the first rays of the rising sun. Both mountains overlook the entire site, down to the river below, which puts the Incas· great achievement of construction into perspective.
The Incas worshipped the sun god Inti, so the summer solstice was the most important day in their calendar, and the Temple of the Sun their most important building. In fact, all their temples and sacred sites were designed to mark solar and astrological events. A stone, Intihuatana ('Hitching Post of the Sun'), is the focus of a major religious site where a ritual was performed, in the shortening days before the winter solstice, to prevent the sun disappearing. Similar stones were at other Inca sites, but were damaged or destroyed by Spanish conquistadores. The one at Machu Picchu survived because the site was never discovered. The population of Machu Picchu is believed to have numbered over a thousand, and the people were so distant from other settlements that they would have produced much of their own food. This accounts for the intricately terraced fields, which have survived remarkably intact thanks to the care and skill that went into their construction. Maize and potatoes were grown, and advanced irrigation techniques were used to ensure that rainwater didn't just run off down the hill to the Urubamba River far below.
No-one knows for sure why Machu Picchu was built. Some surmise that it was a royal or religious retreat for one of the Inca rulers. Certainly its remote location and altitude of nearly 2500 metres would seem to rule out any trade or military function. Whatever its use, the obvious effort that went into its construction indicates that it was considered important and held in high regard by those who created it.
All trips to Machu Picchu begin and end in Cuzco. The train journey from Cuzco to Aguas Calientes, the town in the river valley below the ruins, takes four hours. Buses go to and from the town to the ruins from 6 am until 5.30 pm. The trains from Cuzco arrive mid-morning and leave late in the afternoon, so the least crowded times at the

Prizes and Celebrations in Brazil
UNESCO Brasilia Office usually promotes national events in partnership with various organizations to celebrate the International Days, Years and Decades proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations in order to mark important aspects of human life and history. The Office and its partners also promote national or international prizes in the areas of UNESCO mandate.
List of Prizes, Celebrations and Campaigns
Originally called MERCOSUR Prize for Young Researchers, the Award was created by the Specialized Meeting on Science and Technology of MERCOSUR - RECyT in 1998. Since the 2004 Call, the Award has had the partnership of UNESCO and has changed its title to MERCOSUR Science and Technology Award, comprising two categories: “Young Researchers”, up to 35 years old, and “Integration”, for a team of researchers with no limit of age, involving at least two member countries.
The annual context is organized by UNESCO in Brazil and partnerships in celebration of the World Science Day for Peace and Development, established by the United Nations in 2001 and celebrated every year on November 10. Each year, the context has an specific theme. All secondary education students in Brazil can participate in the context by sending their written works and/or drawings on the theme.
09.04.12 UNESCO International Prizes
UNESCO promotes international prizes to reward international outstanding efforts made in the themes of UNESCO's mandate: Education, Natural Sciences, Social and Human Sciences, Culture, Communication and Information, and Peace.
09.04.12 United Nations International Days
The United Nations General Assembly designates a number of "International Days" to mark important aspects of human life and history. UNESCO, in particular, observes the following:
09.04.12 United Nations International Years
UNESCO participates in the celebration of the following International Years proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations:
09.04.12 United Nations International Decades
UNESCO participates in the celebration of the following International Decades proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations:
UNESCO Director-General, Irina Bokova, has designated the Brazilian Dominican friar Frei Betto as laureate of the 2013 UNESCO/José Martí Prize for his exceptional contribution to building a universal culture of peace, social justice and human rights in Latin America and the Caribbean.
UNESCO Brasilia Office Director, Lucien Muñoz, sent a letter to the Brazilian Dominican friar, Frei Betto, congratulating him for receiving the José Martí 2013 Award for his decisive contribution to a culture of peace, justice and respect to human rights in Latin America.

Undated (WXOW) - In 2009, the US Preventative Task force recommended against breast cancer screening for women aged 40 to 49.
It said the risks outweigh the small potential benefit in younger women, but a new study in the "Annals of Internal Medicine" says these women would benefit from screening the latest turn in the see-saw debate over detecting breast cancer.
The study says screening is helpful for women with a two-fold increase in such risk factors as: having dense breasts, a family history of breast cancer and having had hormone replacement therapy.
The authors acknowledge that false positives can cause needless procedures and increased anxiety, but they say false positives can be reduced by focusing on high-risk patients and using regular instead of digital mammogram's.
All content © Copyright 2000 - 2013 WorldNow and WXOW. All Rights Reserved.
Persons with disabilities who need assistance with issues relating to the content of this station's public inspection file should contact Administrative Assistant Theresa Wopat at 507-895-9969. Questions or concerns relating to the accessibility of the FCC's online public file system should be directed to the FCC at 888-225-5322, at 888-835-5322 (TTY) or at email@example.com.

Portrait of Katherine Parr, Queen of England (1512-1548)
English School, Late Sixteenth Century
“As the famous rhyme suggests, Katherine Parr’s record as the last of Henry VIII’s six wives was unique. She survived.”
Oil on panel
21¼ x 15¾ inches, 54 x 40 cm
Possibly William Bryant, sale at Edward Foster’s, London, 15th May 1823 as ‘Holbein’
Archibald Alexander Leslie Melville, 13th Earl of Leven and 12th Earl of Melville
by whom sold, Robinson and Fisher, 29th November 1934 lot 107, as ‘Holbein’
Anon sale Christies London 9th June 1944, Lot 14
1967 J Gold Coll.
Anon Sale Sothebys London 11th July 1983 (lot 37)
English Private Collection
Katherine Parr, by Susan E. James (London 1999) p 421 fig 30, as showing the Queen c. 1546;
Ian Tyers, Dendrochronoligical Survey, 2005;
Inscribed at top, Catharina Regina Uxor Henrici VIII
As the famous rhyme suggests, Katherine Parr’s record as the last of Henry VIII’s six wives was unique. She survived. Though Anne of Cleves, the sad ‘Flanders Mare’ unable to arouse England’s most insatiable monarch, lived on until 1557 it is only Katherine who was neither divorced, beheaded, or died. She was by any standards a remarkable woman: beautiful enough to marry the King of England, despite having neither royal nor court background; shrewd enough to remain his Queen, despite court plots and an attempt on her life; and courageous enough to sustain the Protestant cause, despite Henry’s latent sympathies for the Roman faith. She was Regent of England during Henry’s invasion of France in 1544. And with her publication of religious works such as Prayers or Meditations in 1545, she became not only the first English Queen to publish a work of prose, but the first woman to do so in the sixteenth century.
Katherine became Queen of England in July 1543. Henry was her third husband, but, on this occasion, not her first choice. She had instead fallen in love with the dashing courtier Thomas Seymour, and was understandably wary of Henry’s past form when it came to marital relations. Five wives had failed – what chance did a sixth have of success? Nonetheless, to turn down the King’s offer of marriage was unthinkable. Katherine, a deeply devout woman, determined that if she was to be Queen, she would be Queen with a purpose. That purpose was to further the cause of the Protestant Reformation.
In doing so Katherine, literally, risked her life. Never afraid to exercise her sharp mind, Katherine had become accustomed to discussing religion with Henry VIII. Though this was at first welcomed by the King, the conservative factions of court and church were terrified of any radical words whispered into the Royal ear - that after all was how Anne Boleyn had first led Henry towards Lutheranism. To conservatives like Bishop Gardiner and Chancellor Wriothesley the answer seemed obvious – Katherine should meet the same fate as Anne. At first, Henry, increasingly irascible from ulcerated legs, indicated that Katherine’s days were numbered. An arrest warrant was drawn up, and, amid rumours of ‘a new queen’, arrest could only have been followed by death. But Katherine succeeded in persuading Henry of her good faith and innocent naivety. “Is it even so, Sweetheart?”, said the King, “Then perfect friends we are now again…”[i] Thus did Tudor Royalty kiss and make up.
Katherine’s victory checked any conservative renaissance in the final years of the King’s reign. From now all eyes turned to the future (Protestant) reign of Edward VI. Here, Katherine appears to have been less successful, and for once followed her heart rather than her head. With ill-considered haste, she took Thomas Seymour as her lover within weeks of Henry’s death in 1547, and married him just months later. In doing so she lost any chance she may have had in exercising power during Edward’s minority. And yet, perhaps her final and most enduring success was yet to come, for in helping to restore the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession she had extended the Tudor dynasty by half a century. Katherine died after giving birth to a daughter in 1548.
The iconography of Katherine Parr is of particular interest. It is ironic that so few portraits of the Queen appear to survive, given that she was the foremost patron of portraiture in mid-Tudor England. There are several reasons why the Queen liked portraiture, not least because she evidently liked art. But perhaps the most intriguing reason may lie in Henry VIII’s habit (undoubtedly annoying to Catherine) of repeatedly portraying himself with Jane Seymour. Was Katherine’s jealousy manifested in art? Was her decision to commission the first full-length portraits of Elizabeth and Mary as Princesses, part of her desire to elevate them from illegitimate bastards to heirs of the English crown? Whatever the reasons, her legacy to the advancement of English portraiture cannot be doubted.
There are five recorded certainly known portraits of Katherine Parr that survive. The first is a miniature formerly in the collection of Horace Walpole (now at Sudeley Castle), which is probably by Lucas Hornebolt. The second and third, in the National Portrait Gallery, are a full-length (once erroneously called Lady Jane Grey) by Master John, and a half-length by an unknown artist. A fourth (Lambeth Palace) shows a young Katherine in the 1530s. And now the present example represents a fifth, and shows the Queen towards the end of her life.
And yet, Katherine’s own records show that she commissioned at least more than a dozen portraits of herself; “give me one of your small pictures”, her fourth husband Thomas Seymour wrote, “if ye have any left…”[ii] The contrast between Katherine’s commissions and those extant portraits gives a useful indication of how little survives from the sixteenth century – in this case less than a third. The Queen’s chamber accounts show that John Bettes the Elder painted up to seven miniatures – none survive – and nor apparently do any other miniatures by Hornebolt, aside from the possible Sudeley example.
Records also show that Katherine was painted by Hans Eworth, the Dutch artist considered the closest thing to Holbein’s heir[iii]. Such patronage was an indication of Katherine’s desire to support the new, for Eworth had only arrived in England c.1543. His earliest known work is dated 1549. The almost enamel-like flesh tones and bright colouring of the cheeks in this portrait, together with the distinctive modeling of the eyes, may suggest that the artist of this picture was influenced in some way by Eworth’s now lost original. The accomplished handling of the detail in Katherine’s out-turned collar, and the delicate portrayal of her hair, is also reminiscent of Eworth’s Mary Neville, Lady Dacre (National Gallery of Canada). That the jewelry Katherine wears in this portrait is similar to that recorded in her inventories, not to mention the intelligent depiction of Katherine’s slight physique, further suggests that it is based on a contemporary ad vivum example.

Margaret Woodrow Wilson, the daughter of President at the time Thomas Woodrow Wilson, singing the U.S. national anthem “Star Spangled Banner” in 1915. After her mother’s death in 1914 Margaret served as the First Lady of the United States until her father’s second marriage in 1915. She would go on to make several recordings around 1918. In 1938 she travelled to the ashram of Sri Aurobindo in Pondicherry, India where she chose to stay for the rest of her life. She was later known in the Sri Aurobindo Ashram as ‘Nistha’ (Sanskrit for “sincerity”). In 1942, she and the scholar Joseph Campbell edited the English translation of the classical work on the Hindu mystic, Sri Ramakrishna, The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna by Swami Nikhilananda, which was published in 1942. She was to die two years later, 6 years after entering the ashram, of a kidney infection aged 57. (Wikipedia)
The lyrics of the “The Star-Spangled Banner” come from “Defence of Fort McHenry”, a poem written in 1814 by the 35-year-old lawyer and amateur poet, Francis Scott Key, after he witnessed the bombardment of Fort McHenry by the British Royal Navy ships in Chesapeake Bay 200 years ago this year in the War of 1812. The image above shows the U.S. flag flying above Fort McHenry in 1914. (Wikipedia)
Internet Archive Link
Please note while this recording is in the public domain in the Eurozone, it may not be in other jurisdictions (e.g. the US). Please check its status in your jurisdiction before re-using.
HELP TO KEEP US AFLOAT
The Public Domain Review is a not-for-profit project and we rely on support from our readers to stay afloat. If you like what we do then please do consider making a donation. We welcome all contributions, big or small - everything helps!
Become a Patron
Make a one off Donation
SIGN UP TO THE NEWSLETTER
Sign up to get our free fortnightly newsletter which shall deliver direct to your inbox the latest brand new article and a digest of the most recent collection items. Simply add your details to the form below and click the link you receive via email to confirm your subscription!

Life in our towns in the Middle Ages is the main subject of our work. We want to look at it from all points of views, like: history, music, clothing food, law, traditions, markets, churches, building houses, medicine.....
- Subjects: Art, Cross Curricular, Design and Technology, Foreign Languages, Geography, History, Media Education, Music, Special Needs Education
- Languages: DE - EN
- Pupil's age: 7 - 16
- Tools to be used: Audio conference, Chat, e-mail, Forum, Other software (Powerpoint, video, pictures and drawings), Video conference, Web publishing
- Aims: The aim of this project is to get to know the history of the Middle Ages in the hometown, area,... read more
- Work process: Life, traditions, music, food, markets, clothes, building houses, churches, law, medicine in the Middle Ages in my town, area, country.
Each... read more
- Expected results: Historical competence about the Middle Ages beginning in the home town, area, country and learning about the same historical time... read more

Requests: If you need specific information on this remedy - e.g. a proving or a case info on toxicology or whatsoever, please post a message in the Request area www.homeovision.org/forum/ so that all users may contribute.
The opium poppy is indigenous to Asia Minor, and awareness of the euphoriant effect of some part of the poppy plant is implicit in the Sumerian records of 4000 BC. Clear accounts exist of its use in the Egyptian, Greek, and Roman cultures. Paracelsus was aware of its usefulness and prepared the first tincture of opium, called laudanum, subsequently simplified by Sydenham.
Friedrich Sertürner (1783-1841) isolated morphine from opium and demonstrated for the first time that a single purified chemical substance could account for the pharmacological effects of a natural product. Sertürner, a reluctant apprentice to a pharmacist in Prussia, was disturbed by the variable potency of available opium preparations and set out to purify and standardize it. Working at a time when neither experimental pharmacology nor the chemistr of natural products were recognized fields of endeavor, Sertürner succeeded in isolating morphine from opium. Using a bioassay in dogs, he established that morphine, as he named the alkaline substance, was the somnifacient principle in opium. His early reports 1803 were either rejected by editors or ignored after publication. He eventually tested his purified preparation on himself and 3 friends, administering 3 doses of 30mg in 45 minutes and observing vomiting, flush, and near coma. This work was finally published in 1817 and attracted the interest of the influential French chemist Gay-Lussac. The work of Sertürner influenced Pelletier and Caventou, and in the same year other pure principles from plant sources were successfully isolated.
The addicting properties of opium have also been important in its history. In China, opium was used only in the treatment of dysentery until the mid-1700s. The English, Portuguese, and Dutch built up a large trade supplying opium to China, and addiction had become so much of a problem by the early 1800s, that the Chinese government acted to bar the importation of opium and reduce the amount of opium-smoking. These acts precipitated a 3-year war terminated by the treaty of Nanking 1842, which gave England Hong-Kong, opened 5 ports to English traders, and specifically authorized continued trade in opium.
The risk of addiction was probably underestimated in the West for some time thereafter. Opium and morphine were widely prescribed and easily available in many patent medicines. Misuse was common until about 1920, but the predominant pattern was one of oral use. Since the laws were changed at that time, the number of people involved has become comparatively small but the narcotic is injected.
Morphine and other naturally occurring narcotics are isolated from opium.
Opium is collected from only one variety of poppy, Papaver somniferum. A few days after the petals fall, the unripe, still succulent seed pod is lighthly incised. A day later the sticky brown gum that has collected is scraped from the surface of the pod. As much as 25% of this crude opium may be made up ofalkaloids. The content of morphine varies from 9 to 14% and is adjusted to 10% in the standardized preparations.
The legal production of opium is regulated by the United Nations. India, Turkey, and Russia are the largest producers of opium from which morphine and other alkaloids are isolated. Morphine is used as such, however, a larger amount is converted chemically into codeine, which occurs in opium in amounts insufficient to meet the needs of medicine.
The illegal production of opium is huge. The large amounts of opium still used in the Orient are produced mostly in Southeast Asia. For many years, the illegal heroin that reached the USA originated as opium in Turkey. Mexican opium is now the primary source of heroin, with smaller contributions from the Orient and Iran.

In my line of work, I get asked the question a lot “What exactly IS a gifted child?” There are a lot of misconceptions and misdiagnoses surrounding this issue. I like to refer to the following two lists that I’ve adapted from College Planning for Gifted Students: Choosing And Getting into the Right College by Sandra Berger, who articulates the myths and truths of this topic very well.
Some common myths about gifted children:
- They are all high achievers and super smart.
- They do not need help and are self-contained.
- They have fewer problems because they are superior to others mentally.
- The future of a gifted student is guaranteed to go well and they will succeed at anything they try.
- They are disciplined and self disciplined.
- They develop socially and emotionally at the same rate as their intellect.
- They are outcasts and loners.
- Their greatest asset is their smarts.
- The gifted student's family always champions and supports them completely.
- They need to be leaders for others and assume that position as part of their lives.
- They are naturally creative and do not need much instruction.
- They are well behaved and role models.
Some truths about gifted children:
- They are often perfectionists who see their academic achievements in direct correlation to their self-esteem.
- They can place unreal expectations on themselves to do well and feel personally responsible as failures if they don’t reach those expectations.
- Their chronological age, social, physical, emotional, and intellectual development may all be at different levels at any given time.
- Some of them are "mappers" (sequential learners), while others are "leapers" (spatial learners).
- They may always be steps ahead of their classmates and peers, causing them to grow bored within the school setting.
- They are problem solvers and sometimes have trouble being in the academic environment where curriculum is so structured and predictable.
- They often think abstractly, which oftentimes makes studying and test taking difficult for them even though they may know the material.
Dr. Dan Peters, Ph.D., is co-founder of the Summit Center (http://summitcenter.us/), which provides psychological and educational assessments and counseling for children and adolescents, specializing in the gifted, creative, and twice-exceptional.

Issued in Shanghai, February 28, 1972
President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from February 21 to February 28, 1972. Accompanying the President were Mrs. Nixon, U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers, Assistant to the President Dr. Henry Kissinger, and other American officials.
President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tsetung of the Communist Party of China on February 21. The two leaders had a serious and frank exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.
During the visit, extensive, earnest and frank discussions were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides. In addition, Secretary of State William Rogers and Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei held talks in the same spirit.
President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured Hangchow and Shanghai where, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, they viewed similar places of interest.
The leaders of the People's Republic of China and the United States of America found it beneficial to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact, to present candidly to one another their views on a variety of issues. They reviewed the international situation in which important changes and great upheavals are taking place and expounded their respective positions and attitudes.
The Chinese side stated: Wherever there is oppression there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want revolution-this has become the irresistible trend of history. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. The Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation and that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and the right to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries. The Chinese side expressed its firm support to the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia in their efforts for the attainment of their goal and its firm support to the seven-point proposal of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the elaboration of February this year on the two key problems in the proposal, and to the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples. It firmly supports the eight-point program for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971, and the stand for the abolition of the "U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea". It firmly opposes the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism and firmly supports the Japanese people's desire to build an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan. It firmly maintains that India and Pakistan should, in accordance with the United Nations resolutions on the India-Pakistan question, immediately withdraw all their forces to their respective territories and to their own sides of the ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmir and firmly supports the Pakistan Government and people in their struggle to preserve their independence and sovereignty and the people of Jammu and Kashmir in their struggle for the right of self-determination.
The U.S. side stated: Peace in Asia and peace in the world requires efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The United States will work for a just and secure peace; just, because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress; secure, because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The United States supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The United States believes that the effort to reduce tensions is served by improving communication between countries that have different ideologies so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation or misunderstanding. Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and be willing to compete peacefully, letting performance be the ultimate judge. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to reexamine its own attitudes for the common good. The United States stressed that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; the eight-point proposal put forward by the Republic of Viet Nam and the United States on January 27, 1972 represents a basis for the attainment of that objective; in the absence of a negotiated settlement, the United States envisages the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of self-determination for each country of Indochina. The United States will maintain its close ties with and support for the Republic of Korea; the United States will support efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula. The United States places the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan; it will continue to develop the existing close bonds. Consistent with the United Nations Security Council Resolution of December 21, 1971, the United States favors the continuation of the ceasefire between India and Pakistan and the withdrawal of all military forces to within their own territories and to their own sides of the ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmir; the United States supports the right of the peoples of South Asia to shape their own future in peace, free of military threat, and without having the area become the subject of great power rivalry.
There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two sides agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. The United States and the People's Republic of China are prepared to apply these principles to their mutual relations.
With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that:
--progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;
--both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict;
--neither should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony; and
--neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at other states.
Both sides are of the view that it would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or for major countries to divide up the world into spheres of interest.
The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position: The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between China and the United States; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government of China; Taiwan is a province of China which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and all U.S. forces and military installations must be withdrawn from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of "one China, one Taiwan" "one China two governments", "two Chinas", an "independent Taiwan" or advocate that "the status of Taiwan remains to be determined".
The U.S. side declared: The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves. With this prospect in mind, it affirms the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan. In the meantime, it will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan as the tension in the area diminishes.
The two sides agreed that it is desirable to broaden the understanding between the two peoples. To this end, they discussed specific areas in such fields as science, technology, culture, sports and journalism, in which people-to-people contacts and exchanges would be mutually beneficial. Each side undertakes to facilitate the further development of such contacts and exchanges.
Both sides view bilateral trade as another area from which mutual benefit can be derived, and agreed that economic relations based on equality and mutual benefit are in the interest of the peoples of the two countries. They agree to facilitate the progressive development of trade between their two countries.
The two sides agreed that they will stay in contact through various channels, including the sending of a senior U.S. representative to Peking from time to time for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations between the two countries and continue to exchange views on issues of common interest.
The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that the normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.
President Nixon, Mrs. Nixon and the American party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

const void * memchr ( const void * ptr, int value, size_t num );
void * memchr ( void * ptr, int value, size_t num );
Locate character in block of memory
Searches within the first num bytes of the block of memory pointed by ptr for the first occurrence of value (interpreted as an unsigned char), and returns a pointer to it.
Both value and each of the bytes checked on the the ptr array are interpreted as unsigned char for the comparison.
- Pointer to the block of memory where the search is performed.
- Value to be located. The value is passed as an int, but the function performs a byte per byte search using the unsigned char conversion of this value.
- Number of bytes to be analyzed.
sizet is an unsigned integral type.
A pointer to the first occurrence of value in the block of memory pointed by ptr.
If the value is not found, the function returns a null pointer.
In C, this function is only declared as:
void * memchr ( const void *, int, size_t );
instead of the two overloaded versions provided in C++.
/* memchr example */
int main ()
char * pch;
char str = "Example string";
pch = (char*) memchr (str, 'p', strlen(str));
printf ("'p' found at position %d.\n", pch-str+1);
printf ("'p' not found.\n");
- Compare two blocks of memory (function
- Locate first occurrence of character in string (function
- Locate last occurrence of character in string (function

The aim of the project - which is in the style of a Wikipedia - is to make the large volume of information that exists on children's rights more accessible, to highlight persistent violations and inspire collective action. Much of the information in the new Wiki is already available on the CRIN website but might not be easily retrieveable.
See the Wiki here: http://wiki.crin.org/mediawiki/index.php?title=Main_Page
We are launching the Wiki with an initial batch of 41 country pages, with more to follow. They are:
Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Grenada, Guatemala, Japan, Lao, PDR, Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of, Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Serbia, Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Yemen
The Wiki is a web-based, multi-lingual and interactive project - this means we need your input to ensure the pages are kept up to date. Find out how to contribute below.
Please note that this project is still being tested, if you have comments or suggestions, please email them to email@example.com.
Why are we doing this?
The purpose of making all information about children's rights available in one place is to build a clearer picture of some of the repeated violations of children's rights in a given country. The eventual goal will be to try to match these violations with possible avenues of redress.
We have found that few children's rights advocates are aware of or make use of the full range of opportunities within the UN and regional human rights mechanisms to pursue children's rights advocacy. Yet many of the bodies which are not specifically child rights-focused, such as the UN Special Procedures and the Universal Periodic Review, also issue recommendations on children's rights. The Wiki therefore brings together all recommendations and decisions on children's rights made by these bodies, including courts, to make it easy for advocates to make the most of all available options.
What is in the Wiki?
Each country has its own homepage with the following sections:
In addition, the Wiki contains state-by-state information on ratifications of international human rights treaties, communications/ complaints mechanisms and inquiry procedures.
On the Wiki, read:
Our eventual aim is to make all information about children's rights available in English as well as the official language of the country concerned. Parts of the Wiki which exist in other languages are currently linked to from the English version. If you are planning to translate any sections of the Wiki into your language or are available to volunteer your time to help with this, please contact CRIN at firstname.lastname@example.org

About How to Draw Elephant:
Learning how to draw an elephant is fun, but it can also help kids develop many important skills. These skills, eye-hand coordination, color concepts, picture and number comprehension, form the foundation for early learning success. Enjoy this free, printable how to draw an elephant page!
Use of our How to Draw Elephant page:
Our how to draw an elephant may be used only for your personal, non-commercial use. Parents, teachers, churches and recognized nonprofit organizations may print or copy multiple how to draw an elephant pages for use at home or in the classroom.

UK hydrogen cars are coming - if you can fill up
LONDON (Reuters) - Britain's hydrogen fuel cell car fleet may hit top gear within five years, but only if there is enough investment in filling stations, the UK Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Association (UK HFCA) told Reuters on Friday.
Fuel cells convert hydrogen into electricity, with heat and water being the only by-products, with a number of car makers including Toyota, Ford, and Hyundai, pushing to commercialize the low-carbon hybrid fuel cell vehicle by 2015.
"Somewhere around 2015 to 2017 we'll be over threshold and I think we'll see a larger and growing fleet," HFC chairman Dennis Hayter said.
"It's all aligned with the rollout of the infrastructure. In order to get to a semi-ubiquitous availability of hydrogen, then yes, you're talking may billions of pounds, but it doesn't have to come at once."
Hayter said fuel cell cars only take minutes to refill with a range of around 250 miles range. Plug-in electric vehicles take hours to recharge with a range of around 100 miles.
Existing petrol filling stations could be converted, with hydrogen companies possibly leasing some of the pumps, while current hydrogen production capacity is seen as adequate for the next decade.
"You may find there's a deal to be made between the hydrogen gas and petroleum companies. Things are happening in the background and gradually a network is starting to appear," Hayter said.
"At present, the majority of hydrogen is derived from reforming of natural gas for industrial purposes such as refining and in chemicals.
"The quantities currently used and likely to be needed for transport in the next five to 10 years would still be minimal alongside hydrogen consumed for industrial use."
For the long term estimates of hydrogen costs, Hayter believes it will be competitive with petrol, or cheaper. Using U.S. hydrogen prices of $8 a kilogram, it would cost around $32 to fill up fuel cell car with a 250 mile range, he said.
"It's not comparing apples with apples, but if they're the long term costs, then it could be significantly cheaper but it depends on the fuel duty," Hayter added.
The UK HFCA is calling for hydrogen not to be taxed as a transport fuel, as petrol is, to help incentivize uptake.
Britain has around 30 hydrogen fuel vehicles, mostly buses and taxi in London, with two filling stations in the city and another four expected by 2012, the UK HFCA said.
Seen as a way to decarbonise the transport sector, Britain's former Labour government planned to subsidise low-carbon vehicle purchases from 2011, with a grant worth up to 5,000 pounds ($7,584).
(Editing by William Hardy)
- Tweet this
- Share this
- Digg this

Acidosis is a condition in which there is excessive acid in the body fluids. It is the opposite of alkalosis (a condition in which there is excessive base in the body fluids).
Causes, incidence, and risk factors:
The kidneys and lungs maintain the balance (proper pH level) of chemicals called acids and bases in the body. Acidosis occurs when acid builds up or when bicarbonate (a base) is lost. Acidosis is classified as either respiratory acidosis or metabolic acidosis .
Respiratory acidosis develops when there is too much carbon dioxide (an acid) in the body. This type of acidosis is usually caused by a decreased ability to remove carbon dioxide from the body through effective breathing. Other names for respiratory acidosis are hypercapnic acidosis and carbon dioxide acidosis. Causes of respiratory acidosis include:
- Chest deformities, such as kyphosis
- Chest injuries
- Chest muscle weakness
- Chronic lung disease
- Overuse of sedative drugs
Metabolic acidosis develops when too much acid is produced or when the kidneys cannot remove enough acid from the body. There are several types of metabolic acidosis:
Diabetic acidosis (also called diabetic ketoacidosis and DKA) develops when substances called ketone bodies (which are acidic) build up during uncontrolled diabetes .
- Hyperchloremic acidosis results from excessive loss of sodium bicarbonate from the body, as can happen with severe diarrhea.
Lactic acidosis is a buildup of lactic acid . This can be caused by:
- Exercising vigorously for a very long time
- Liver failure
- Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
- Medications such as salicylates
- Prolonged lack of oxygen from shock, heart failure, or severe anemia
Other causes of metabolic acidosis include:
Signs and tests:
- Arterial or venous blood gas analysis
- Serum electrolytes
- Urine pH
An arterial blood gas analysis or serum electrolytes test, such as a basic metabolic panel, will confirm that acidosis is present and indicate whether it is metabolic acidosis or respiratory acidosis. Other tests may be needed to determine the cause of the acidosis.
Treatment depends on the cause. See the specific types of acidosis.
Acidosis can be dangerous if untreated. Many cases respond well to treatment.
See the specific types of acidosis.
Calling your health care provider:
Although there are several types of acidosis, all will cause symptoms that require treatment by your health care provider.
Prevention depends on the cause of the acidosis. Normally, people with healthy kidneys and lungs do not experience significant acidosis.
Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Medicine. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2007:chap 119.
|Review Date: 11/15/2009|
Reviewed By: David C. Dugdale, III, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. © 1997-
A.D.A.M., Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.

[Sex. Syst.—Monoecia, Polyandria.
Gen. Char—See ante, p. 318.
Sp. Char.—Leaves obovate, oblong; obliquely divided into obtuse lobes; segments, oblong entire; cup hemispherical, tuberculated; acorn ovoid, oblong; fruit in pairs.
This tree is less elevated than the Q. tinctoria. It forms, however, a larger and more regularly-expanded head, with numerous horizontal branches. The trunk and branches have a whitish hue, hence the name White Oak. The leaves are of a silvery appearance, with a hoary under surface. The young leaves are covered with a fine silky down.
The bark is rough externally, of a light colour; the effete epidermis being arranged in flat layers On drying, the internal layer becomes brown. It breaks with a stringy fracture. The odour is decided and tan-like; taste astringent and bitter. This bark is used in tanning. For medicinal purposes it is preferred to the black oak.
DECOCTUM QUERCUS ALBAE, U. S.; Decoction of White Oak Bark.—(Take of White Oak Bark, bruised, an ounce: Water a pint and a half. Boil down to a pint and strain.)—Used as the Decoctum Quercus, p. 320.]
The Elements of Materia Medica and Therapeutics, Vol. II, 3th American ed., was written by Jonathan Pereira in 1853.

|NEWSRoom | Source: Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center|
Older Adults May Need More Vitamin D to Prevent Mobility Difficulties
Older adults who don’t get enough vitamin D—either from diet, supplements or sun exposure—may be at increased risk of developing mobility limitations and disability, according to new research from Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center.
“This is one of the first studies to look at the association of vitamin D and the onset of new mobility limitations or disability in older adults,” said lead author Denise Houston, PhD, RD, a nutrition epidemiologist in the Wake Forest Baptist Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology. Houston researches vitamin D and its effects on physical function.
The study, published online in the Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, analyzed the association between vitamin D and onset of mobility limitation and disability over six years of follow-up using data from the National Institute on Aging’s Health, Aging, and Body Composition (Health ABC) study. Mobility limitation and disability are defined as any difficulty or inability to walk several blocks or climb a flight of stairs, respectively.
Of the 3,075 community-dwelling black and white men and women aged 70-79 who were enrolled, data from 2,099 participants was used for this study. Eligible participants reported no difficulty walking one-fourth mile, climbing 10 steps, or performing basic, daily living activities, and were free of life-threatening illness. Vitamin D levels were measured in the blood at the beginning of the study. Occurrence of mobility limitation and disability during follow-up was assessed during annual clinic visits alternating with telephone interviews every six months over six years.
“We observed about a 30% increased risk of mobility limitations for those older adults who had low levels of vitamin D, and almost a two-fold higher risk of mobility disability,” Houston said.
Houston said vitamin D plays an important role in muscle function, so it is plausible that low levels of the vitamin could result in the onset of decreased lower muscle strength and physical performance. Vitamin D may also indirectly affect physical function as low vitamin D levels have also been associated with diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and lung disease—conditions that are frequent causes of decline in physical function. Houston said people get vitamin D when it is naturally produced in the skin by sun exposure, by eating foods with vitamin D, such as fortified milk, juice and cereals, and by taking vitamin D supplements.
“About one-third of older adults have low vitamin D levels,” she said. “It’s difficult to get enough vitamin D through diet alone and older adults, who may not spend much time outdoors, may need to take a vitamin D supplement.”
Current recommendations call for people over age 70 to get 800 International Units of vitamin D daily in their diet or supplements. Houston pointed out that current dietary recommendations are based solely on vitamin D’s effects on bone health.
“Higher amounts of vitamin D may be needed for the preservation of muscle strength and physical function as well as other health conditions,” she said. “However, clinical trials are needed to determine whether increasing vitamin D levels through diet or supplements has an effect on physical function.”
This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging; National Institute on Aging contracts N01-AG-6-2101, N01-AG-6-2103, and No1-AG-6-2106; National Institute on Aging grants R01 AG028050, R01 AG029364 and K01 AG030506 (to DKH); National Institute of Nursing Research grant R01 NR012459; and the Wake Forest University Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Center (P30 AG021332).
Co-authors include: Janet A. Tooze, PhD, Gary G. Schwartz, PhD, Jeff D. Williamson, MD, Stephen B Kritchevsky, PhD, Rebecca H. Neiberg, PhD and M. Kyla Shea, PhD, all of Wake Forest Baptist; Dorothy B. Hausman, PhD, and Mary Ann Johnson, PhD, University of Georgia, Athens; Jane A. Cauley, PhD, University of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania; Doug C. Bauer, MD, University of California, San Francisco; and Tamara B. Harris, MD, National Institute on Aging.
|Short Link: http://www.news-line.com/?s212392|
comments powered by Disqus

The National Museum of the American Indian on the National Mall opened in September 2004. Fifteen years in the making, it is the first national museum in the country dedicated exclusively to Native Americans. The five-story, 250,000-square-foot, curvilinear building is clad in a golden-colored Kasota limestone that is designed to evoke natural rock formations that have been shaped by wind and water over thousands of years. The museum is set in a 4.25-acre site and is surrounded by simulated wetlands. The museum's east-facing entrance, its prism window and its 120-foot-high space for contemporary Native performances are direct results of extensive consultations with Native peoples. The museum's architect and project designer is the Canadian Douglas Cardinal (Blackfoot); its design architects are GBQC Architects of Philadelphia and architect Johnpaul Jones (Cherokee/Choctaw). Disagreements during construction led to Cardinal being removed from the project, but the building retains his original design intent, and his continued input enabled its completion. The museum's project architects are Jones & Jones Architects and Landscape Architects Ltd. of Seattle and SmithGroup of Washington, D.C., in association with Lou Weller (Caddo), the Native American Design Collaborative, and Polshek Partnership Architects of New York City; Ramona Sakiestewa (Hopi) and Donna House (Navajo/Oneida) also served as design consultants. The landscape architects are Jones & Jones Architects and Landscape Architects Ltd. of Seattle and EDAW Inc., of Alexandria, Virginia.

The doctrine of purgatory is revealed through certain scriptural texts which speak of a burning fire – cf. 1 Cor 3:15, 1 Pet 1:7. Though there are certainly other passages of the Bible which can be drawn upon (e.g. Job praying for his dead children, the Judas Maccabeus praying for the dead), the Tradition of the Church has principally relied upon the passages referring to fire – this is especially noticeable in the declarations of Florence and Trent.
Hence, we come to a very important question: If the Church discovered the doctrine of purgatory through meditating upon the scriptural images of a purifying fire, ought we to hold that there is material fire in purgatory? With the help of the Catechism of the Catholic Church and the great Thomistic theologian Fr. Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange, we may succeed in shedding some light upon this question.
Not a clear teaching of the Church
That there is fire in purgatory is not a clear teaching of the Church – Garrigou-Lagrange considers it a sententia probabilissima (the most probable doctrine), but not a defined teaching of the Church. He notes that the Council of Florence did not condemn the Greek schismatics who denied the existence of fire in purgatory, though it does favor the common Latin opinion affirming the presence of material fire there.
On the other hand, it is important to mention that the Church has not rejected the possibility of material fire in purgatory. The Catechism of the Catholic Church (CCC 1030-1032) refers to the fire and flames of purgatory twice, never indicating that these flames are metaphorical. Thus, the Church seems to feel bound to at least allow for the possibility of a strictly literal interpretation of the purifying fire and uses the language of fire and of flames without any hint that this is meant metaphorically.
How can a disembodied soul suffer from material flames?
Fr. Garrigou-Lagrange, following St. Thomas Aquinas, affirms that it is possible for spiritual beings to “suffer” from material flames – this is called the pain of sense. It is a clear doctrine of the Church that the souls in purgatory undergo the pain of sense, at least spiritually – even if there are no physical flames in purgatory, the souls there suffer in their spiritual senses. The chief pain of purgatory is the delay of the beatific vision, but in addition to this there also the pain of sense.
A disembodied soul cannot suffer from material flames in the same way a body or even an embodied soul can suffer from them. The separated spirit suffers insofar as it is bound to the material flames and hindered from acting as it would and where it would. There is a certain humiliation inflicted upon the soul since it is made to depend upon a material creature (i.e. the fire). A loose analogy is seen in a paralyzed person who cannot act as they would.
Are there material flames in purgatory?
Here we will cite the words of the venerable father Garrigou-Lagrange: “After long discussions and wide historical researches on this particular point, it seems wise to conclude with St. Robert Bellarmine and Suarez as follows, ‘Although the existence of fire in purgatory is less certain than that of fire in hell, the doctrine which admits a real fire in purgatory must be classified as a sentential probabilissima. Hence the contrary opinion is improbable.’
“This view rests on seven reasons: first, the consent of scholastic theologians. Second, the authority of St. Gregory the Great (Dial. 4, 39). Third, the authority of St. Augustine. Forth, the concordant testimonies of St. Cyprian, St. Basil, St. Caesarius, of the liturgy, which begs refreshment of these souls. Fifth, the unanimous decision of the Latin fathers at the Council of Florence. Sixth, the very probable foundation found in 1 Corinthians 3:15. Seventh, particular revelations, for example those of St. Catherine of Ricci. She suffered forty days to deliver a soul from purgatory. A novice, touching her hand, said, ‘But, my mother, you are burning.’ ‘Yes, my daughter,’ she replied, ‘this fire is not seen, but it consumes like a burning fever.’” (from Life Everlasting)
Throughout the next couple of weeks, I will post on several additional questions regarding the nature of purgatory. Let us all pray for the Poor Souls during the next month!

January 10th, 2004 01:15 AM
Yeah, arbitrary precision is very confusing. I've tried to make my own like that with huge string allocations (acturally char arrays) and compare numbers one by one. I don't know what happened to it, but I probably never completed it anyways.
And that recursive function looks really....recursive. I don't see any code to exit out of the loop, IE it will continue to call it self over and over until the program finally kills the heap/stack or something. I don't quite know what it is...
Also, even if it wasn't a static, it would still always be zero (if you managed to get an answer out of it since it loops forever). Why? Since there is no checking to see if X is less than or equal to 1. Without that it would multiply it by 0 when x = 0, and thus the answers would be cleared.
Well the only reason I can acturally comment on it is because I have my C book here with an example of a recursive function to calculate factorials... heh. Sadly I don't think I'm *allowed* to post the code up. Sorry.
The next best thing - Using Linked Lists of Integers to store the factorial of 1000... http://www.codeguru.com/algorithms/factorial.shtml I don't happen to think that the code there is easily understandable though...
January 10th, 2004 01:32 AM
Tim_axe, sorry to be pedantic, but if you look at his code, x would never be zero, that wasn't the issue. The fact is that it is pointless even having the x if you set total to 0 at the start because total will never increase, and that's even if you ignore that there is no way to exit the recursion.
Also, because total is a local variable and you are not sending it as an argument, total would have died at the beginning of each recursion in any case. A slightly more functional function, if still not very good would be:
Please note that even that code is completely useless :P I just felt like correcting the other code (too tired to check who it was that posted it, and I can't see just now anyway :P)
void genFactorial(int x, int t)
int total = t; // you probably wouldn't even need total now
void main(void) // yes, I know it isn't totally correct
Oh god that makes me look sad.
 Tim_axe, I'm sorry. I realise what you are saying now (couldn't really see it properly, my contact lenses are fscked atm). I left what I said in incase someone already had seen it so that you know I was apologising [/edit]
January 10th, 2004 04:07 AM
Don't worry about it gothic_type, I can see where I sort of rambled on in my post and just messed up what I was trying to point out.
I'll work off of your code since it has the basic framework and I want to save typing...
*Opens up DevC++*
*Finds C Programming Book*
*Returns to Open Window*
Okay, this following code compiles, and works fine for me. If not, please debug it yourself. :P Also, don't give it an integer bigger than 14. It will crash or mess up something (Integer Overflow). Same goes for letters, and decimal numbers. Integers only...
Enjoy. Also, it won't do your 100 or whatnot. Only up to 14... Check the link in my previous post to find code for bigger numbers. I haven't tried it myself...
using namespace std;
unsigned int genFactorial(unsigned int x);
cout<<"Blah. Give me an Integer or I'll crash: ";
cout<<"\nI think that is: "<<genFactorial(fact)<<endl;
cout<<"If that's wrong, it's 42!"<<endl;
unsigned int genFactorial(unsigned int x)
x *= genFactorial(x-1);
January 10th, 2004 08:33 AM
Tim_axe, nice prog; appears to work correctly (despite the fact that I attempted to get gcc to compile it to begin with which made it unhappy )
Now all we need to do is edit the program so that it can do 100, but still using integers :P.
BTW -- Tim_axe, I think we must be the only people sad enough to have kept on posting to this topic...I think everyone else bailed :P
January 12th, 2004 07:27 PM
well you guys are using recursion, which isnt going to be good when you are computing 100 because you will run out of space in RAM.
Support your right to arm bears.
^^This was the first video game which i played on an old win3.1 box
January 12th, 2004 10:26 PM
White_Eskimo, the only reason I (and I think Tim_axe as well) was using recursion was because Striek had suggested it. His code was really messed up, so I was trying to "fix" it while also attempting to point out the multiplying by zero error.
Anyhow. Since no-one else really suggested/posted another method, at least it's something. :P
January 13th, 2004 12:31 AM
Well I guess we could continue it... Anyone else want to help out?
So we can scrap the recursion idea because the program would eventually run out of heap/stack or something on really big numbers... But as to how will we use integers to store numbers that are over 32bits long... We might have to borrow from the code @ http://www.codeguru.com/algorithms/factorial.shtml by somehow adopting use of linked lists of integers. Although the code there already uses it to compute factorials...
So, I guess it would be like this (insert really bad program outline here):
Use types in number, ie 60.
Allocate 59/60/61 integers (array), put numbers 60 to 1 in them. (we will somehow multiply them later on, which is what factorials do)
Then we can allocate some more integers, say 1000 to be safe for now, and set each element to 0. This will hold our output, with each integer holding a single digit. 1000 here would mean we can store a 1000 digit answer for a factorial. My guess is that is the factorial of 150 or so?
We then multiply the last two integers from the first array, ie with values 60 and 59.
Store this result, ie 3540, in a temporary integer. We then seperate it into thousands, hundreds, tens, and ones, etc., and put it into the answer in those respective places in the answer array.
This gets messy. We seperate the next integer into ones and tens, and then somehow multiply the answer array and this next integer, ie 58, and deal with carrying over numbers to keep a single digit to the answer. Move that into the answer, and repeat that process. The link does that somewhere, but with linked lists instead of arrays of integers.
This technique could work well up until getting the factorial of about 65537, since 65537 * 65536 is a number over 32bits, the largest we could hold in an unsigned integer / long value on a normal 32bit PC... (first multiplacation step)
It is sort of reinventing the wheel I guess since there is already code to do it. I could probably work on it when I'm not studying for finals this week. Hopefully we can figure this one out, lol.
January 13th, 2004 04:55 PM
Wow. I looked at that "algorithm"...I couldn't even have begun to think about coding that (mainly because I've never learned about linked lists and I don't know as much as I should about c++).
January 14th, 2004 03:38 AM
I tried to come up with my own code and it is useless. I can't get it to carry numbers over right and multiply them together the way I need to. It ended up using only the first unsigned long in the array of about 1000 of them.
Anyways, I read through the comments of that tutorial, and came across this one. Man the person (Krishna Kumar Khatri) is good... Saves me from ripping out anymore of hair trying to get my own version to work.
January 14th, 2004 03:47 PM
lol. That code's still too confusing for me to understand without reading it over a couple of times :P.
If you could somehow devise a way to multiply parts 1 to n in an array to output them without having to store them in a variable, then I've got a program that solves this problem. But I guess that was the whole problem in the first place :P
Anyhow. I'm just annoyed that I couldn't think up a solution myself

a programme established by the US government in 1947 to give economic help to Europe after World War II. It was named after George C. Marshall, who was the US Secretary of State. Thousands of millions of dollars were provided for rebuilding cities, roads, industries etc
Definition from the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Advanced Learner's Dictionary.
Dictionary pictures of the day
Do you know what each of these is called?
Click on any of the pictures above to find out what it is called.

A/Prof. Dirk Van Helden
|Work Phone||(02) 4921 5623|
|Fax||(02) 4921 7406|
Principal Research Fellow
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy
The University of Newcastle, Australia
|Office||MS405, Medical Sciences|
Investigations are being made on cellular rhythms including those in lymphatics, blood vessels, gastrointestinal tract, heart and specific mood-associated brain nuclei. We have discovered a new mechanism that it is driven by intracellular Ca2+ stores that allow groups of cells to self pace and hence become rhythmic. We are now exploring the relevance of this mechanism in a range of tissues. We are also interested in specific proteins involved in the pacemaker mechanism including inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors, ryanodine receptors, store operated calcium channels and TRP family proteins. These studies may influence future therapies to control lymphedema, digestive disorders, heart arrhythmias and brain mood states.
We also have a recent patent relating to use of a topical ointment as a first aid treatment against snakebite. This was a surprising outcome that arose from studies investigating whether snake venoms enhance lymphatic pumping and hence accelerate their own delivery. Our preliminary trials indicate topical application of the ointment slows lymphatic transport by some 350% with no obvious adverse effects. The cream will be of particular use for bites to the torso where pressure bandaging is ineffective. It may also be useful as a first aid treatment against bites from other venomous creatures.
- PhD, University of New South Wales
- Bachelor of Engineering, University of New South Wales
- Cellular physiologist
- gastrointestinal physiology
- heart pacemaking
- smooth muscle
Lymphatic and gastric pacemaking: Pacemaking in the lymphatic and gastric systems are the basis for our discovery of store pacemaking and calcium phase waves. We are now unravelling the finer details of these mechanisms. Importantly, as for all good research, there can often be unexpected yet important serendipitous outcomes. One in case is that this work has led to development of a first aid treatment against bites from venomous animals whose venoms transit the lymphatic system and we have a patent application on this finding under review.
Heart pacemaking: Traditionally, this has been considered to operate through a clock in the cell surface membrane of pacemaker cells. However, recent evidence from our pilot and modelling studies and from the work of others indicates a significant role of calcium stores. This introduces the possibility that the heart pacemaker model is only part of the story and that pacemaking involves an intracellular clock (i.e. store pacemaking). We are investigating this hypothesis, which if upheld will change the text book model for heart pacemaking and help change present understanding of specific heart disorders and their treatment.
(National Health and Medical Research Program Grant -NHMRC PG Cardiac Pacemaking, 2007-2009).
Brain rhythms: Brain rhythms function in most areas of the brain and while fundamental to life and our psyche remain poorly understood. We are testing the hypothesis that specific rhythms in the Locus Coeruleus, a brain stem nucleus known to be associated with mood states, are generated by store pacemaking. Evidence that the rhythms are generated by store pacemaking could provide a new framework for interpreting drug action in the treatment of mood disorders such as Bipolar Disorder, as all three main drug classes used in its treatment have the common mode action of inhibiting calcium stores.
(Australian Research Council Discovery Program Grant Investigation of a Brain Rhythm 2005-2007).
Uterine pacemaking: Astonishingly, there is still no clear understanding of the pacemaker mechanism that initiates and times uterine contractions. Pilot studies we have undertaken suggest this to be mediated by store pacemaking. Proof for this hypothesis would herald a mechanistic description for uterine contractions and may provide new insight into associated dysfunctions such as premature birth.
(NHMRC PG Rhythmicity and synchronicity in uterine smooth muscle, 2007-2009).
Fields of Research
|020599||Optical Physics Not Elsewhere Classified||50|
|110399||Clinical Sciences Not Elsewhere Classified||30|
|111699||Medical Physiology Not Elsewhere Classified||20|
Centres and Groups
Body relevant to professional practice.
- Faculty member - Cardiovascular Physiology/Circulation of 'Faculty of 1000 Biology'
- member of council - Australian Physiological society
- Chair, Research Committee - HMRI Cardiovascular Group
- Member of Editorial Board 2001-2005 - the British Journal of Pharmacology
- Member - The British Journal of Pharmacology
- member - Australian Physiological Society
|01/01/2001 - 01/12/2011|
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow
University of Newcastle (Australia)
|01/01/1990 - 01/12/2000|
Senior Brawn Fellowship
University of Newcastle (Australia)
Hunter Medical Research Institute (Australia)
2004 Hunter Medical Research Institute Sparke Helmore/ NBN Award for Research Excellence from a field of ~350 scientists in the University and Area Health Sectors
Gordon conference, United Kingdom (Conference Presentation - non published.)
Department of physiology
University of Western Australia, Australia (External Reviewer - Departments.)
Research policy (e.g. Archetect of the Brawn Fellowship Scheme at the University of Newcastle)
Honours and Postgraduate students
- Cellular Physiology

Part 2 - Those Who Are Unable to See the Fact of Creation
The theory of evolution is a philosophy and a conception of the world that produces false hypotheses, assumptions and imaginary scenarios in order to explain the existence and origin of life in terms of mere coincidences. the roots of this philosophy go back as far as antiquity and ancient Greece.
All atheist philosophies that deny creation, directly or indirectly embrace and defend the idea of evolution. the same condition today applies to all the ideologies and systems that are antagonistic to religion.
The evolutionary notion has been cloaked in a scientific disguise for the last century and a half in order to justify itself. Though put forward as a supposedly scientific theory during the mid-19th century, the theory, despite all the best efforts of its advocates, has not so far been verified by any scientific finding or experiment. Indeed, the "very science" on which the theory depends so greatly has demonstrated and continues to demonstrate repeatedly that the theory has no merit in reality.
Laboratory experiments and probabilistic calculations have definitely made it clear that the amino acids from which life arises cannot have been formed by chance. the cell, which supposedly emerged by chance under primitive and uncontrolled terrestrial conditions according to evolutionists, still cannot be synthesised even in the most sophisticated, high-tech laboratories of the 20th century. Not a single "transitional form", creatures which are supposed to show the gradual evolution of advanced organisms from more primitive ones as neo-Darwinist theory claims, has ever been found anywhere in the world despite the most diligent and prolonged search in the fossil record.
In their attempts to gather evidence for evolution, evolutionists have unwittingly proven by their own efforts that evolution cannot have happened at all!
The person who originally put forward the theory of evolution, essentially in the form that it is defended today, was an amateur English biologist by the name of Charles Robert Darwin. Darwin first published his ideas in a book entitled the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection in 1859. Darwin claimed in his book that all living beings had a common ancestor and that they evolved from one another by means of natural selection. Those that best adapted to the habitat transferred their traits to subsequent generations, and by accumulating over great epochs, these advantageous qualities transformed individuals into totally different species from their ancestors. the human being was thus the most developed product of the mechanism of natural selection. in short, the origin of one species was another species.
Darwin's fanciful ideas were seized upon and promoted by certain ideological and political circles and the theory became very popular. the main reason was that the level of knowledge of those days was not yet sufficient to reveal that Darwin's imaginary scenarios were false. When Darwin put forward his assumptions, the disciplines of genetics, microbiology, and biochemistry did not yet exist. If they had, Darwin might easily have recognised that his theory was totally unscientific and thus would not have attempted to advance such meaningless claims: the information determining species already exists in the genes and it is impossible for natural selection to produce new species by altering genes.
While the echoes of Darwin's book reverberated, an Austrian botanist by the name of Gregor Mendel discovered the laws of inheritance in 1865. Although little known before the end of the century, Mendel's discovery gained great importance in the early 1900s with the birth of the science of genetics. Some time later, the structures of genes and chromosomes were discovered. the discovery, in the 1950s, of the DNA molecule, which incorporates genetic information, threw the theory of evolution into a great crisis, because the origin of the immense amount of information in DNA could not possibly be explained by coincidental happenings.
Besides all these scientific developments, no transitional forms, which were supposed to show the gradual evolution of living organisms from primitive to advanced species, have ever been found despite years of search.
These developments ought to have resulted in Darwin's theory being banished to the dustbin of history. However, it was not, because certain circles insisted on revising, renewing, and elevating the theory to a scientific platform. These efforts gain meaning only if we realise that behind the theory lie ideological intentions rather than scientific concerns.
Nevertheless, some circles that believed in the necessity of upholding a theory that had reached an impasse soon set up a new model. the name of this new model was neo-Darwinism. According to this theory, species evolved as a result of mutations, minor changes in their genes, and the fittest ones survived through the mechanism of natural selection. When, however, it was proved that the mechanisms proposed by neo-Darwinism were invalid and minor changes were not sufficient for the formation of living beings, evolutionists went on to look for new models. They came up with a new claim called "punctuated equilibrium" that rests on no rational or scientific grounds. This model held that living beings suddenly evolved into another species without any transitional forms. in other words, species with no evolutionary "ancestors" suddenly appeared. This was a way of describing creation, though evolutionists would be loath to admit this. They tried to cover it up with incomprehensible scenarios. for instance, they said that the first bird in history could all of a sudden inexplicably have popped out of a reptile egg. the same theory also held that carnivorous land-dwelling animals could have turned into giant whales, having undergone a sudden and comprehensive transformation.
These claims, totally contradicting all the rules of genetics, biophysics, and biochemistry are as scientific as fairy-tales of frogs turning into princes! Nevertheless, being distressed by the crisis that the neo-Darwinist assertion was in, some evolutionist paleontologists embraced this theory, which has the distinction of being even more bizarre than neo-Darwinism itself.
The sole purpose of this model was to provide an explanation for the gaps in the fossil record that the neo-Darwinist model could not explain. However, it is hardly rational to attempt to explain the gap in the fossil record of the evolution of birds with a claim that "a bird popped all of a sudden out of a reptile egg", because, by the evolutionists' own admission, the evolution of a species to another species requires a great and advantageous change in genetic information. However, no mutation whatsoever improves the genetic information or adds new information to it. Mutations only derange genetic information. Thus, the "gross mutations" imagined by the punctuated equilibrium model, would only cause "gross", that is "great", reductions and impairments in the genetic information.
The theory of punctuated equilibrium was obviously merely a product of the imagination. Despite this evident truth, the advocates of evolution did not hesitate to honour this theory. the fact that the model of evolution proposed by Darwin could not be proved by the fossil record forced them to do so. Darwin claimed that species underwent a gradual change, which necessitated the existence of half-bird/half-reptile or half-fish/half-reptile freaks. However, not even one of these "transitional forms" was found despite the extensive studies of evolutionists and the hundreds of thousands of fossils that were unearthed.
Evolutionists seized upon the model of punctuated equilibrium with the hope of concealing this great fossil fiasco. As we have stated before, it was very evident that this theory is a fantasy, so it very soon consumed itself. the model of punctuated equilibrium was never put forward as a consistent model, but rather used as an escape in cases that plainly did not fit the model of gradual evolution. Since evolutionists today realise that complex organs such as eyes, wings, lungs, brain and others explicitly refute the model of gradual evolution, in these particular points they are compelled to take shelter in the fantastic interpretations of the model of punctuated equilibrium.
Is there any Fossil Record to Verify the Theory of Evolution?
The theory of evolution argues that the evolution of a species into another species takes place gradually, step-by-step over millions of years. the logical inference drawn from such a claim is that monstrous living organisms called "transitional forms" should have lived during these periods of transformation. Since evolutionists allege that all living things evolved from each other step-by-step, the number and variety of these transitional forms should have been in the millions.
If such creatures had really lived, then we should see their remains everywhere. in fact, if this thesis is correct, the number of intermediate transitional forms should be even greater than the number of animal species alive today and their fossilised remains should be abundant all over the world.
Since Darwin, evolutionists have been searching for fossils and the result has been for them a crushing disappointment. Nowhere in the world – neither on land nor in the depths of the sea – has any intermediate transitional form between any two species ever been uncovered.
Darwin himself was quite aware of the absence of such transitional forms. It was his greatest hope that they would be found in the future. Despite his hopefulness, he saw that the biggest stumbling block to his theory was the missing transitional forms. This is why, in his book the Origin of Species, he wrote:
Darwin was right to be worried. the problem bothered other evolutionists as well. A famous British paleontologist, Derek V. Ager, admits this embarrassing fact:
The gaps in the fossil record cannot be explained away by the wishful thinking that not enough fossils have yet been unearthed and that these missing fossils will one day be found. Another evolutionist paleontologist, T. Neville George, explains the reason:
Life Emerged on Earth Suddenly and in Complex Forms
When terrestrial strata and the fossil record are examined, it is seen that living organisms appeared simultaneously. the oldest stratum of the earth in which fossils of living creatures have been found is that of the "Cambrian", which has an estimated age of 530-520 million years.
Living creatures that are found in the strata belonging to the Cambrian period emerged in the fossil record all of a sudden without any pre-existing ancestors. the vast mosaic of living organisms, made up of such great numbers of complex creatures, emerged so suddenly that this miraculous event is referred to as the "Cambrian Explosion" in scientific literature.
Most of the organisms found in this stratum have highly advanced organs like eyes, or systems seen in organisms with a highly advanced organisation such as gills, circulatory systems, and so on. There is no sign in the fossil record to indicate that these organisms had any ancestors. Richard Monestarsky, the editor of Earth Sciences magazine, states about the sudden emergence of living species:
Not being able to find answers to the question of how earth came to overflow with thousands of different animal species, evolutionists posit an imaginary period of 20 million years before the Cambrian Period to explain how life originated and "the unknown happened". This period is called the "evolutionary gap". No evidence for it has ever been found and the concept is still conveniently nebulous and undefined even today.
In 1984, numerous complex invertebrates were unearthed in Chengjiang, set in the central Yunnan plateau in the high country of southwest China. Among them were trilobites, now extinct, but no less complex in structure than any modern invertebrate.
The Swedish evolutionist paleontologist, Stefan Bengston, explains the situation as follows:
The sudden appearance of these complex living beings with no predecessors is no less baffling (and embarrassing) for evolutionists today than it was for Darwin 135 years ago. in nearly a century and a half, they have advanced not one step beyond the point that stymied Darwin.
As may be seen, the fossil record indicates that living things did not evolve from primitive to advanced forms, but instead emerged all of a sudden and in a perfect state. the absence of the transitional forms is not peculiar to the Cambrian period. Not a single transitional form verifying the alleged evolutionary "progression" of vertebrates – from fish to amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals – has ever been found. Every living species appears instantaneously and in its current form, perfect and complete, in the fossil record.
In other words, living beings did not come into existence through evolution. They were created.
Deceptions in Drawings
The fossil record is the principal source for those who seek evidence for the theory of evolution. When inspected carefully and without prejudice, the fossil record refutes the theory of evolution rather than supporting it. Nevertheless, misleading interpretations of fossils by evolutionists and their prejudiced representation to the public have given many people the impression that the fossil record indeed supports the theory of evolution.
The susceptibility of some findings in the fossil record to all kinds of interpretations is what best serves the evolutionists' purposes. the fossils unearthed are most of the time unsatisfactory for reliable identification. They usually consist of scattered, incomplete bone fragments. for this reason, it is very easy to distort the available data and to use it as desired. Not surprisingly, the reconstructions (drawings and models) made by evolutionists based on such fossil remains are prepared entirely speculatively in order to confirm evolutionary theses. Since people are readily affected by visual information, these imaginary reconstructed models are employed to convince them that the reconstructed creatures really existed in the past.
Evolutionist researchers draw human-like imaginary creatures, usually setting out from a single tooth, or a mandible fragment or a humerus, and present them to the public in a sensational manner as if they were links in human evolution. These drawings have played a great role in the establishment of the image of "primitive men" in the minds of many people.
These studies based on bone remains can only reveal very general characteristics of the creature concerned. the distinctive details are present in the soft tissues that quickly vanish with time. with the soft tissues speculatively interpreted, everything becomes possible within the boundaries of the imagination of the reconstruction's producer. Earnst A. Hooten from Harvard University explains the situation like this:
Studies Made to Fabricate False Fossils
Unable to find valid evidence in the fossil record for the theory of evolution, some evolutionists have ventured to manufacture their own. These efforts, which have even been included in encyclopaedias under the heading "evolution forgeries", are the most telling indication that the theory of evolution is an ideology and a philosophy that evolutionists are hard put to defend. Two of the most egregious and notorious of these forgeries are described below.
Charles Dawson, a well-known doctor and amateur paleoanthropologist, came forth with a claim that he had found a jawbone and a cranial fragment in a pit in the area of Piltdown, England, in 1912. Although the skull was human-like, the jawbone was distinctly simian. These specimens were christened the "Piltdown Man". Alleged to be 500 thousand years old, they were displayed as absolute proofs of human evolution. for more than 40 years, many scientific articles were written on the "Piltdown Man", many interpretations and drawings were made and the fossil was presented as crucial evidence of human evolution.
In 1949, scientists examined the fossil once more and concluded that the "fossil" was a deliberate forgery consisting of a human skull and the jawbone of an orang-utan.
Using the fluorine dating method, investigators discovered that the skull was only a few thousand years old. the teeth in the jawbone, which belonged to an orang-utan, had been artificially worn down and the "primitive" tools that had conveniently accompanied the fossils were crude forgeries that had been sharpened with steel implements. in the detailed analysis completed by Oakley, Weiner and Clark, they revealed this forgery to the public in 1953. the skull belonged to a 500-year-old man, and the mandibular bone belonged to a recently deceased ape! the teeth were thereafter specially arranged in an array and added to the jaw and the joints were filed in order to make them resemble that of a man. Then all these pieces were stained with potassium dichromate to give them a dated appearance. (These stains disappeared when dipped in acid.) Le Gros Clark, who was a member of the team that disclosed the forgery, could not hide his astonishment:
In 1922, Henry Fairfield Osborn, the director of the American Museum of Natural History, declared that he had found a molar tooth fossil in western Nebraska near Snake Brook belonging to the Pliocene period. This tooth allegedly bore the common characteristics of both man and ape. Deep scientific arguments began in which some interpreted this tooth to be that of Pithecanthropus erectus while others claimed it was closer to that of modern human beings. This fossil, which aroused extensive debate, was popularly named "Nebraska Man". It was also immediately given a "scientific name": "Hesperopithecus Haroldcooki".
Many authorities gave Osborn their support. Based on this single tooth, reconstructions of Nebraska Man's head and body were drawn. Moreover, Nebraska Man was even pictured with a whole family.
In 1927, other parts of the skeleton were also found. According to these newly discovered pieces, the tooth belonged neither to a man nor to an ape. It was realised that it belonged to an extinct species of wild American pig called Prosthennops.
Did Men and Apes Come from a Common Ancestor?
According to the claims of the theory of evolution, men and modern apes have common ancestors. These creatures evolved in time and some of them became the apes of today, while another group that followed another branch of evolution became the men of today.
Evolutionists call the so-called first common ancestors of men and apes "Australopithecus" which means "South African ape". Australopithecus, nothing but an old ape species that has become extinct, has various types. Some of them are robust, while others are small and slight.
Evolutionists classify the next stage of human evolution as "Homo", that is "man". According to the evolutionist claim, the living beings in the Homo series are more developed than Australopithecus, and not very much different from modern man. the modern man of our day, Homo sapiens, is said to have formed at the latest stage of the evolution of this species.
The fact of the matter is that the beings called Australopithecus in this imaginary scenario fabricated by evolutionists really are apes that became extinct, and the beings in the Homo series are members of various human races that lived in the past and then disappeared. Evolutionists arranged various ape and human fossils in an order from the smallest to the biggest in order to form a "human evolution" scheme. Research, however, has demonstrated that these fossils by no means imply an evolutionary process and some of these alleged ancestors of man were real apes whereas some of them were real humans.
Now, let us have a look at Australopithecus, which represents to evolutionists the first stage of the scheme of human evolution.
Australopithecus: Extinct Apes
Evolutionists claim that Australopithecus are the most primitive ancestors of modern men. These are an old species with a head and skull structure similar to that of modern apes, yet with a smaller cranial capacity. According to the claims of evolutionists, these creatures have a very important feature that authenticates them as the ancestors of men: bipedalism.
The movements of apes and men are completely different. Human beings are the only living creatures that move freely about on two feet. Some other animals do have a limited ability to move in this way, but those that do have bent skeletons.
According to evolutionists, these living beings called Australopithecus had the ability to walk in a bent rather than an upright posture like human beings. Even this limited bipedal stride was sufficient to encourage evolutionists to project onto these creatures that they were the ancestors of man.
However, the first evidence refuting the allegations of evolutionists that Australopithecus were bipedal came from evolutionists themselves. Detailed studies made on Australopithecus fossils forced even evolutionists to admit that these looked "too" ape-like. Having conducted detailed anatomical research on Australopithecus fossils in the mid-1970s, Charles E. Oxnard likened the skeletal structure of Australopithecus to that of modern orang-utans:
What really embarrassed evolutionists was the discovery that Australopithecus could not have walked on two feet and with a bent posture. It would have been physically very ineffective for Australopithecus, allegedly bipedal but with a bent stride, to move about in such a way because of the enormous energy demands it would have entailed. By means of computer simulations conducted in 1996, the English paleoanthropologist Robin Crompton also demonstrated that such a "compound" stride was impossible. Crompton reached the following conclusion: a living being can walk either upright or on all fours. A type of in-between stride cannot be sustained for long periods because of the extreme energy consumption. This means that Australopithecus could not have been both bipedal and have a bent walking posture.
Probably the most important study demonstrating that Australopithecus could not have been bipedal came in 1994 from the research anatomist Fred Spoor and his team in the Department of Human Anatomy and Cellular Biology at the University of Liverpool, England. This group conducted studies on the bipedalism of fossilised living beings. Their research investigated the involuntary balance mechanism found in the cochlea of the ear, and the findings showed conclusively that Australopithecus could not have been bipedal. This precluded any claims that Australopithecus was human-like.
The Homo Series: Real Human Beings
The next step in the imaginary human evolution is "Homo", that is, the human series. These living beings are humans who are no different from modern men, yet who have some racial differences. Seeking to exaggerate these differences, evolutionists represent these people not as a "race" of modern man but as a different "species". However, as we will soon see, the people in the Homo series are nothing but ordinary human racial types.
According to the fanciful scheme of evolutionists, the internal imaginary evolution of the Homo species is as follows: First Homo erectus, then Homo sapiens archaic and Neanderthal Man, later Cro-Magnon Man and finally modern man.
Despite the claims of evolutionists to the contrary, all the "species" we have enumerated above are nothing but genuine human beings. Let us first examine Homo erectus, who evolutionists refer to as the most primitive human species.
The most striking evidence showing that Homo erectus is not a "primitive" species is the fossil of "Turkana Boy", one of the oldest Homo erectus remains. It is estimated that the fossil was of a 12-year-old boy, who would have been 1.83 meters tall in his adolescence. the upright skeletal structure of the fossil is no different from that of modern man. Its tall and slender skeletal structure totally complies with that of the people living in tropical regions in our day. This fossil is one of the most important pieces of evidence that Homo erectus is simply another specimen of the modern human race. Evolutionist paleontologist Richard Leakey compares Homo erectus and modern man as follows:
Leakey means to say that the difference between Homo erectus and us is no more than the difference between Negroes and Eskimos. the cranial features of Homo erectus resulted from their manner of feeding, and genetic emigration and from their not assimilating with other human races for a lengthy period.
Another strong piece of evidence that Homo erectus is not a "primitive" species is that fossils of this species have been unearthed aged twenty-seven thousand years and even thirteen thousand years. According to an article published in Time – which is not a scientific periodical, but nevertheless had a sweeping effect on the world of science – Homo erectus fossils aged twenty-seven thousand years were found on the island of Java. in the Kow swamp in Australia, some thirteen thousand year-old fossils were found that bore Homo Sapiens-Homo Erectus characteristics. All these fossils demonstrate that Homo erectus continued living up to times very close to our day and were nothing but a human race that has since been buried in history.
Archaic Homo Sapiens and Neanderthal Man
Archaic Homo sapiens is the immediate forerunner of contemporary man in the imaginary evolutionary scheme. in fact, evolutionists do not have much to say about these men, as there are only minor differences between them and modern men. Some researchers even state that representatives of this race are still living today, and point to the Aborigines in Australia as an example. Like Homo sapiens, the Aborigines also have thick protruding eyebrows, an inward-inclined mandibular structure, and a slightly smaller cranial volume. Moreover, significant discoveries have been made hinting that such people lived in Hungary and in some villages in Italy until not very long ago.
Evolutionists point to human fossils unearthed in the Neander valley of Holland which have been named Neanderthal Man. Many contemporary researchers define Neanderthal Man as a sub-species of modern man and call it "Homo sapiens neandertalensis". It is definite that this race lived together with modern humans, at the same time and in the same areas. the findings testify that Neanderthals buried their dead, fashioned musical instruments, and had cultural affinities with the Homo sapiens sapiens living during the same period. Entirely modern skulls and skeletal structures of Neanderthal fossils are not open to any speculation. A prominent authority on the subject, Erik Trinkaus from New Mexico University writes:
In fact, Neanderthals even had some "evolutionary" advantages over modern men. the cranial capacity of Neanderthals was larger than that of the modern man and they were more robust and muscular than we are. Trinkaus adds: "One of the most characteristic features of the Neanderthals is the exaggerated massiveness of their trunk and limb bones. All of the preserved bones suggest a strength seldom attained by modern humans. Furthermore, not only is this robustness present among the adult males, as one might expect, but it is also evident in the adult females, adolescents, and even children."
To put it precisely, Neanderthals are a particular human race that assimilated with other races in time.
All of these factors show that the scenario of "human evolution" fabricated by evolutionists is a figment of their imaginations, and that men have always been men and apes always apes.
Can Life Result from Coincidences as Revolution Argues?
The theory of evolution holds that life started with a cell that formed by chance under primitive earth conditions. Let us therefore examine the composition of the cell with simple comparisons in order to show how irrational it is to ascribe the existence of the cell – a structure which still maintains its mystery in many respects, even at a time when we are about to set foot in the 21st century – to natural phenomena and coincidences.
With all its operational systems, systems of communication, transportation and management, a cell is no less complex than any city. It contains power stations producing the energy consumed by the cell, factories manufacturing the enzymes and hormones essential for life, a databank where all necessary information about all products to be produced is recorded, complex transportation systems and pipelines for carrying raw materials and products from one place to another, advanced laboratories and refineries for breaking down imported raw materials into their usable parts, and specialised cell membrane proteins for the control of incoming and outgoing materials. These constitute only a small part of this incredibly complex system.
Far from being formed under primitive earth conditions, the cell, which in its composition and mechanisms is so complex, cannot be synthesised in even the most sophisticated laboratories of our day. Even with the use of amino acids, the building blocks of the cell, it is not possible to produce so much as a single organelle of the cell, such as mitochondria or ribosome, much less a whole cell. the first cell claimed to have been produced by evolutionary coincidence is as much a figment of the imagination and a product of fantasy as the unicorn.
Proteins Challenge Coincidence
And it is not just the cell that cannot be produced: the formation, under natural conditions, of even a single protein of the thousands of complex protein molecules making up a cell is impossible.
Proteins are giant molecules consisting of amino acids arranged in a particular sequence in certain quantities and structures. These molecules constitute the building blocks of a living cell. the simplest is composed of 50 amino acids; but there are some proteins that are composed of thousands of amino acids. the absence, addition, or replacement of a single amino acid in the structure of a protein in living cells, each of which has a particular function, causes the protein to become a useless molecular heap. Incapable of demonstrating the "accidental formation" of amino acids, the theory of evolution founders on the point of the formation of proteins.
We can easily demonstrate, with simple probability calculations anybody can understand, that the functional structure of proteins can by no means come about by chance.
There are twenty different amino acids. If we consider that an average-sized protein molecule is composed of 288 amino acids, there are 10300 different combinations of acids. of all of these possible sequences, only "one" forms the desired protein molecule. the other amino-acid chains are either completely useless or else potentially harmful to living things. in other words, the probability of the coincidental formation of only one protein molecule cited above is "1 in 10300". the probability of this "1" occurring out of an "astronomical" number consisting of 1 followed by 300 zeros is for all practical purposes zero; it is impossible. Furthermore, a protein molecule of 288 amino acids is rather a modest one compared with some giant protein molecules consisting of thousands of amino acids. When we apply similar probability calculations to these giant protein molecules, we see that even the word "impossible" becomes inadequate.
If the coincidental formation of even one of these proteins is impossible, it is billions of times more impossible for approximately one million of those proteins to come together by chance in an organised fashion and make up a complete human cell. Moreover, a cell is not merely a collection of proteins. in addition to proteins, cells also include nucleic acids, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, and many other chemicals such as electrolytes, all of which are arranged harmoniously and with design in specific proportions, both in terms of structure and function. Each functions as a building block or component in various organelles.
As we have seen, evolution is unable to explain the formation of even a single protein out of the millions in the cell, let alone explain the cell.
Prof. Dr. Ali Demirsoy, one of the foremost authorities of evolutionist thought in Turkey, in his book Kalitim ve Evrim (Inheritance and Evolution), discusses the probability of the accidental formation of Cytochrome-C, one of the essential enzymes for life:
After these lines, Demirsoy admits that this probability, which he accepted just because it was "more appropriate to the goals of science", is unrealistic:
The correct sequence of proper amino acids is simply not enough for the formation of one of the protein molecules present in living things. Besides this, each of the twenty different types of amino acid present in the composition of proteins must be left-handed. Chemically, there are two different types of amino acids called "left-handed" and "right-handed". the difference between them is the mirror-symmetry between their three dimensional structures, which is similar to that of a person's right and left hands. Amino acids of either of these two types are found in equal numbers in nature and they can bond perfectly well with one another. Yet, research uncovers an astonishing fact: all proteins present in the structure of living things are made up of left-handed amino acids. Even a single right-handed amino acid attached to the structure of a protein renders it useless.
Let us for an instant suppose that life came into existence by chance as evolutionists claim. in this case, the right and left-handed amino acids that were generated by chance should be present in nature in roughly equal amounts. the question of how proteins can pick out only left-handed amino acids, and how not even a single right-handed amino acid becomes involved in the life process is something that still confounds evolutionists. in the Britannica Science Encyclopaedia, an ardent defender of evolution, the authors indicate that the amino acids of all living organisms on earth and the building blocks of complex polymers such as proteins have the same left-handed asymmetry. They add that this is tantamount to tossing a coin a million times and always getting heads. in the same encyclopaedia, they state that it is not possible to understand why molecules become left-handed or right-handed and that this choice is fascinatingly related to the source of life on earth.13
It is not enough for amino acids to be arranged in the correct numbers, sequences, and in the required three-dimensional structures. the formation of a protein also requires that amino acid molecules with more than one arm be linked to each other only through certain arms. Such a bond is called a "peptide bond". Amino acids can make different bonds with each other; but proteins comprise those and only those amino acids that join together by "peptide" bonds.
Research has shown that only 50 % of amino acids, combining at random, combine with a peptide bond and that the rest combine with different bonds that are not present in proteins. to function properly, each amino acid making up a protein must join with other amino acids with a peptide bond, as it has only to be chosen from among the left-handed ones. Unquestionably, there is no control mechanism to select and leave out the right-handed amino acids and personally make sure that each amino acid makes a peptide bond with the other.
Under these circumstances, the probabilities of an average protein molecule comprising five hundred amino acids arranging itself in the correct quantities and in sequence, in addition to the probabilities of all of the amino acids it contains being only left-handed and combining using only peptide bonds are as follows:
As you can see above, the probability of the formation of a protein molecule comprising five hundred amino acids is "1" divided by a number formed by placing 950 zeros after a 1, a number incomprehensible to the human mind. This is only a probability on paper. Practically, such a possibility has "0" chance of realisation. in mathematics, a probability smaller than 1 over 1050 is statistically considered to have a "0" probability of realisation.
While the improbability of the formation of a protein molecule made up of five hundred amino acids reaches such an extent, we can further proceed to push the limits of the mind to higher levels of improbability. in the "haemoglobin" molecule, a vital protein, there are five hundred and seventy-four amino acids, which is a much larger number than that of the amino acids making up the protein mentioned above. Now consider this: in only one out of the billions of red blood cells in your body, there are "280,000,000" (280 million) haemoglobin molecules. the supposed age of the earth is not sufficient to afford the formation of even a single protein, let alone a red blood cell, by the method of "trial and error". the conclusion from all this is that evolution falls into a terrible abyss of improbability right at the stage of the formation of a single protein.
Looking for Answers to the Generation of Life
Well aware of the terrible odds against the possibility of life forming by chance, evolutionists were unable to provide a rational explanation for their beliefs, so they set about looking for ways to demonstrate that the odds were not so unfavourable.
They designed a number of laboratory experiments to address the question of how life could generate itself from non-living matter. the best known and most respected of these experiments is the one known as the "Miller Experiment" or "Urey-Miller Experiment", which was conducted by the American researcher Stanley Miller in 1953.
With the purpose of proving that amino acids could have come into existence by accident, Miller created an atmosphere in his laboratory that he assumed would have existed on primordial earth (but which later proved to be unrealistic) and he set to work. the mixture he used for this primordial atmosphere was composed of ammonia, methane, hydrogen, and water vapour.
Miller knew that methane, ammonia, water vapour and hydrogen would not react with each other under natural conditions. He was aware that he had to inject energy into the mixture to start a reaction. He suggested that this energy could have come from lightning flashes in the primordial atmosphere and, relying on this supposition, he used an artificial electricity discharge in his experiments.
Miller boiled this gas mixture at 100 0C for a week, and, in addition, he introduced an electric current into the chamber. At the end of the week, Miller analysed the chemicals that had been formed in the chamber and observed that three of the twenty amino acids, which constitute the basic elements of proteins, had been synthesised.
This experiment aroused great excitement among evolutionists and they promoted it as an outstanding success. Encouraged by the thought that this experiment definitely verified their theory, evolutionists immediately produced new scenarios. Miller had supposedly proved that amino acids could form by themselves. Relying on this, they hurriedly hypothesised the following stages. According to their scenario, amino acids had later by accident united in the proper sequences to form proteins. Some of these accidentally formed proteins placed themselves in cell membrane-like structures, which "somehow" came into existence and formed a primitive cell. the cells united in time and formed living organisms. the greatest mainstay of the scenario was Miller's experiment.
However, Miller's experiment was nothing but make-believe, and has since been proven invalid in many respects.
The Invalidity of Miller's Experiment
Nearly half a century has passed since Miller conducted his experiment. Although it has been shown to be invalid in many respects, evolutionists still advance Miller and his results as absolute proof that life could have formed spontaneously from non-living matter. When we assess Miller's experiment critically, without the bias and subjectivity of evolutionist thinking, however, it is evident that the situation is not as rosy as evolutionists would have us think. Miller set for himself the goal of proving that amino acids could form by themselves in earth's primitive conditions. Some amino acids were produced, but the conduct of the experiment conflicts with his goal in many ways, as we shall now see.
F Miller isolated the amino acids from the environment as soon as they were formed, by using a mechanism called a "cold trap". Had he not done so, the conditions of the environment in which the amino acids formed would immediately have destroyed the molecules.
It is quite meaningless to suppose that some conscious mechanism of this sort was integral to earth's primordial conditions, which involved ultraviolet radiation, thunderbolts, various chemicals, and a high percentage of free oxygen. Without such a mechanism, any amino acid that did manage to form would immediately have been destroyed.
F the primordial atmospheric environment that Miller attempted to simulate in his experiment was not realistic. Nitrogen and carbon dioxide would have been constituents of the primordial atmosphere, but Miller disregarded this and used methane and ammonia instead.
Why? Why were evolutionists insistent on the point that the primitive atmosphere contained high amounts of methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), and water vapour (H2O)? the answer is simple: without ammonia, it is impossible to synthesise an amino acid. Kevin McKean talks about this in an article published in Discover magazine:
After a long period of silence, Miller himself also confessed that the atmospheric environment he used in his experiment was not realistic.
F Another important point invalidating Miller's experiment is that there was enough oxygen to destroy all the amino acids in the atmosphere at the time when evolutionists thought that amino acids formed. This oxygen concentration would definitely have hindered the formation of amino acids. This situation completely negates Miller's experiment, in which he totally neglected oxygen. If he had used oxygen in the experiment, methane would have decomposed into carbon dioxide and water, and ammonia would have decomposed into nitrogen and water.
On the other hand, since no ozone layer yet existed, no organic molecule could possibly have lived on earth because it was entirely unprotected against intense ultraviolet rays.
F in addition to a few amino acids essential for life, Miller's experiment also produced many organic acids with characteristics that are quite detrimental to the structures and functions of living things. If he had not isolated the amino acids and had left them in the same environment with these chemicals, their destruction or transformation into different compounds through chemical reactions would have been unavoidable. Moreover, a large number of right-handed amino acids also formed. the existence of these amino acids alone refuted the theory, even within its own reasoning, because right-handed amino acids are unable to function in the composition of living organisms and render proteins useless when they are involved in their composition.
To conclude, the circumstances in which amino acids formed in Miller's experiment were not suitable for life forms to come into being. the medium in which they formed was an acidic mixture that destroyed and oxidised any useful molecules that might have been obtained.
Evolutionists themselves actually refute the theory of evolution, as they are often wont to do, by advancing this experiment as "proof". If the experiment proves anything, it is that amino acids can only be produced in a controlled laboratory environment where all the necessary conditions have been specifically and consciously designed. That is, the experiment shows that what brings life (even the "near-life" of amino acids) into being cannot be unconscious chance, but rather conscious will – in a word, Creation. This is why every stage of Creation is a sign proving to us the existence and might of Allah.
The Miraculous Molecule: DNA
The theory of evolution has been unable to provide a coherent explanation for the existence of the molecules that are the basis of the cell. Furthermore, developments in the science of genetics and the discovery of the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) have produced brand-new problems for the theory of evolution.
In 1955, the work of two scientists on DNA, James Watson and Francis Crick, launched a new era in biology. Many scientists directed their attention to the science of genetics. Today, after years of research, scientists have, largely, mapped the structure of DNA.
Here, we need to give some very basic information on the structure and function of DNA:
The molecule called DNA, which exists in the nucleus of each of the 100 trillion cells in our body, contains the complete construction plan of the human body. Information regarding all the characteristics of a person, from the physical appearance to the structure of the inner organs, is recorded in DNA by means of a special coding system. the information in DNA is coded within the sequence of four special bases that make up this molecule. These bases are specified as A, T, G, and C according to the initial letters of their names. All the structural differences among people depend on the variations in the sequence of these bases. There are approximately 3.5 billion nucleotides, that is, 3.5 billion letters in a DNA molecule.
The DNA data pertaining to a particular organ or protein is included in special components called "genes". for instance, information about the eye exists in a series of special genes, whereas information about the heart exists in quite another series of genes. the cell produces proteins by using the information in all of these genes. Amino acids that constitute the structure of the protein are defined by the sequential arrangement of three nucleotides in the DNA.
At this point, an important detail deserves attention. An error in the sequence of nucleotides making up a gene renders the gene completely useless. When we consider that there are 200 thousand genes in the human body, it becomes more evident how impossible it is for the millions of nucleotides making up these genes to form by accident in the right sequence. An evolutionist biologist, Frank Salisbury, comments on this impossibility by saying:
The number 41000 is equivalent to 10600. We obtain this number by adding 600 zeros to 1. As 10 with 11 zeros indicates a trillion, a figure with 600 zeros is indeed a number that is difficult to grasp.
Evolutionist Prof. Ali Demirsoy was forced to make the following admission on this issue:
In addition to all these improbabilities, DNA can barely be involved in a reaction because of its double-chained spiral shape. This also makes it impossible to think that it can be the basis of life.
Moreover, while DNA can replicate only with the help of some enzymes that are actually proteins, the synthesis of these enzymes can be realised only by the information coded in DNA. As they both depend on each other, either they have to exist at the same time for replication, or one of them has had to be "created" before the other. American microbiologist Jacobson comments on the subject:
The quotation above was written two years after the disclosure of the structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick. Despite all the developments in science, this problem remains unsolved for evolutionists. to sum up, the need for DNA in reproduction, the necessity of the presence of some proteins for reproduction, and the requirement to produce these proteins according to the information in the DNA entirely demolish evolutionist theses.
Two German scientists, Junker and Scherer, explained that the synthesis of each of the molecules required for chemical evolution, necessitates distinct conditions, and that the probability of the compounding of these materials having theoretically very different acquirement methods is zero:
In short, the theory of evolution is unable to prove any of the evolutionary stages that allegedly occur at the molecular level.
To summarise what we have said so far, neither amino acids nor their products, the proteins making up the cells of living beings, could ever be produced in any so-called "primitive atmosphere" environment. Moreover, factors such as the incredibly complex structure of proteins, their right-hand, left-hand features, and the difficulties in the formation of peptide bonds are just parts of the reason why they will never be produced in any future experiment either.
Even if we suppose for a moment that proteins somehow did form accidentally, that would still have no meaning, for proteins are nothing at all on their own: they cannot themselves reproduce. Protein synthesis is only possible with the information coded in DNA and RNA molecules. Without DNA and RNA, it is impossible for a protein to reproduce. the specific sequence of the twenty different amino acids encoded in DNA determines the structure of each protein in the body. However, as has been made abundantly clear by all those who have studied these molecules, it is impossible for DNA and RNA to form by chance.
The Fact of Creation
With the collapse of the theory of evolution in every field, prominent names in the discipline of microbiology today admit the fact of creation and have begun to defend the view that everything is created by a conscious Creator as part of an exalted creation. This is already a fact that people cannot disregard. Scientists who can approach their work with an open mind have developed a view called "intelligent design". Michael J. Behe, one of the foremost of these scientists, states that he accepts the absolute being of the Creator and describes the impasse of those who deny this fact:
The result of these cumulative efforts to investigate the cell – to investigate life at the molecular level – is a loud, clear, piercing cry of "design!" the result is so unambiguous and so significant that it must be ranked as one of the greatest achievements in the history of science. This triumph of science should evoke cries of "Eureka" from ten thousand throats.
But, no bottles have been uncorked, no hands clapped. Instead, a curious, embarrassed silence surrounds the stark complexity of the cell. When the subject comes up in public, feet start to shuffle, and breathing gets a bit laboured. in private people are a bit more relaxed; many explicitly admit the obvious but then stare at the ground, shake their heads, and let it go like that. Why does the scientific community not greedily embrace its startling discovery? Why is the observation of design handled with intellectual gloves? the dilemma is that while one side of the elephant is labelled intelligent design, the other side must be labelled God.19
Today, many people are not even aware that they are in a position of accepting a body of fallacy as truth in the name of science, instead of believing in Allah. Those who do not find the sentence "Allah created you from nothing" scientific enough can believe that the first living being came into being by thunderbolts striking a "primordial soup" billions of years ago.
As we have described elsewhere in this book, the balances in nature are so delicate and so numerous that it is entirely irrational to claim that they developed "by chance". No matter how much those who cannot set themselves free from this irrationality may strive, the signs of Allah in the heavens and the earth are completely obvious and they are undeniable.
Allah is the Creator of the heavens, the earth and all that is in between.
The signs of His being have encompassed the entire universe.
1. Charles Darwin, the Origin of Species: By Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, London: Senate Press, 1995, p. 134.
2. Derek A. Ager. "The Nature of the Fossil Record." Proceedings of the British Geological Association, vol. 87, no. 2, (1976), p. 133.
3. T.N. George, "Fossils in Evolutionary Perspective", Science Progress, vol.48, (January 1960), p.1-3
4. Richard Monestarsky, Mysteries of the Orient, Discover, April 1993, p.40.
5. Stefan Bengston, Nature 345:765 (1990).
6. Earnest A. Hooton, Up From the Ape, New York: McMillan, 1931, p.332.
7. Stephen Jay Gould, Smith Woodward's Folly, New Scientist, 5 April, 1979, p. 44.
8. Charles E. Oxnard, the Place of Australopithecines in Human Evolution: Grounds for Doubt, Nature, No. 258, p. 389.
9. Richard Leakey, the Making of Mankind, London: Sphere Books, 1981, p. 116
10. Eric Trinkaus, Hard Times Among the Neanderthals, Natural History, No. 87, December 1978, p. 10, R.L. Holoway, "The Neanderthal Brain: What was Primitive?", American Journal of Physical Anthrophology Supplement, No. 12, 1991, p. 94
11. Ali Demirsoy, Kalitim ve Evrim (Inheritance and Evolution), Ankara: Meteksan Yayinlari 1984, p. 61
12. Ali Demirsoy, Kalitim ve Evrim (Inheritance and Evolution), Ankara: Meteksan Yayinlari 1984, p. 61
13. Fabbri Britannica Science Encyclopaedia, Vol. 2, No. 22, p. 519
14. Kevin McKean, Bilim ve Teknik, No. 189, p. 7
15. Frank B. Salisbury, "Doubts about the Modern Synthetic Theory of Evolution", American Biology Teacher, September 1971, p. 336.
16. Ali Demirsoy, Kalitim ve Evrim (Inheritance and Evolution), Ankara: Meteksan Publishing Co., 1984, p. 39.
17. Homer Jacobson, "Information, Reproduction and the Origin of Life", American Scientist, January, 1955, p.121.
18. Reinhard Junker & Siegfried Scherer, "Entstehung Gesiche Der Lebewesen", Weyel, 1986, p. 89.
19. Michael J. Behe, Darwin's Black Box, New York: Free Press, 1996, pp. 232-233.

With Abby off at school, it is a chance to work on learning more with Kenzie. She knows all her letters, and we have been working on mastering her sounds. We’ll be doing the activity I’m showing you today with every letter of the alphabet. You may have seen my tutorial on sewing a reversible bag. Today I decided to put the bag to use. I had some punch out letters and attached them to the bag with tape so it would just be a temporary addition.
Next, we wandered around the house looking for A words to put in our bag. We found an apple, alligator, ambulance, airplane, apron. As we walked around, we kept on making the two A sounds.
We took our bag to the chalkboard, emptied it out and wrote down all of our words. Then, I had Kenzie locate and trace the A’s in the words. Finally, she was able to write the letter A on her own. In case you are wondering, she is 3 1/2. It is a great preschool or kindergarten activity.

As an extended service of _____________________________________________, you will receive fact sheets to help you learn how to investigate, select and use waste minimization opportunities for your industry. Reducing or eliminating hazardous substances is an important business decision. When you use hazardous chemicals in your processes, you are not just making a one-time purchase of the material, you are also paying for:
These costs add up, and finding alternatives to these substances should be a priority. Alternatives are available and often out-perform old process equipment and chemicals.
Proper storage and disposal Permits Protecting worker health submitting required reports training employees
How can auto body repair shops' pollution prevention efforts help industrial laundries?
Often small amounts of hazardous materials are left in industrial shop towels and wipes after use. The wipes are usually not treated as hazardous waste and are often cleaned by industrial laundries for re-use.
Wipes and towels from auto body repair shops often contain cleaners, oils, solvents and paints composed of hazardous materials. These chemicals are transferred to the industrial laundry's wastewater during washing.
Auto body repair shops' efforts to reduce the amount of hazardous substances they use and discard in wipes will reduce the pollutant load in the laundries' wastewater. Pollution prevention efforts to substitute less hazardous cleaners, oils, solvents and paints will benefit both auto body shops and industrial laundries.
The pollution prevention ideas in this fact sheet may help you lessen the overall impact of your facility on the environment as well as potentially reduce operating costs.
Identify and Use Less Hazardous Paints and CoatingsWHO TO CALL FOR HELP
Less toxic paints and coatings mean less hazardous materials left on shop towels and wipes.
- Consider using paints and coatings with less hazardous ingredients.
Identify and Use Less Hazardous Solvents and Cleaners
Less hazardous cleaners mean less hazardous materials left on shop towels and wipes.
- Consider using cleaners and solvents with a lower volatile organic compound (VOC) content.
- Consider using water-based or citrus-based dillmonine cleaner in place of solvents.
Reduce the Amount of Solvents and Cleaners Used
Employees often have ideas on how to use less solvents. Check with them.
- Use a spray bottle or plunger can to deliver solvents where they're needed.
- Don't dip shop towels or wipes into open solvent containers.
- Reduce the size of the shop towel or wipe. You'll reduce the amount of solvent used at the same time.
- Consider reusing shop towels or wipes for repetitive tasks.
- Keep used wipes and towels in closed containers between uses.
- Limit the amount of solvent available for use each day.
Spray Gun Cleaning Tips
- Consider developing a multiple stage cleaning process with a soak stage using partially spent solvent.
- Keep spray guns in proper working condition. This minimizes cleaning effort and solvent use.
- Immerse only the spray gun tip when cleaning.
Recover Solvents and Cleaners from Towels and Wipes Before They Are Sent to the Laundry. Recovery methods include:
- Gravity Drain
- Hand Wringing
- Automatic wringing
- Centrifuging--explosion proof
- VOC stripping using steam
- Use a liner (mesh type bag) in the used towel/wipe collection container to keep the wipes above any free liquid in the bottom of the container
- Don't put towels or wipes with free liquid into the collection container--wring them out first
- Recovered solvents may be reused
- Share Material Safety Data Sheets for materials used in your shop with your launderer
- Collect, store and transport used shop towels and wipes to the laundry facility in closed containers
- Don't use shop towels or wipes to clean up spills of hazardous materials or to dispose of excess materials
- Sort shop towels or wipes according to the types of materials they may contain
For Free, Non-Regulatory Assistance and Referrals, contact PPRC.
Produced by the Northwest Partnership for Environmental Technology Education for the Pacific Northwest Pollution Prevention Resource Center,
513 First Ave. West, Seattle, WA 98119
phone: 206-352-2050, fax: 206-352-2049, e-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org, WWW address: http://www.pprc.org

Glossary of Generalized Anxiety Disoder Terms
Definition of hedonic treadmill
Definition of learned helplessness
Description of norepinephrine
Description of serotonin
Definition of manic episode.
Major Depressive Episode
Definition of major depressive episode
Definition of negative reinforcement
Definition of substance abuse
Definition of substance dependence
Definition of panic attack and how it is related to generalized anxiety disorder
Definition and description of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
Social Phobia (Social Anxiety Disorder)
Definition of social phobia and how it can be related to GAD
Definition of agoraphobia and how it can be related to GAD.
Definition of specific phobia and the various subtypes.
definition of mood disorder
Description of depression
Discussion of psychotherapy related to generalized anxiety disorder
definition of an anxiety disorder

Patient data is more accessible than ever thanks to patient and provider mobile connectivity. Data protection and patient ID verification have become critical parts of health care infrastructure. Providers want to identify their patients as quickly as possible, if they’re in need of emergency treatment, but they also need to ensure the data they're reading is accurate and secure.
Read this guide to understand how different health care patient ID verification technologies and trends, including single sign-on, data breach protection and response, and more, have affected and will continue to shape the health IT industry.
Table of contents:
Identification numbers or codes can be used to authenticate doctors and verify the accuracy of patient data. Hospitals also use IDs to control what information doctors can access through the use of their mobile devices. Read more to see other ways in which IDs are currently used in health care facilities.
Single sign-on in health care
Single sign-on technology enables doctors and patients more convenient access to their information by giving them one login name and password that grants them access to various processes. Read how else single sign-on is used to protect and grant access to critical data.
Patient info data breaches
Instances of compromised or stolen data are preventable through patient and physician education. However, there have been examples of data breaches in which patient information has been exposed, including a notable breach at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.
Future patient ID options and regulations
A national system consisting of a unique patient ID for every American has been a stated goal of some health care personnel. This is one possible option for secure patient identification in the future. There are other areas, like cloud and mobile devices, that are changing the way that health care IDs will be used.

Words Are Powerful
Speech -- the ability to convey ideas and feelings through words -- is unique to human beings. It can be a tremendous blessing, but it's also ripe for abuse.
The words our children choose to use in expressing themselves help create their personal window on the world.
Positive forms of expression can help our children grow into positive, optimistic people who view the world around them with generous and hopeful eyes. Negative forms of expression, such as defamatory, mean-spirited speech, will cultivate in them a negative, cynical view of the world.
Speech That Is Evil
It's easy to fall prey to a destructive pattern of speaking badly about others and gossiping -- to the point where it becomes a recreational activity! In order to enjoy the many people in our lives, we have to stop verbalizing the negativity and focus on their positive virtues. This takes a lot of effort but is essential in raising happy children.
If we're always finding fault, we will naturally be dissatisfied, disappointed and displeased, and so will be our children.
Raising happy children requires us to impart to our offspring the ability to look at everything positively --situations, places and material objects. Most important of all is how they view people.
Torah calls "evil language" anything negative, even if it's true.
The Hebrew term for speaking badly of others is called lashon hara, literally "evil language." Interestingly, the Torah calls "evil language" anything negative, even if it's true. (Slander -- malicious, false information is called motzi shem ra, literally "giving another a bad name.")
In sharp contrast to the Western adage about sticks and stones not hurting, Judaism looks very gravely upon misuse of speech. Our tradition teaches that lashon hara can destroy many lives, even unintentionally, in one fell swoop:
- the person speaking,
- the person spoken about,
- and the person spoken to.
Let's look at why.
- The person speaking: Although you briefly become the center of attention when you dish out a juicy piece of gossip, in the long run people start mistrusting you. "Gee, I wonder what she says about me when I'm not around." People don't trust gossips and will avoid confiding in you. In the end, you're killing your own reputation. Furthermore, because you are misusing the gift of speech that God gave you, you are also lessened in His eyes.
- The person spoken about: The person under discussion is, of course, being killed in everyone's eyes. Whether the information is true or false, it is hard to take back defamatory words already spoken and undo the character assassination already committed. That person's reputation is forever blemished.
- The person spoken to: Interestingly enough, this is the person who is the most culpable, even though s/he is seemingly the innocent one. All s/he did was listen! But the Talmud says that listening to lashon hara is even worse than speaking it; the person had the power to stop it and didn't. Now the transgression is complete.
Exceptions to the Rule
Of course, there are times we are all owed to speak share negative information about others; in fact, there are times it is an obligation to do so. For example - when a friend is about to be become financially involved with a person we know to be unethical, or seriously dating a person we know to be abusive or otherwise unsuitable. Or when a child has information that will prevent harm from occurring.
Beware of the excuses children and adults often use for speaking lashon hara:
- "But it's true!" Lashon hara specifically refers to sharing derogatory information when it is true. Spreading vicious lies is far worse!
- "If she were here I would say it to her face." Maybe you would, and maybe you wouldn't. In any case, it is still forbidden.
- "Everyone knows about it." Does this justify you adding fuel to the fire? Even if it is on the front page of the newspaper, you are still forbidden to speak about it.
Teaching our children to avoid speaking lashon hara takes a concerted effort. Experiment with the following tools:
- Teach by example. Showing children that it's a priority for you is perhaps the most important lesson. Don't let them hear your gossiping with your friends or relatives. Don't let them hear you laughing at other people's expense. Even better than "don't let them hear you" is not doing it -- whether they're in earshot or not.
- Discuss the importance of avoiding lashon hara. Help your children identify what is and isn't proper speech. Talk about how improper speech can hurt others and how it hurts the person speaking lashon hara. There are a number of excellent Jewish books that can help you.
- Discourage "tattling." When your kids come to "tell on" someone, tell them you aren't interested in reports of someone else's bad behavior, but that you're available if they need help or advice.
- Get in the habit of not using names. There's no need for you to know the names of problem students at school unless you'll have a direct role in addressing the issue. Focus the discussion on your child's feelings, worries and concerns. If he or she needs protection that requires your intervention, tell him or her that it is proper to tell you the name of the offending child.
- Don't fall into the trap of casual lashon hara. At dinner and at other family times, bring books to the table to discuss or talk about current events. When you discuss what happened in each person's day, focus on what they learned that day and how they felt. Show your children that there are more interesting things to talk about than other people's poor behavior.
- Give positive reinforcement. Be sure to commend your kids when they manage to tell you about school or neighborhood problems without mentioning who was involved. Let them know that you're proud of them - and that God is too.
- Reminders! Tape a reminder to the telephone: "No Lashon Hara!" Put up signs on the fridge and in other prominent locations around the house.
- Study it. Read a small section of the laws of lashon hara each day during dinner or at your Shabbat table. Encourage discussion and examples.

Gasoline prices have increased rapidly during the past several years, pushed up mainly by the sharply rising price of oil. A gallon of gasoline in the US rose from $1.50 in 2002 to $2 in 2004 to $2.50 in 2006 to over $4 at present. Gasoline prices almost trebled during these 6 years compared to very little change in nominal gas prices during the prior fifteen years. The US federal tax on gasoline has remained at 18.4 cents per gallon during this period of rapid growth in gasoline prices, while state excise taxes add another 21.5 cents per gallon. In addition, many local governments levy additional sales and other taxes on gasoline. Gasoline taxes have not risen much as the price of gasoline exploded upward.
The price of gasoline is much lower than in other rich countries mainly because American taxes are far smaller. For example, gasoline taxes in Germany and the United Kingdom amount to about $3 per gallon. Some economists and environmentalists have called for large increases in federal, state, and local taxes to make them more comparable to gasoline taxes in other countries. Others want these taxes to rise by enough so that at least they would have kept pace with the sharply rising pre-tax fuel prices. At the same time two presidential candidates, Hillary Clinton and John McCain, proposed a temporary repeal during this summer of the federal tax in order to give consumers a little relief from the higher gas prices. We discuss the optimal tax on gasoline, and how the sharp increase in gas prices affected its magnitude.
Taxes on gasoline are a way to induce consumers to incorporate the "external" damages to others into their decision of how much to drive and where to drive. These externalities include the effects of driving on local and global pollution, such as the contribution to global warming from the carbon emitted into the atmosphere by burnt gasoline. One other important externality is the contribution of additional driving to road congestion that slows the driving speeds of everyone and increases the time it takes to go a given distance. Others include automobile accidents that injure drivers and pedestrians, and the effect of using additional gasoline on the degree of dependence on imported oil from the Middle East and other not very stable parts of the world.
A careful 2007 study by authors from Resources for the Future evaluates the magnitudes of all these externalities from driving in the US (see Harrington, Parry, and Walls, "Automobile Externalities and Policies", Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, pp 374-400). They estimate the total external costs of driving at 228 cents per gallon of gas used, or at 10.9 cents per mile driven, with the typical car owned by American drivers. Their breakdown of this total among different sources is interesting and a little surprising. They attribute only 6 cents of the total external cost to the effects of gasoline consumption on global warming through the emission of carbon into the atmosphere from the burning of gasoline, and 12 cents from the increased dependency on imported oil. Perhaps their estimate of only 6 cents per gallon is a large underestimate of the harmful effects of gasoline use on global warming. Yet even if we treble their estimate, that only raises total costs of gasoline use due to the effects on global warming by 12 cents per gallon. That still leaves the vast majority of the external costs of driving to other factors.
They figure that local pollution effects amount to 42 cents per gallon, which makes these costs much more important than even the trebled cost of global warming. According to their estimates, still more important costs are those due to congestion and accidents, since these are 105 cents and 63 cents per gallon, respectively. Their figure for the cost of traffic accidents is likely too high ‚Äìas the authors' recognize- because it includes the cost in damages to property and person of single vehicle accidents, as when a car hits a tree. Presumably, single vehicle accidents are not true externalities because drivers and their passengers would consider their possibility and internalize them into their driving decisions. Moreover, the large effect of drunk driving on the likelihood of accidents should be treated separately from a gasoline tax by directly punishing drunk drivers rather than punishing also sober drivers who are far less likely to get into accidents.
On the surface, these calculations suggest that American taxes on gasoline, totaling across all levels of government to about 45 cents per gallon, are much too low. However, the federal tax of 18.4 cents per gallon is almost exactly equal to their figure of 18 cents per gallon as the external costs of global warming and oil dependency. To be sure, a trebled estimate for global warming would bring theirs up to 30 cents per gallon. However, the federal government also taxes driving through its mandated fuel efficiency standards for cars, although this is an inefficient way to tax driving since it taxes the type of car rather than driving. Still, the overall level of federal taxes does not fall much short, if at all, from the adjusted estimate of 30 cents per gallon of damages due to the effects of gasoline use on global warming and oil dependency.
Any shortfall in taxes would be at the state and local levels in combating externalities due to local pollution effects, and to auto accidents and congestion on mainly local roads. Here too, however, the discrepancy between actual and optimal gasoline taxes is far smaller than it may seem, and not only because single vehicle accidents are included in their estimate of the cost of car accidents, and accidents due to drunk driving should be discouraged through punishments to drunk drivers. One important reason is that congestion should be reduced not by general gasoline taxes, but by special congestion taxes- as used in London and a few other cities- that vary in amount with degree of congestion (see our discussion of congestion taxes on February 12, 2006). Congestion taxes are a far more efficient way to reduce congestion than are general taxes on gasoline that apply also when congestion is slight.
In addition and often overlooked, the sharp rise in pre-tax gasoline prices has partly accomplished the local pollution and auto accident goals that would be achieved by higher gas taxes. For higher prices have cut driving, just as taxes would, and will cut driving further in the future as consumers continue to adjust the amount and time of their driving to gasoline that costs more than $4 a gallon. Reduced driving will lower pollution and auto accidents by reducing the number of cars on the road during any time period, especially during heavily traveled times when pollution and accidents are more common.
The effects of high gas prices in reducing congestion, local pollution, and accident externalities could be substantial. These authors estimate the size of local driving externalities, aside from congestion costs, at 105 cents per gallon. Even after the sharp run up in gas prices, this may still exceed the 28 cents per gallon of actual state and local taxes, but the gap probably is small. It surely is a lot smaller than it was before gas prices exploded on the back of the climb in the cost of oil. In effect, by reducing driving, higher gasoline prices have already done much of the work in reducing externalities that bigger gas taxes would have done when prices were lower.

HAD Edmund Cartwright thought for one moment of the hardship and misery he was about to unleash on a vulnerable section of society, he would never have sat down to invent the power loom.
Cartwright (1743-1823) was a Church of England minister, with a clergyman's love for his fellow man, so he would have been mortified to watch the long, agonising death throes of the hand-loom weaving industry that his invention caused.
The 18th century was full of men who excelled in several different fields at the same time, but if anyone deserved the description of polymath, it was Cartwright. Born into a landed family in Marnham, Nottinghamshire, he was one of three brothers who all became nationally famous.
John, born in 1740, would be one of Britain's best-known radical politicians while George, the eldest (born 1739) followed his army career by becoming a fur trapper and explorer in Canada. He earned the sobriquet of “Labrador Cartwright,” and was the first man to bring Eskimos to Britain – a family of five accompanied him back after one voyage and became favourites at Court.
Edmund was educated at Wakefield Grammar School and University College, Oxford. He became a fellow of Magdalen College and while there, made a name for himself as a literary critic and a poet. His mythical poem Armine and Elvira ran to several editions and was described by Sir Walter Scott as “a “very beautiful piece.”Cartwright was marked down for the church and in 1772 he was appointed curate of Brampton, near Wakefield, moving, seven years later, to become vicar of Goadby Marwood in Leicestershire. It was here that his ingenuity first surfaced.
Attending the sickbed of a young boy who was dying from putrid fever, or typhus, he spotted a tub of yeast in the room. Recalling an old tradition that rotting meat suspended over yeast would become pure and sweet again, he dosed the youngster with it – and cured him.
He treated several other parishioners in the same way and with the same result, and the treatment was widely adopted by 18th-century medics.
Still, Cartwright might have settled for rural obscurity in his rectory had it not been for a chance holiday encounter.
THIS was Cartwright's first attempt at loom building - before he had seen how others did it.
So, how did a man of the cloth become a man who made cloth? Cartwright tells the story of his invention in his own words, in an interview later in life with a representative of the Encyclopædia Britannica:
“HAPPENING to be at Matlock in the summer of 1784, I fell in company with some gentlemen of Manchester, when th conversation turned on Arkwright's spinning machinery. One of the company observed that as soon as Arkwright's patent expired, so many mills would be erected and so much cotton spun that hands would never be found to weave it.
"To this I replied that Arkwright must then set his wits to work to invent a weaving mill.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is an anxiety disorder that is characterized by excessive, uncontrollable and often irrational worry about everyday things that is disproportionate to the actual source of worry. This excessive worry often interferes with daily functioning, as individuals suffering GAD typically anticipate disaster, and are overly concerned about everyday matters such as health issues, money, death, family problems, friend problems, relationship problems or work difficulties. Physical symptoms can include fatigue, fidgeting, headaches, nausea, numbness in hands and feet, muscle tension, muscle aches, difficulty swallowing, bouts of difficulty breathing, difficulty concentrating, trembling, twitching, irritability, agitation, sweating, restlessness, insomnia, hot flashes, rashes, and an inability to fully control the anxiety. These symptoms must be consistent and on-going, persisting at least 6 months, for a formal diagnosis of GAD to be introduced. Generalized anxiety disorder is estimated to occur in 5% of the general population. Women are generally more affected than men .
Page 1 of 2
Dating Advice For Men

Like butterflies? Enjoy birds?
Garden with Vermont plants.
Native plants can help turn your yard into a wonderful wildlife preserve. They provide butterflies, birds and bees the habitat and food they need to survive and reproduce, in turn supporting other forms of wildlife that get energy directly from plants or by eating something that has already eaten a plant.
When land is converted to lawn or planted with non-native plants imported from Europe or Asia, native insects have a hard time finding something to eat because they are adapted to use particular plant species for food, lay eggs and hide from predators. Insect diversity and populations drop significantly when native plant species disappear - gardens with native plants have three times as many insect species and 35 times as much insect biomass as those with non-natives. Smaller populations means insects are not fulfilling the critical role they play in an ecosystem's food web.
Here are a few things you can do to create a wildlife and insect haven in your yard:
Plant native perennials, shrubs and trees. They offer birds the best variety and most abundant source of seasonal seeds, fruits and insects. Click here for a list of native Vermont plants and the insects they support.
Replace lawns with woodlands, meadows, native gardens and shrubs. Reduce the need for labor-intensive, gas-consuming lawn care by planting low-maintenance, native vegetation.
Provide pollinators a range of species that bloom throughout the season. Perennial beds do not include the seasonal variety that bees and other pollinators need. Include late-blooming native asters, goldenrods and sunflowers in your borders and meadows.
Whenever possible, leave leaf litter alone. Many insects overwinter in leaf litter, so leaving it on the ground allows many species of moths and butterflies to make it through Vermont’s long winters. For example, leaf litter frequently contains moth eggs, so those moths cannot survive if leaf litter is bagged and sent to the landfill.
Maintain naturally "messy" areas - leave woody debris alone. Many bees live alone or in colonies in twigs, stumps, dead branches or wood, and some birds nest on the ground and forage in leaf litter for insects.

Please Note: By clicking a link to any resource listed on this page, you will be leaving the KidsHealth site.
Sickle Cell Disease Association of America
This group provides education, advocacy, and other initiatives to promote awareness of and support for sickle cell disease programs.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)
NINDS offers research information related to neurological disorders.
United Cerebral Palsy
This organization provides information about cerebral palsy (CP) as well as new research and therapies.
National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities (NICHCY)
NICHCY is the national information and referral center that provides information on disabilities and disability-related issues for families, educators, and other professionals.

Take any point P inside an equilateral triangle. Draw PA, PB and PC
from P perpendicular to the sides of the triangle where A, B and C
are points on the sides. Prove that PA + PB + PC is a constant.
Can you decide whether two lines are perpendicular or not? Can you
do this without drawing them?
The centre of the larger circle is at the midpoint of one side of an equilateral triangle and the circle touches the other two sides of the triangle. A smaller circle touches the larger circle and. . . .
X is a moveable point on the hypotenuse, and P and Q are the feet
of the perpendiculars from X to the sides of a right angled
triangle. What position of X makes the length of PQ a minimum?
The circumcentres of four triangles are joined to form a
quadrilateral. What do you notice about this quadrilateral as the
dynamic image changes? Can you prove your conjecture?
It is impossible to trisect an angle using only ruler and compasses
but it can be done using a carpenter's square.
Find the area of the shaded region created by the two overlapping
triangles in terms of a and b?
Position the lines so that they are perpendicular to each other.
What can you say about the equations of perpendicular lines?
ABCD is a square. P is the midpoint of AB and is joined to C. A line from D perpendicular to PC meets the line at the point Q. Prove AQ = AD.
At the time of writing the hour and minute hands of my clock are at
right angles. How long will it be before they are at right angles

Since 2002, when HAVA was enacted, computer scientists have released over three dozen studies of the software-based voting systems rushed in by HAVA. Every one of these studies has concluded that software-based optical scanners and DREs (direct record electronic systems, often known as “touch screens”) are vulnerable to undetectable manipulation and error. While any machine, including a lever voting machine, can be hacked, software enables a single individual to change thousands of votes in a few minutes without leaving a trace.
The inner workings of the software-based machine are invisible. Systematic exploits enable massive vote switching in minutes. In contrast, to affect the outcome of an election conducted with lever machines is labor-intensive since each machine must be individually rigged, increasing the likelihood that the crime would be caught; levers are not capable of systematic exploits. Vote flipping, common on electronic machines, is also not possible on a lever machine. Tampering to a lever machine can be detected because the working parts of the lever machine are visible, as contrasted with software, which is invisible to all but the programmers. Regardless of how the software has been programmed, self-erasing malware can be introduced into an electronic system but not into a lever system. Certification of computerized systems is a ruse because no amount of certification testing will make voting computers secure.
- The National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Federal government’s own technical advisers, found that certification testing cannot provide security or reliability:
[E]xperience in testing software and systems has shown that testing to high degrees of security and reliability is from a practical perspective not possible.” (Emphasis added.)
- A 2007 report authorized by the California Secretary of State found that with software-based voting machines:
An attack could plausibly be accomplished by a single skilled individual with temporary access to a single voting machine. The damage could be extensive – malicious code could spread to every voting machine in polling places and to county election servers.
- Finding error or fraud in software code has been shown to be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming due to self-erasing code and the fact that code can be several hundred thousand lines in length, according to the 2008 ACCURATE Report (A Center for Correct, Usable, Reliable, Auditable, and Transparent Elections):
[N]o matter how hard one looks for errors or faults in voting system software, there is no way to guarantee that one has found them all. Even if no errors or faults are found, there is no way to guarantee that none exist….
- Notwithstanding the pre-election certification of the optical scanners and even with security seals in place, in 2006 the University of Connecticut established how easily election results can be falsified on an optical scanner:
An Accu-Vote Optical Scan can be compromised with off-the-shelf equipment in a matter of minutes even if the machine has its removable memory card sealed in place. The basic attack can be applied to effect a variety of results, including entirely neutralizing one candidate so that their votes are not counted, swapping the votes of two candidates, or biasing the results by shifting some votes from one candidate to another….
Such vote tabulation corruptions can lay dormant until Election Day, thus avoiding detection through pre-election tests…. [V]oters could be unaware of any discrepancies between their cast votes and the internally recorded votes.
- A 2007 Florida report demonstrated how viruses can be introduced and propagated from a single machine to every other computer in the jurisdiction as well as from one election to the next. Each county will use an Election Management System (EMS) computer (commonly known as a “central tabulator”). The central tabulator reprograms the optical scanners before every election using a memory card that tells the machine who is on the ballot and how to count it, and then accumulates and reports precinct-level results after an election. Florida’s study demonstrated how a virus introduced to a single machine would spread to every other machine in the county via memory cards:
A cleverly constructed virus can cover its tracks so that infected machines could not be detected by ordinary means and an appropriately programmed virus could self-destruct and erase all its tracks…. [I]f carefully constructed, it can allow an attacker to transfer program control to her own malicious code. Once this happens, the attacker controls the machine.
- A 2006 Princeton University report “describes how the virus propagates … via memory cards, without requiring any network.” NY’s wireless ban would not prevent this massive attack because all computers in a county communicate with the EMS central tabulator, which in turn communicates with each computer in the county:
An infected machine will infect any memory card that is inserted into it. An infected memory card will infect any machine that is powered up or rebooted with the memory card inserted. Because cards are transferred between machines during vote counting and administrative activities, the infected population will grow over time.
- A 2006 report commissioned by California’s Secretary of State corroborated that these attacks to optical scanners cannot be discerned by election officials responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the election:
There would be no way to know that any of these attacks occurred; the canvass procedure would not detect any anomalies, and would just produce incorrect results. The only way to detect and correct the problem would be by recount of the original paper ballots.
- A 2007 report commissioned by Florida’s Secretary of State reaffirmed that election results could be readily compromised by an individual with only brief access to an optical scanner, by replacing the memory card with one preprogrammed to read one candidate’s votes as counting for another. The report also found “The attack can be carried out with a reasonably low probability of detection….”
Flaws in the Optical Scan software enable an unofficial memory card to be inserted into an active terminal. Such a card can be preprogrammed to swap the electronically tabulated votes for two candidates, reroute all of a candidate’s votes to a different candidate, or tabulate votes for several candidates of choice toward a different candidate.
- In 2007, Ohio’s Secretary of State released the Evaluation and Validation of Election Related Equipment, Standards and Testing (EVEREST) study, which revealed, among other things, the ineffectiveness of requirements –such as NY’s — that the source code be escrowed to secure the software. The EVEREST team was able to penetrate all of Ohio’s voting systems, including Sequoia’s optical scanner, without the source code. None of these attacks could have been detected or prevented by knowing the source code. The EVEREST report concluded that software-based systems are “insufficient to guarantee a trustworthy election.”

Life Club is what regular schools don’t provide: the opportunity for your child to become a creative and confident English speaker. Life Club brings students of a common age group together to participate in teacher-led activities, socialize, and have fun in an English-speaking environment.
Life Club focuses on building your child’s confidence, communication skills, and awareness of English speaking cultures through fun performances, speech and drama activities, and authentic experience held outside of the traditional classroom setting.
We believe that the most effortless and effective learning happens while the student is having fun. The non-traditional environment of Life Club helps your child gain the skills and confidence to use real-life English.
As a component of the Efekta System, Life Club reinforces the language learned in the classroom and through iLAB.
Life Club is made up of various activities including games, speech and drama performances, holiday parties, music appreciation, movement, social interaction, arts & crafts, and multi media presentation. All these in English, all the time!
Read more about this product.
The Life Club Themes
Life Club creates a link between English language learning and a broader educational curriculum. The Life Club themes are based on mainstream school subjects such as Science, Geography, History, Art, Mathematics, Music, and Health. This cross-curricular approach also offers students an ideal opportunity to refresh and to revise what they have done and learned in other subject areas, so that their knowledge becomes more active. This makes both learning and teaching English more interesting and memorable.
This theme is aimed at helping the students realize and nurture their talents and skills. The sessions will provide the students the opportunity to discover their and each other’s talents.
Related Subjects: Arts, Social Science, History, Sports, and Music.
Under the Sea
This theme presents the great bodies of water, the natural resources, and many fun things about the sea. Students will learn new interesting trivia through the game shows.
Related Subjects: Social Science, Natural Science, Geography, and Sports.
The Little Green Explorer
This theme is about the environment, natural resources and the world in general. It seeks to create awareness among students on how to take care of the environment. Students will learn the basics of news reporting and interviewing during the sessions.
Related Subjects: Natural Sciences, Geography, and Health.
This theme is about satisfying the curiosity about things and events around students. The Secret Detective theme seeks to open the students’ eyes to the value of research, experimentation, and inquiry.
Related Subjects: History and Science.
Everybody, especially kids, is interested in animals, wild and domesticated alike. This theme helps the students discover the many creatures that surround them. Through the sessions, they will learn how to appreciate and care for animals and wildlife.
Related Subjects: Natural Science and Social Science.
This theme will specially focus on the beauty of the universe. Space Wonders presents the topic of space exploration and the science involved in it.
Related Subjects: Astronomy, Astrology, History, Science, and Technology.
Super Duper Heroes
This theme introduces universal heroes and their adventures to students. The theme can help the children to better understand the concept of good deeds, manners and social responsibility. The topics include famous heroes who made a difference to the world. Through role-play, students get to be their own heroes, with or without the superpowers.
Related Subjects: History and Social Science.
The World Over
This theme introduces culture in different English-speaking countries other than The United Kingdom, Australia and the United States of America. Students will become more familiar with countries and cultures around the world.
Related Subjects: History, Language and Social Science.
Happy Birthday (For Small Stars only)
One’s birthday is probably the most important day of the year. This theme introduces the concept of western birthday parties to the students. They will learn the Happy Birthday song, decorate the room, play party games, make birthday cards, decorate birthday cookies, and make and wrap birthday gifts. The students will be involved actively in the preparation of an exciting birthday party for Roddy!
Related Subjects: Music, Arts, and Sports.
The Life Club Session
A Life Club Session is composed of various activities such as Speech and Drama, Social Interaction, Games, Music, Movement, Visual Presentation, and Arts & Crafts, based on a relevant theme. Through these, students experiment with language in a low-stress, fun, and secure English environment. A typical Life Club session will involve the students practicing a range of language skills as they carry out the activities. These will be integrated into the activities and will be practiced together. As most of the sessions will have members who are at different levels and ages, there is a strong emphasis on open-ended tasks and activities. These will allow for more student involvement and will help to promote the students’ autonomy.
The teacher should be seen as a group leader or facilitator, assisting and guiding the students as they engage in the activities. The teacher aims to provide learning opportunities whenever possible.
Life Club for Parents
EF encourages active parental involvement in each student’s learning. To this end, Life Club for Parents is conducted in the school at least once a month. Life Club for Parents gives suggestions on how to support and reinforce at home what your child has learnt in class and in Life Club.
EF introduces your child to foreign cultures in a playful, hands-on way, without very detailed background explanations. Through Life Club for Parents, EF can provide you with the background information necessary to understand cultural aspects at a level that is accessible only for adults.
Life Club for Parents includes special interest sessions which have been designed to broaden your knowledge in the field of education in order to support your child’s learning development at home.

Press Release: First Comprehensive National Study Finds Centers Safest Form of Childcare
Child care centers are much safer than all other forms of child care, according to a new national study.
Sociologists Julia Wrigley and Joanna Dreby of the City University of New York Graduate Center created a comprehensive database of child care failures, including fatalities, between 1985 and 2003. They found that child care is quite safe overall, and child care fatalities are rarer than outside of paid care. But the fatality rate for children who receive child care in private homes is sixteen times higher than the fatality rate for children in child care centers.
The study appears in the October issue of the American Sociological Review . It was funded by the Foundation for Child Development.
While more than 8 million children are in paid child care every day, until now little has been known about their safety. Wrigley and Dreby analyzed reports of 1,362 fatalities (among 4,356 caregiving failures) from 1985 to 2003. The fatality data was gathered from media reports, legal cases, and state records. Three forms of child care were investigated: child care centers, nannies working in children's homes, and family day care providers working in their own homes.
"While accidents can happen anywhere, child care centers are almost 100% protective against children's deaths by violence. They are much safer than arrangements in private homes," explains Wrigley.
Infants are by far the most vulnerable children in care. Their fatality rate from both accidents and violence is nearly seven times higher than that of children from one to four. Equally striking are differences in infant fatality rates across types of care. The infant fatality rate in the care of nannies or family day care providers is more than seven times higher than that in centers.
Why are centers the safest form of child care?
Wrigley and Dreby conclude that centers are the safest form of child care because they afford children multiple forms of protection. Most importantly, staff members do not work alone. They have others watching them and helping them cope with fussy infants or whining toddlers. This helps them maintain their emotional control. It also helps identify and remove unstable or volatile workers. Center teachers also have more training than most caregivers in private homes and they are supervised by professionally-trained directors. Finally, centers control access by outsiders more effectively to keep out people who might pose risks.
These protections help reduce risks of accidental deaths, such as suffocation and drowning. But they are especially important in preventing violent deaths. Not a single shaken baby fatality was found in a child care center, while 203 were reported in arrangements in private homes. The stress of infant crying, in particular, can drive caregivers to impulsive acts of violence. With little professional training, without supervisors or coworkers, and often paid very little for long hours of work, even some experienced caregivers can lose emotional control. Once children are past the toddler years, safety differences between centers and other forms of child care diminish.
Wrigley says, "Child care is quite safe overall, but it could be made safer. We need to recognize what a stressful and demanding job it is to look after young children. Improved safety will only come with more resources and closer regulation of care."
How can we improve child care safety?
A complete copy of the article, titled: "Fatalities and the Organization of Childcare," can be found beginning November 1 on the website of the American Sociological Association www.asanet.org which will also be linked from The Graduate Center's website www.gc.cuny.edu . Hard copies may be obtained from by contacting Johanna Ebner at the American Sociological Association, 1307 New York Avenue, NW, Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20005.
While working on this research, Julia Wrigley was a Professor of Sociology at the CUNY Graduate Center, where she was recently appointed Acting Associate Provost. Her work focuses on social class and inequality. She is the author of Class Politics and Public Schools , on conflicts over the control and funding of Chicago's schools, and Other People's Children , on relations between middle-class parents and their children's caregivers. She edited Sociology of Education and chaired the ASA section on Children and Youth.
Joanna Dreby is a Ph.D. student in Sociology at the CUNY Graduate Center. Her research interests include child care, the sociology of children, gender and families and immigration/transnational communities. She recently spent a year in Mexico on a Fulbright doing research for her dissertation on parent-child separation in Mexican transnational families.
The Foundation for Child Development is a national, private philanthropy dedicated to the principle that all families should have the social and material resources to raise their children to be healthy, educated, and productive members of society. PK-3, the Foundation's signature focus, seeks to create a new beginning for public education from prekindergarten through third grade. For more information, visit the Foundation's website, http://www.fcd-us.org.
The Graduate Center is the doctorate-granting institution of The City University of New York. The only consortium of its kind in the nation, the school draws its faculty of more than 1,700 members mainly from the CUNY senior colleges. Established in 1961, The Graduate Center has grown to an enrollment of about 4,000 students in 32 doctoral programs and six master's degree programs in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences. The Graduate Center also houses 28 research centers and institutes, administers the CUNY Baccalaureate Program as well as a number of other university-wide academic programs, and offers a wide range of continuing education and cultural programs of interest to the general public. Further information on The Graduate Center's programs and activities can be found on its website at: www.gc.cuny.edu.
Submitted on: NOV 1, 2005

January 21, 2010
An estimated 430,000 children worldwide became infected with HIV in 2008, mostly through birth or breastfeeding from an HIV-infected mother. Many regions of the world are gaining increased access to complex antiretroviral drug regimens for preventing HIV transmission from a mother to her child. However, these strategies have not yet been directly compared with simpler antiretroviral drug regimens in terms of their safety, efficacy, feasibility and cost-effectiveness.
On January 15, a large, multinational clinical trial began to determine how best to reduce the risk of HIV transmission from infected pregnant women to their babies during pregnancy and breastfeeding while preserving the health of these children and their mothers.
The PROMISE (“Promoting Maternal-Infant Survival Everywhere”) study aims to enroll 7,950 HIV-infected women who are pregnant or have recently given birth and 5,950 HIV-exposed infants of these women. The participants will come from as many as 18 countries whose levels of resources range from high to low. The International Maternal Pediatric Adolescent AIDS Clinical Trials network is conducting the study with funding from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, both part of the National Institutes of Health. Led by protocol chair Mary Glenn Fowler, M.D., M.P.H., of the Makerere University–Johns Hopkins University Research Collaboration in Kampala, Uganda, the study team expects results in five to six years.
The HIV-infected women eligible to participate in PROMISE do not yet qualify for treatment—that is, their CD4+ T cell count, a measure of immune health, exceeds the level (350 cells per cubic millimeter of blood) at which highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) generally is recommended. HAART consists of a potent combination of three or more antiretroviral drugs.
The study addresses four distinct research questions. Most volunteers will participate in multiple components of the study to answer these questions. The first component will examine which of two proven strategies is safer and more effective at preventing mother-to-child HIV transmission before and during delivery: giving HIV-infected pregnant women a three-antiretroviral-drug regimen beginning as early as 14 weeks of gestation, or giving them the antiretroviral drug zidovudine beginning as early as 14 weeks of pregnancy and a single dose of the antiretroviral drug nevirapine during labor. The regimen of zidovudine and nevirapine is the standard of care in many countries for women who do not yet require treatment for their HIV infection. Some 4,400 women will be assigned at random to receive either one of these two interventions.
The second component of the PROMISE study will compare the safety and efficacy of two methods of preventing mother-to-child HIV transmission during breastfeeding. The study team will assign 4,650 mother-infant pairs at random either to receive a daily dose of infant nevirapine or to have the mothers take a three-antiretroviral-drug regimen throughout breastfeeding.
The third component of the PROMISE study will examine the effects of short-term use of a three-antiretroviral-drug regimen during pregnancy and breastfeeding to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission on the health of HIV-infected mothers who do not yet need treatment. For such women, it remains unclear whether stopping the three-drug regimen after giving birth or ceasing to breastfeed would compromise their health. Although past studies have shown that interrupting treatment with antiretroviral drugs has a negative effect, the conditions in those studies are different enough from the conditions of the PROMISE study to make extrapolating the results difficult, according to the study investigators.
The 4,675 women participating in this third component of PROMISE will be assigned at random either to stop the three-antiretroviral-drug regimen after giving birth or weaning, or to continue the drug regimen indefinitely. The health of these two groups will be compared. In addition, the women who receive the time-limited three-drug regimen will be compared with the women who participated in the first component of PROMISE and did not receive the three-drug regimen, but rather took zidovudine during pregnancy and single-dose nevirapine during labor.
The last component of the PROMISE study involves protecting the health of HIV-exposed but uninfected infants. In resource-limited settings, it is standard to give the antibiotic cotrimoxazole once daily to infants exposed to HIV at birth until the infant has stopped breastfeeding and is known to be HIV-uninfected. While cotrimoxazole prophylaxis improves the survival rate of HIV-infected infants, it is not known whether continuing to administer the drug after weaning similarly would benefit HIV-exposed but uninfected children.
In this fourth component of the PROMISE study, nearly 2,290 HIV-exposed but uninfected, weaned infants under one year old will be assigned at random either to continue receiving cotrimoxazole or to receive a placebo through age 18 months. Neither the mothers of the infants nor the study team will know which infants are in which group. The study will determine whether continuing cotrimoxazole prophylaxis in HIV-exposed, uninfected infants from the time they stop breastfeeding through age 18 months decreases their risk of illness and death without causing side effects or generating bacterial resistance to cotrimoxizole.
Media inquiries can be directed to the NIAID Office of Communications at 301-402-1663, firstname.lastname@example.org.
The NICHD sponsors research on development, before and after birth; maternal, child, and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit the Institute’s Web site at http://www.nichd.nih.gov/.
NIAID conducts and supports research—at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide—to study the causes of
infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News
releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID Web site at www.niaid.nih.gov.
About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research,
and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ®
back to top
Last Updated January 21, 2010

When set to hair mode, particle system creates only static particles, which may be used for hair, fur, grass and the like.
The first step is to create the hair, specifying the amount of hair strands and their lengths.
The complete path of the particles is calculated in advance. So everything a particle does a hair may do also. A hair is as long as the particle path would be for a particle with a lifetime of 100 frames. Instead of rendering every frame of the particle animation point by point there are calculated control points with an interpolation, the segments.
The next step is to style the hair. You can change the look of base hairs by changing the Physics Settings.
A more advanced way of changing the hair appearance is to use Children. This adds child hairs to the original ones, and has settings for giving them different types of shapes.
You can also interactively style hairs in Particle Mode. In this mode, the particle settings become disabled, and you can comb, trim, lengthen, etc. the hair curves.
Hair can now be made dynamic using the cloth solver. This is covered in the Hair Dynamics page.
Blender can render hairs in several different ways. Materials have a Strand section, which is covered in the materials section in the Strands Page.
Hair can also be used as a basis for the Particle Instance modifier, which allows you to have a mesh be deformed along the curves, which is useful for thicker strands, or things like grass, or feathers, which may have a more specific look.
- Regrow Hair for each frame.
- Enables advanced settings which reflect the same ones as working in Emitter mode.
- Set the amount of hair strands. Use as little particles as possible, especially if you plan to use softbody animation later. But you need enough particles to have good control. For a “normal” haircut I found some thousand (very roughly 2000) particles to give enough control. You may need a lot more particles if you plan to cover a body with fur. Volume will be produced later with Children.
Settings for adding movement to hair see Hair Dynamics.
- Draw hair as curves.
- Draw just the end points if the hairs.
- The number of segments (control points minus 1) of the hair strand. In between the control points the segments are interpolated. The number of control points is important:
- for the softbody animation, because the control points are animated like vertices, so more control points mean longer calculation times.
- for the interactive editing, because you can only move the control points (but you may recalculate the number of control points in Particle Mode).
- 10 Segments should be sufficient even for very long hair, 5 Segments are enough for shorter hair, and 2 or 3 segments should be enough for short fur.
Hair can be rendered as a Path, Object, or Group. See Particle Visualization for descriptions.
- Fur Tutorial, which produced (Image 4b). It deals especially with short hair.
- Blender Hair Basics, a thorough overview of all of the hair particle settings.

Maui’s death in set net takes species one step closer to extinction
WWF-New Zealand’s Executive Director Chris Howe says: “This death of a Maui’s dolphin is a tragedy for a species that is down to only about 100 individuals. Set nets in Maui’s habitat continue to pose an unacceptable risk to these dolphins. Until we get set nets out of the shallow coastal waters where they live, more Maui’s will needlessly get entangled and drown. The species could be extinct within our generation without urgent action.”
Maui’s dolphins, a subspecies of the South Island’s Hector’s dolphins, are found only off the west coast of the North Island. They are the world’s rarest marine dolphin, classified internationally as critically endangered.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) yesterday released a statement saying they believe that the dead animal was a Maui’s, not a Hector’s dolphin as originally reported, because of the location of its death. The dead dolphin was returned to the sea by the fisher. MAF claimed the death “occurred outside of the current known range of Maui’s dolphins, as well as outside the current restrictions.”
However there have been independent verified sightings of Maui’s dolphins in the coastal waters off Taranaki in recent years, and WWF-New Zealand is urging MAF and the government to extend protection measures throughout the Maui’s historical range to give the species the best chance of survival and recovery.
Despite fishing restrictions announced in 2008, Maui’s are not currently protected throughout their entire range. WWF is calling on the government to extend protection measures into harbours and the southern extent of their current range, along with better monitoring and policing of regulations.
WWF- New Zealand is urging all members of the public who see a Maui’s dolphin – noted for their rounded dorsal fin - to report it to a special sightings hotline, 0800 4 MAUIS. Mr Howe says: “Every sighting of one of these rare and precious dolphins matters. The more we know about where Maui’s range and their movements, the better we can protect them.
“WWF will continue to speak out on behalf of all those New Zealanders who want to stop the extinction of Maui’s dolphins, and urge the government to extend the current protection measures before it is too late.”

DLTK's Crafts for Kids
Cone Santa Paper Craft
Set Santa out on a coffee table or the mantle as a fun Christmas
decoration or put him on the top of a small Christmas tree as a tree topper
- something to color with
The directions are appropriate for an older child or adult to
assemble. Don't worry too much if younger children glue the pieces a bit
off kilter -- part of the fun of watching them grow is seeing their
progress over the years!
- Color and cut out the pieces.
- Roll the large triangular piece and use the tab to glue it into a cone
- Glue the nose onto the face using a dot of glue on the nose (this allows
the mustache to stick out from the edges a bit in a slightly 3d manner).
- Glue the hat band around the top, just above the face.
- Glue the beard around the top, just below the face. You can see how the
mouth fits into the little notch in the beard.
- Glue the belt around the center, just below the buttons.
- Fold the arms in half and glue together (so they're coloured on both
sides). Use a dot of glue on the top of the arms (shoulder) to position the
arms near the beard, leaving them sticking out in a slightly 3d manner. You
can have them sticking straight down, reaching forward, waving, etc...
however you want Santa to look!).
- Close template window when done printing to return to this screen.
- Set page margins to zero if you have trouble fitting the template on one page (FILE, PAGE SETUP or FILE, PRINTER SETUP in most browsers).
Printable version of these instructions

BJU Press' Spelling Grade 4 introduces new words to master for the 4th grade level. Word lists are primarily grouped by pattern, with lessons including the list of words plus two challenge words, and a "word sort" section that allows students to sort words by pattern. Additional exercises help students to master syllables, vocabulary knowledge, dictionary skills and more through a variety of fun activities. Thirty-two weekly spelling lists are included, and each list contains approximately 20 words. This 4th Edition has been completely revised to include colorful worktext pages with activities designed to strengthen spelling and communication skills. This resource is also known as Bob Jones Spelling Grade 4 Student Worktext, 2nd Edition.
- Type: Other ()
- Category: > Home Schooling
- ISBN / UPC: 9781606821923/160682192X
- Publish Date: 1/1/2010
- Item No: 319704
- Vendor: Bob Jones University Press

There is an overwhelming amount of news coverage related to the state of the economy, international politics, and various domestic programs. The environment and environmental policy on the other hand, are being ignored. When environmental policy is discussed many citizens and representatives champion the need for substantial policy reform. However, when actual policies are introduced, they are typically ignored or delayed. Due to the current state of the environment, politicians need to place a higher priority on environmental policy.
First, the public needs to understand exactly what environmental policy is and how it affects them. Environmental policy is defined as “any action deliberately taken to manage human activities with a view to prevent, reduce, or mitigate harmful effects on nature and natural resources, and ensuring that man-made changes to the environment do not have harmful effects on humans or the environment,” (McCormick 2001). It generally covers air and water pollution, waste management, ecosystem management, biodiversity protection, and the protection of natural resources, wildlife, and endangered species. Issues like these, affect everyone across the globe and cannot be ignored.
Environmental policy became a national issue under Theodore Roosevelt, when National Parks were established in hopes of preserving wildlife for future generations. The modern environmental movement began in the 1970s during the Nixon administration, when a large amount of environmental legislation started rolling out. Nixon signed the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) which established a national policy promoting the enhancement of the environment and set requirements for all government agencies to prepare Environmental Assessments and Environmental Impact Statements. Nixon also established the President’s Council on Environmental Quality. Legislation of the time established the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), The Clean Air Act, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. The EPA has received a lot of notoriety recently, mostly for republican’s desire to get rid of it, though it is still a source vital to protecting the environmental.
Rising gas prices in the 1970s inspired a wave of greener vehicles, a phenomenon witnessed again in 2008. High energy costs motivated Jimmy Carter to install solar panels on the white house roof, a clear message that helping the environment was everyone’s responsibility.
Focus on environmental policy began dwindling in the 1980s though, under the Regan administration. As the Soviet Union began to weaken and fall, the restructuring of Europe became a priority and the environment quickly slipped to the backburner.
Many of the environmental issues that the public faced in the late twentieth century are still issues today, including: climate change, lack of fossil fuels, sustainable energy solutions, ozone depletion, and resource depletion. Today, with the plethora of issues currently affecting the environment, it needs to become a priority again.
As gas prices reached record highs in 2007 and 2008, there was a surge in Green Startups to help companies struggling with high fuel costs. As fuel costs decreased, the focus on these Green Startups decreased as well. However, now that gas prices are again on the rise, there will likely be a green resurgence in the market.
These green initiatives should not rise and fall with the cost of gas. Environmental issues have impacts and implications far greater than the bottom dollar.
Rising sea levels, droughts, and other extreme weather events have enormous human impacts, killing or displacing scores of people each year. In an Oxfam International study at the University of Belgium, the earth is currently experiencing approximately 500 natural disasters a year, affecting over 250 million people (Guitierrez 2008).
It is paramount that our government focus significant attention and funding on environmental policy. If we continue to disregard the environment, the planet might be degraded to the point where it is no longer habitable. We only have one Earth; we need to do our best to preserve it.
Gutierrez, David. “Natural Disasters Up More Than 400 Percent in Two Decades.”
NaturalNews.com, June 5, 2008. Accessed March 10, 2012. http://www.naturalnews.com/023362.html.

E Numbers: Emulsifiers Sunday, Oct 16 2011
Emulsification is the word scientists give to mixing liquids together. Specifically, it is the process by which immiscible liquids, liquids that cannot normally mix, are mixed together. The chemical agent used is called an emulsifier. Emulsifiers are not unique to food, we use emulsifiers to clean ourselves (soap), and in order to produce medical injections.
Emulsifiers in Food
The most familiar emulsifier is probably the egg. Eggs are used as an emulsifier in everything from cakes and custard, to mayonnaise (Figure 1) and from hollandaise, to soufflés. What the egg is doing chemically is allowing the other ingredients to form a stable emulsion (mix). Interestingly, egg itself actually contains two types of emulsifier: one is protein, the other is lecithin (Figure 2). They both have chemical properties that are shared by both water and fatty substances. This helps mix things up sufficiently well to make a homogeneous mixture of water, fat and lecithin, that looks not unlike baby sick. There are others that are used regularly in cooking too. As well as the egg in mayonnaise, mustard powder is also added to many recipes. This also helps it to stay homogeneous.
In industrial food production, several harmless emulsifiers, not common-place in the home, have been used for some time. One such is xanthan gum. The name is perhaps misleading as it is not a gum as such when bought, but an off-white powder that is usually accused of being either cocaine or flour. The usage of the word gum is perhaps clearer when we consider the properties it has on being mixed with fat and water. Figure 3 shows the transformation. Here, I include weights and volumes so you can do this yourself if you want to.
In part A we see the oil (clear yellow layer, 10 mL) above the water (colourless layer, 25 mL). Adding the xanthan gum (B, 5 g) appears to do little initially (C), however a brief agitation of the system leads to homogenesis of the three substances (D). Not only do we have an homogenous mixture, but also one that is thicker than it was previously – squeezing it out gives the appearance of an off-white turd (E). Said turd goes brilliantly with a sprig of basil or rosemary and glass of chilled white Sancerre.
2 Responses to “E Numbers: Emulsifiers”
Leave a Reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.

U.S. Navy in Florida
The presence of the U.S. Navy in Florida officially began with the transfer of the peninsula by Spain to the U.S. in 1821, and the subsequent establishment of Florida as a U.S. Territory. Two of the earliest American military vessels which sank in Florida waters were actually American privateers captured by Britain's Royal Navy during the American Revolution, and which later sank while in Royal Navy service. The captured American privateer Who's Afraid was placed into the Royal Navy and renamed HMS Mentor. The captured American privateer Independence was placed into the Royal Navy and renamed HMS Racer. HMS Mentor was burned by the British at Pensacola in 1781 to prevent her capture by invading Spanish forces. HMS Racer foundered in a gale in the Gulf of Mexico in 1814. The first commissioned Navy ship lost in Florida waters was USS Alligator, which wrecked in the Florida Keys in 1822, while assigned to combat piracy. Many naval, and other military craft have been sunk in Florida waters since 1821, through military action, foundering, grounding, fire and explosion, deliberate sinking to create artificial reefs, and other causes. Such shipwrecks are the major focus of the Florida Navy Legacy Shipwreck Project.
During its long history in Florida, the U.S. Navy has established a number of naval bases and stations. The most strategically significant of these have been at Pensacola, Key West, and Jacksonville. There has been a U.S. Navy presence at Pensacola since 1825, at Key West since 1822, and more recently at Jacksonville since the Second World War. There have been several military conflicts in Florida since 1821 in which the U.S. Navy has played an important role. These were the First Seminole War (1816-1818), the Second Seminole War (1835-1842), the Third Seminole War (1855-1858), the Civil War (1861-1865), the Spanish American War (1898), the First World War (1917-1918), the Second World War (1941-45), and events such as the Cuban Missile Crisis (1963).
During the Seminole Wars, the Spanish American War, and First and Second World Wars, there were a number of smaller Naval stations established along Florida's vast coastline. During the Seminole Wars, these stations were often operated as supply depots, intended for the joint Army-Navy operations being conducted. One example is the Naval Depot established on Key Biscayne in 1836, which lasted until 1926. During the First and Second World Wars, with new developments in aviation technology, these coastal naval stations were outfitted to serve as stations for lighter than air craft (dirigibles), conventional aircraft, and smaller surface craft, used to patrol Florida's coastline and offshore waters. Between the spring of 1942, and the fall of 1943, German submarines attacked and sank large numbers of ships on Florida's Atlantic and Gulf coasts. The Navy's system of coastal defense was ultimately one of the major factors which turned the tide against the U-Boats and caused Germany's Naval Command to redirect its effort to other locations where targets were easier to attack.
Since the Second World War, the U.S. Navy has continued to maintain a significant presence in Florida. The Key West Naval Station became a major staging area for the Navy during the Cuban Missile Crisis, for example. Recognizing the on-going strategic significance of the Key West Naval Station, the Navy invested large amounts of money in the early 1980s to upgrade its facilities. Since the stationing of the Navy's first aircraft carrier at Pensacola in 1925, Pensacola has become the focus for naval aviation activities and training. A Naval Training Center was in operation at Orlando from 1968 to 1994. Today in Florida, there are naval facilities at Pensacola, Panama City, Key West, Homestead, Mayport and Jacksonville, as well as some other smaller stations.
The U.S. Navy's history in Florida spans 175 years, from the earliest days of U.S. territorial expansion to the Space and Nuclear Age. Although much valuable work has already been done, much of this interesting chapter of U.S. Naval history remains to be studied and written by future historians.

by Nate Jones, Vertebrate Ecology Lab
(still in the Bering Sea) … Of course the bad weather I’ve been writing about was nothing compared to what happens on the Bering during the months of February or March, and the Gold Rush fishes regularly during that time of year, so I had complete faith in the seaworthiness of the ship and the judgment and skill of the crew. I took comfort in that thought, and stumbled down to my bunk for what became a grueling 72 hours of bumps, rolls, and queasy stomachs. During this stormy time the crew exchanged watches at the helm, keeping the ship pointed into the fury.
We all hoped for the best, but by the time the seas had calmed to (a more manageable?) 8-10’, the hungry ocean had damaged and ripped off much of our scientific equipment, snapping several ¼” steel bolts and ripping welds clean apart!
The Gold Rush itself weathered this storm in fine shape (wish we could say the same of our scientific equipment!), and there were no major injuries to anyone on board. It really was quite a minor event in the context of the Bering Sea; just another blowy, bumpy day or two out on the water.
But, it impressed me and I couldn’t help contemplating darker scenarios – what happens when there is a true emergency? What if someone had been swept overboard, or, worse yet, what if the ship itself had been damaged or taken on water and started to go down? Such things do happen, although not as frequently now as they have in the past (coast guard regulations and improvements in technology and crew training have contributed to much increased safety).
In my next post I’ll put up some images from training exercises that are routinely undertaken to help prepare crew and passengers (scientists) for emergencies at sea…

Antoine Pierre Joseph Marie Barnave
Barnave, Antoine Pierre Joseph Marie (äNtwänˈ pyĕr zhōzĕfˈ märēˈ bärnävˈ) [key], 1761–93, French revolutionary. A member of the States-General of 1789 from Grenoble, he was a brilliant speaker and leader of the Jacobins. After Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette fled to Varennes in 1791, Barnave believed that the king might finally be persuaded to accept a constitutional government, thereby avoiding the impending political anarchy. He began a correspondence with Marie Antoinette, encouraging her to convert the monarchy to the Revolution; this correspondence was later used as evidence of Barnave's treasonous activities. In July, 1791, he spoke in the assembly in favor of the restoration of the king as a constitutional monarch and appealed for an end to the Revolution. He retired to Grenoble, and was tried for treason and guillotined (1793). His history of the French Revolution, written during his imprisonment, is considered a major work that tried to put the Revolution into a broader political and social framework.
See E. Chill, Power, Property, and History: Barnave's Introduction to the French Revolution and Other Writings (1971).
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
See more Encyclopedia articles on: French History: Biographies

There was no question that the monarch was in charge. Elizabeth I (1558-1603) and James I (1603-25) both made it very clear that they ruled the country. They made the laws, they fought the wars, they appointed the top ministers and so on. However, the monarchy worked on the basis of cooperation between the monarch and the political nation.
The political nation was the nobles and gentry. The nobles were the very rich landowners. The gentry were the wealthy smaller landowners and also rich merchants in the towns. They were a tiny minority of the population, but they held most of the wealth and power in the kingdom. They saw themselves as the protectors of the ordinary people. They were the Members of Parliament and they collected the king’s taxes. The local gentleman or merchant was usually the local magistrate. The gentry were in charge of the local militia (armed forces). They were also in charge of law and order because there was no police at this time. Their estates and businesses made them the biggest employers.
The court was the gathering of people around the monarch. Wherever the monarch was, the court would also be. It included all the top nobles and officials. James I ran a very informal court. In fact he had a reputation for being too informal – he sometimes got drunk and there were lots of stories of very bad behaviour. It was quite easy for a top noble to get to talk to the king. The noble might want to do this because he was concerned about a particular law or policy that he did not agree with. James was usually prepared to explain his policies, and he often made compromises with the nobles. The court was one way that the top nobles could communicate with the king.
Parliament was made up of the House of Lords and the House of Commons. The House of Lords contained the great nobles from the richest and most powerful families. The MPs in the House of Commons were elected. Members of the gentry and wealthy merchant classes elected men from their own class to sit in Parliament.
Parliament was an important way that the political nation and the monarch could communicate. The monarch made speeches to Parliament. MPs also made speeches and wrote letters of advice to the monarch.
James I and most other monarchs preferred to rule without Parliament. However, James often ran short of money. He needed the support of MPs to agree to new taxes to raise money. He also needed the cooperation of MPs to collect these taxes. As a result, he usually agreed to listen to the concerns of MPs and accepted some of their advice.
Charles I was James I’s son. He came to the throne in 1625. He was the ruler of three kingdoms – England, Ireland and Scotland. It was a hard job to rule three kingdoms. They had different laws, churches, languages and traditions.
Charles spent most of his time in his richest and most powerful kingdom – England. His biggest problem was working with the MPs in England’s Parliament. Charles believed very strongly in the Divine Right of kings. This meant that the right to rule was based on the law of God. The King was responsible to God alone therefore nobody could question the King or disobey him. Unfortunately for Charles, the political nation was not happy about such views. They expected to be able to talk to the monarch, discuss policies and reach agreements. Charles was not suited to this approach. He was a private man who did not speak much and who liked order and discipline in all aspects of his life. He never developed his father’s political skill in working out compromises to tricky problems.
Charles was shy, small and had a stammer. This probably made him insecure. This may help to explain why his court was very grand and formal. It was held in magnificent palaces like Whitehall, full of riches. Charles invited great painters like Anthony van Dyck to his court. The people there wore expensive, impressive clothes. There were rules about how everyone should behave. Charles also restricted the number of people who could come and talk to him. They had to have an appointment. His right-hand man, the Duke of Buckingham, controlled access to Charles.
Charles tended to rely too heavily on one or two officials he trusted. His closest minister was George Villers, usually known as Buckingham. Buckingham used his position of power and influence with Charles to make himself and his family rich. He made sure that his friends and family were appointed to the top jobs in the government. As a result, he was widely hated by many Lords and MPs. What was worse, Buckingham was not particularly good at his job. Charles I gave him command of a military expedition against Spain in 1625. It was a failure, with many of the troops being killed by disease or made ill by cheap Spanish wine. He led another disastrous military campaign in 1627. The following year Buckingham was assassinated.

If genealogy books were rated by the pound, the book I examined this week would be number one. I don't recall ever picking up a single genealogy book as thick and heavy as this one. Of course, genealogy books are not graded by heft. Nonetheless, this particular book is the definitive guide to descents from the Magna Carta Barons of 1215 A.D. for over 200 individuals who emigrated from the British Isles to the North American colonies in the 17th century.
Magna Carta Ancestry: A Study in Colonial and Medieval Families, by Douglas Richardson is a 1,099-page reference to those descents, combining both research in original records with the use of published literature to provide well-documented ancestral lines for American colonists with Magna Carta ancestry. Yes, that is one thousand ninety-nine pages. Best of all, nearly every page is full of high-quality, well-researched genealogy information.
Magna Carta (Latin for "Great Charter") is a document written in 1215 A.D. that serves as the charter of England which limited the power of English monarchs. King John was the ruler at the time, and he ruled with an iron fist, much to the chagrin of his noblemen. The barons of England organized numerous uprisings. In the face of such strong and well-organized opposition, King John was forced to renounce certain rights and to grant a charter of liberties. This document stated that the King would respect certain legal procedures and accept the premise that the will of the king could be bound by law. Magna Carta is widely considered to be the first step in a long historical process leading to the rule of constitutional law.
Magna Carta was signed in the meadow at Runnymede on June 15, 1215. Numerous disagreements arose immediately, and King John soon refuted it. A civil war then erupted. In the midst of this war, King John died of dysentery on October 18, 1216. His death quickly changed the nature of the war. His nine-year-old son, King Henry III, was soon crowned King of England. The civil war stopped, and a somewhat modified Magna Carta was issued. When he turned eighteen in 1225, Henry III himself reissued Magna Carta a third time, this time in a shorter version with only 37 articles.
The twenty-five barons who signed the Magna Carta were the leading nobles of England at the time. Most were married, and many had large families. Hundreds of thousands, possibly millions, of people alive today can trace their ancestry back to one or more of these twenty-five barons. Indeed, this book, Magna Carta Ancestry: A Study in Colonial and Medieval Families, lists 238 Colonial-era immigrants to the United States with proven descent from the Magna Carta barons. If one of these immigrants is in your family tree, this book will trace your ancestry back to the meadow at Runnymede in 1215 A.D.
This scholarly book features thousands of biographical sketches of people who lived in medieval England and their descendants through to those who immigrated to America. The book also contains more than 28,000 source citations to published materials, making it the most documented source book of its kind. In fact, the extensive cross-referencing makes the text simple to follow. The book also contains a 93-page bibliography, probably the most exhaustive listing of medieval genealogy and history ever published. Finally, Magna Carta Ancestry contains an index of over 18,000 entries.
Author Doug Richardson has refuted numerous published genealogies in this new book, pointing to source citations that disprove many lineages that have been accepted for decades. If you believe that you have royal or noble English ancestry, you need to check this book!
Many new additions to the book show the lineages of colonial immigrants that previously were unknown. As a result, many people will be able to claim noble ancestry for the first time.
While the primary audience for this book is anyone with American ancestry in the Colonial era, the book contains extensive biographical information about thousands of individuals who lived in England between 1215 and the 17th century. As such, the information will be of interest to anyone with ancestry in England, even if their later ancestors moved to Canada, Australia, New Zealand, or elsewhere.
A complete list of the 17th-century American immigrants with proven Magna Carta ancestry can be found on the publisher's web site at http://www.genealogical.com/item_detail.asp?afid=&ID=4887
Magna Carta Ancestry: A Study in Colonial and Medieval Families, by Douglas Richardson will be the standard reference for many, many years. This huge scholarly work with more than 28,000 source citations belongs on the shelf at every genealogy library as well as in many private collections.
Magna Carta Ancestry sells for $100 and is available directly from Genealogical Publishing Company at http://www.genealogical.com/item_detail.asp?afid=&ID=4887 as well as from Amazon.com and from many other bookstores. You can order it by specifying ISBN 0806317590.

Fragmented across Central Asia, China, and Tibet, snow leopards (Uncia uncia) roam through mountain corridors and montane habitats. Today, scientists think there are between 4,000 and 7,500 snow leopards exist in the wild with most of them living within China. But accurate estimates are difficult to make when dealing with this elusive master of camouflage in its unwelcoming home.
Snow leopards have developed many interesting characteristics that help it survive in the cold, mountainous terrain they call home. Their long tails help them balance on steep, rocky terrain, and their large paws and furry feet act as snow shoes in deep mountain snows. Living at heights of 2,000 to 6,000 kilometers, they also have special nasal cavities that help them breath low-oxygen mountain air.
Did you know? Snow leopards can leap vertically 6-10 meters (20-30 feet). This helps them hunt prey on steep, rocky mountainsides.
Because food is scarce at such high altitudes, snow leopards are solitary animals, hunting and eating whatever meat they are able to find – including deer, marmots, boars and farm livestock. This also means, however, that they are not as possessive of their home ranges. In areas where food is more plentiful, a snow leopard might have a small range of 12-15 km2, whereas if food is not available, a snow leopard may roam up to 40 km2 to find sufficient food.
Threats to the Snow Leopard
Snow leopards are hunted for their bones, which are in demand to replace tiger bones in Chinese medicinal traditions. Additionally, in eastern Asia, fur coats and similar items made from snow leopard skins have become increasingly popular.
Habitat loss and changing patterns of land use have also threatened snow leopard populations. In the Central Asian mountains, the animals that snow leopards prey on have been hunted to dangerously low numbers, threatening the food supply of these sleek animals. Decreasing wild food supplies have often driven snow leopards to small farms, resulting in unfortunate clashes between these threatened animals and local farmers.
Although some conservation projects have been put in place to conserve the habitats and environments for the snow leopard populations, additional projects focusing on local education and corridor-building would make an important contribution to snow leopard conservation.

PROVIDENCE, RI -- Shifting glaciers and exploding volcanoes aren't confined to Mars' distant past, according two new reports in the journal Nature.
Glaciers moved from the poles to the tropics 350,000 to 4 million years ago, depositing massive amounts of ice at the base of mountains and volcanoes in the eastern Hellas region near the planet's equator, based on a report by a team of scientists analyzing images from the Mars Express mission. Scientists also studied images of glacial remnants on the western side of Olympus Mons, the largest volcano in the solar system. They found additional evidence of recent ice formation and movement on these tropical mountain glaciers, similar to ones on Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa.
In a second report, the international team reveals previously unknown traces of a major eruption of Hecates Tholus less than 350,000 million years ago. In a depression on the volcano, researchers found glacial deposits estimated to be 5 to 24 million years old.
James Head, professor of geological sciences at Brown University and an author on the Nature papers, said the glacial data suggests recent climate change in Mars' 4.6-billion-year history. The team also concludes that Mars is in an "interglacial" period. As the planet tilts closer to the sun, ice deposited in lower latitudes will vaporize, changing the face of the Red Planet yet again.
Discovery of the explosive eruption of Hecates Tholus provides more evidence of recent Mars rumblings. In December, members of the same research team revealed that calderas on five major Mars volcanoes were repeatedly active as little as 2 million years ago. The volcanoes, scientists speculated, may even be active today.
"Mars is very dynamic," said Head, lead author of one of the Nature reports. "We see that the climate change and geological forces that drive evolution on Earth are happening there."
Head is part of a 33-institution team analyzing images from Mars Express, launched in June 2003 by the European Space Agency. The High Resolution Stereo Camera, or HRSC, on board the orbiter is producing 3-D images of the planet's surface.
These sharp, panoramic, full-color pictures provided fodder for a third Nature report. In it, the team offers evidence of a frozen body of water, about the size and depth of the North Sea, in southern Elysium.
A plethora of ice and active volcanoes could provide the water and heat needed to sustain basic life forms on Mars. Fresh data from Mars Express – and the announcement that live bacteria were found in a 30,000-year-old chunk of Alaskan ice – is fueling discussion about the possibility of past, even present, life on Mars. In a poll taken at a European Space Agency conference last month, 75 percent of scientists believe bacteria once existed on Mars and 25 percent believe it might still survive there.
Head recently traveled to Antarctica to study glaciers, including bacteria that can withstand the continent's dry, cold conditions. The average temperature on Mars is estimated to be 67 degrees below freezing. Similar temperatures are clocked in Antarctica's frigid interior.
"We're now seeing geological characteristics on Mars that could be related to life," Head said. "But we're a long way from knowing that life does indeed exist. The glacial deposits we studied would be accessible for sampling in future space missions. If we had ice to study, we would know a lot more about climate change on Mars and whether life is a possibility there."
The European Space Agency, the German Aerospace Center and the Freie Universitaet in Berlin built and flew the HRSC and processed data from the camera. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) supported Head's work.
AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert! system.

Teachers, register your class or environmental club in our annual Solar Oven Challenge! Registration begins in the fall, and projects must be completed in the spring to be eligible for prizes and certificates.
Who can participate?
GreenLearning's Solar Oven Challenge is open to all Canadian classes. Past challenges have included participants from grade 3 through to grade 12. Older students often build solar ovens as part of the heat unit in their Science courses. Other students learn about solar energy as a project in an eco-class or recycling club.
How do you register?
1. Registration is now open to Canadian teachers. To register, send an email to Gordon Harrison at GreenLearning. Include your name, school, school address and phone number, and the grade level of the students who will be participating.
2. After you register, you will receive the Solar Oven Challenge Teacher's Guide with solar oven construction plans. Also see re-energy.ca for construction plans, student backgrounders, and related links on solar cooking and other forms of renewable energy. At re-energy.ca, you can also see submissions, photos and recipes from participants in past Solar Oven Challenges.
3. Build, test and bake with solar ovens!
4. Email us photos and descriptions of your creations by the deadline (usually the first week of June).
5. See your recipes and photos showcased at re-energy.ca. Winners will be listed there and in GreenLearning News.

KDL Recommends For Kids > PLAY-GROW-READ! - Books for Early Literacy > Katie L. Talks: Books that Invite Participation
Shout! Shout It Out!
Title: Shout! Shout It Out!
Author: Denise Fleming
CONCEPT E FLEMING
Mouse invites the reader to shout out what he or she knows as they review numbers, letters, and easy words.
Kids are often told to sit still and be quiet. But Denise Fleming encourages them to shout, shout it out! By taking basic learning concepts like numbers, letters, and colors and putting them on display, she asks kids to shout out what they know—and her readers will be happy to oblige.
With bold colors and her unique handmade paper art, Denise Fleming makes learning into a game. Long-time fans and sharp-eyed newcomers will be happy to see that Mouse returns on every page, shouting along with the crowd!

Entomological Survey of Rio Bravo Conservation and Management Area, Belize
Peter Kovarik, John Shuey, and Chris Carlton
During the mid-late 1990's, lepidopterist John Shuey became interested in testing the widely touted concept that insect communities are useful in evaluating impacts to ecological integrity in tropical forest communities. At that time the literature had been advocating insects, especially butterflies, as appropriate indicators for assessing the impacts of specific management activities on tropical forests. People were already using insects as indicators, despite the fact that this simple premise had yet to be tested. John enlisted coleopterist Peter Kovarik as a partner in this study. The two decided that in addition to butterflies, scarabaeine scarabs and hister beetles would become part of the study. The taxa that were selected were chosen in part because of their susceptibility to bait and or passive trapping techniques. In fact the beauty of this study was that we envisioned relatively little active collecting. This way we could quasi enjoy ourselves while our traps were filling with insects!
The site chosen for our study was Rio Bravo Conservation Area located in Orange Walk Province, Belize. Rio Bravo is a 230,000 acre nature preserve in the northwestern corner of the country near the corner where Belize, Guatemala, and Mexico meet. Rio Bravo is a beautiful mosaic of semitropical moist forest, savanna, and wetland habitats with over 230 species of trees, 70 species of mammals, and approximately 400 species of birds. Among large animals, the area has healthy populations of jaguar, puma, Baird's tapir, and two species of monkeys. There are also significant Mayan archeological sites, and the area has a colorful recent history of mahogany logging, chicl? extraction, and marijuana farming. This preserve is ministered by Programme For Belize (PfB), a private conservation organization that holds Rio Bravo in trust for the people of Belize. PfB integrates elements of sustainable forestry and natural product harvesting, ecotourism, and education into a single comprehensive long-term management plan. For a location map of Rio Bravo click on the PfB logo above. For additional information about The Nature Conservancy's role, click on that logo.
Rio Bravo turned out to be an ideal setting for our study. In addition to extensive areas of oak-pine savanna, there were huge expanses of contiguous limestone rainforest without excessive topographic variability. Within this expanse of fairly homogenous habitat, there were areas along trails or roads through the forest that had been fairly recently logged. We sought to imbed our sample sites within areas that were both recently disturbed by man and others which had been relatively untouched for quite some time. Because Rio Bravo is a preserve and PfB encourages research activities, we felt confidant that human impact on both the ecosystem and our sampling devices would be minimal. Thus, it seemed probable that any potential differences we observed in insect communities between our sample sites would be primarily due to forest integrity rather than extraneous factors.
Our core studies were conducted once during the dry season and twice during the rainy season. They were completed in 1996. Since neither John nor Pete knew much about scarabaeine scarabs, expert Bill Warner was coaxed into participating by promising him many scarabs with no strings attached. In fact Bill eventually joined us in Rio Bravo in July 1996. We are still awaiting some of our quantitative insect data, but we have botanical assessments of each forest tract, and data from the sample events for butterflies and hister beetles in hand. As soon as the last of our insect data is cleaned up, we will finish off the ecological end of this work.
Like many studies, this one began small and focused and eventually expanded into a full blown entomological survey. Coleopterist Chris Carlton became the third major player in our survey. Chris has made several trips to Rio Bravo and done some intensive leaf litter work and set up many a flight intercept trap in search of tiny pselaphid beetles. We collected massive amounts of insects and have spent the last several years processing our samples and farming specimens out to various specialists who have generously provided us with identifications. We have learned, with little surprise that many of the insects that inhabit the forests and savannas of Rio Bravo are new to science. Many others are new country records. This is not surprising either since the entomofauna of Belize is poorly known. What is perhaps a bit of a surprise are the many unusual range extensions for some of the described insect species. This indicates that knowing the insect fauna of Belize will improve our understanding of the zoogeography of Mexico and Central America.
The following checklists and are now available and more will be added as they mature. Available images may be accessed through links within the checklists.
- Anthribidae, by Charles O'Brien
- Cerambycidae, by Robert Turnbow
- Chrysomelidae, by Shawn Clark
- Curculionidae, by Charles O'Brien
- Elateroidea, by Paul Johnson
- Erotylidae, by Paul Skelley
- Mordellidae, by John Jackman
- Staphylinidae: subfamily Pselaphinae, by Chris Carlton
- Tenebrionidae, by Charles Triplehorn and Otto Merkl
For questions and comments contact Peter Kovarik.

UK Telegraph had the original report
This astounding achievement is a big step toward protecting sensitive electronics and the delicate human body against the radioactive effects of manned missions between the planets.
Earlier paper from 2008 - The interaction of a flowing plasma with a dipole magnetic field: measurements and modelling of a diamagnetic cavity relevant to spacecraft protection
Minimag presenation from Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, early 2010
In results just published in the journal Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, they have devised a system no bigger than a large desk that uses the same energy as an electric kettle. Two mini-magnetospheres will be contained within two mini satellites located outside the spaceship. Should there be an increase in solar wind flux, or an approaching cloud of energetic particles from a flare and/or coronal mass ejection (CME), the magnetospheres can be switched on and the solar ions are deflected away from the spacecraft.
If you liked this article, please give it a quick review on ycombinator or StumbleUpon. Thanks
Ocean Floor Gold and Copper
Ocean Floor Mining Company

You are here: PureEnergySystems.com
> News > October
E-Cat Test Validates Cold Fusion Despite Challenges
The test of the E-Cat (Energy Catalyzer) that took place on October 6, 2011 in Italy has validated Andrea Rossi's claim that the device produces excess energy via a novel Cold Fusion nuclear reaction. Despite its success, the test was flawed, and could have been done in a way that produced more spectacular results -- as if confirmation of cold fusion is not already stunning enough.
Andrea Rossi stands in front of his E-Cat
apparatus, October 6, 2011
Photo by Maurizio Melis of Radio24
by Hank Mills
Pure Energy Systems News
Andrea Rossi has made big claims for the past year, about his cold fusion "E-Cat" (Energy Catalyzer) technology. He has claimed that it produces vast amounts of energy via a safe and clean low energy nuclear reaction that consumes only tiny amounts of nickel and hydrogen. A series of tests had been performed earlier this year that seemed to confirm excess energy is produced by the systems tested. Some of the tests were particularly impressive, such as one that lasted eighteen hours, and was performed by Dr. Levi of the University of Bologna. Unfortunately, the tests were not planned out as well as they could have been and had flaws.
The most recent test that took place on October 6, 2011 in Bologna, Italy, was supposed to address many of the concerns about the previous tests, and be performed in a way that would put to rest many issues that had been discussed continually on the internet. Despite showing clear evidence of excess energy -- which is absolutely fantastic -- this most recent test failed to live up to its full potential. It was a big success in that it validated the claim the E-Cat produces excess energy via cold fusion, but it was not nearly as successful as it could have been. Or as successful as we, the outsiders looking in, would like for it to have been.
The Inventor's Mindset
One thing that should be stated is that inventors do not always think like the people who follow their inventions. They have their own mindset and way of looking at things. This should be obvious, because they are seeing *everything* from a different perspective. For example, when we think seeing the inside of an important component would be exciting and informative, they consider it a threat to their intellectual property. Or, for example, when we would like to see a test run for days, they are thinking that a few hours is long enough. In their mind, they know their technology works, and running it for hours, days, or weeks would be more of a chore to them than an exciting event.
In Rossi's case, he has worked with these reactors for many years. He has tested them time and time again. In fact, he has built hundreds of units (of different models), and has tested every one of them. He is aware of how the units operate and how they perform. Actually, for a period of many months to a year or more, he had an early model of E-Cat heating one of his offices in Italy. Satisfying the curiosity of internet "chatters" by operating a unit for an extended period of time -- beyond what he thinks is needed to prove the effect -- is just a waste of his time, according to his thinking. He could spend the time getting the one megawatt plant ready to launch.
Don't forget, Rossi is a busy person. In addition to finishing the one megawatt plant, he has a new partner company to find, a wife at home, and a life to live! We need to consider that he works sixteen to eighteen hours a day building units, testing them, addressing other issues about the E-Cat. Although he is a very helpful person in many ways (willing to communicate with people and answer questions), he simply does not have the time to grant all of the many requests made of him. If he did, he could not get any work done at all, and the E-Cat would never be launched, or ever make it to the market place!
The Outsider's Mindset
I consider myself an outsider. I have never built a cold fusion device, have never spent years working to develop a technology, and have never gone through the grueling process of trying to bring a product into the market place. Although I spend a lot of time researching various technologies on the internet, I don't work sixteen to eighteen hours a day. In addition, I have no vested interest in the success of any technology, other than simply wanting at least one to hit the market place, ASAP.
As an outsider, I do not think like Rossi thinks. I don't think the majority of people think like Rossi thinks, because they are not in his shoes. They are not working to the point of exhaustion, and do not have years of their life invested in an exotic technology. Due to the fact we do not think like Rossi, his actions or sometimes lack thereof can seem strange, bizarre, or odd. Sometimes, they can make us want to smack ourselves, to make sure we are not in some sort of strange dream.
The recent test on October 6, 2011 is an example of a situation in which outsiders would have liked to have seen a very different test. Here are examples of how an outsider would have liked to see the test performed, compared to Rossi's possible mindset.
(Please note that I am making speculations about what Rossi is thinking, and his mindset. I do not know for sure if my guesses are accurate. If they are not, then I would like to apologize to Rossi, and give him the chance to respond in any way he sees fit.)
In the recent test, the output producing capability of the reactors was throttled down for safety reasons. This may have been done by keeping the hydrogen pressure low, or adding less of the catalyst to the nickel powder. Also, only one out of the three reactors that were inside of the module, were used in the test. For an experimental test to prove the effect beyond a shadow of a doubt, I, as an outsider, would have loved to have seen the device fully throttled up, despite the safety risks. Even if it meant everyone that attended would have had to sign long legal disclaimers, it would have been worth it.
I think it would have been great if all three reactors were utilized, and they all were adjusted to produce their maximum level of output. This would have increased the amount of output produced dramatically, and would have reduced the amount of input needed. The more heat produced by the system, the less heat would have needed to be input via the electric resistors.
Rossi, on the other hand, probably thought throttling up the device to a high level was not worth the risk, and was not needed to prove that excess energy was being produced. It is true that an explosion causing injuries -- while probably VERY unlikely -- could result in a setback of his project, and possible legal ramifications. Also, in reality, the test proved excess energy was being produced even with only one, throttled down reactor being used.
So even though a test of the device adjusted to operate at full power would have been useful and exciting, it was not absolutely needed for what Rossi wanted to accomplish.
I would like to ask Rossi to consider performing a demonstration with a module both adjusted to operate at full power, and utilizing all three reactor cores. Even if he has to limit the number of people involved, perform the test remotely with cameras monitoring the module, utilize a blast shield, or only allow certain individuals (who have signed disclaimers) to go into the room in which the module is running.
A Longer Self Sustain
As an outsider, I have not had the chance to look at test data from these devices self-sustaining for long periods of time -- 12 hours, 24 hours, days, weeks, etc. I would really like to see one of these units self sustain for a *very* long period of time. This is not because I think the output of the E-Cat during the recent test was due to stored energy being released (the 'thermal inertia' theory being floated around the internet). In fact, I think that the flat line in NyTeknik's graph -- showing self sustain mode for three and a half hours without any drop in output temperature -- provides clear evidence against the thermal inertia theory. The reason I would like to see a longer period of self sustain, is that it would not only document a huge gain of energy, but one that no individual could rationally deny!
Rossi has claimed that these devices represent an alternative energy solution that could change the world. I think this is true. However, to show just how much potential this technology has, an even more extended test of the E-Cat in self sustain mode (at full power or at least with all three reactors inside the module being used), would have been much more impressive. I am not saying the Oct. 6 test was not impressive -- it was very significant because it demonstrated excess energy and proof of cold fusion -- but that a longer test would have been better. It would have done more to shut up the cynics (a few of which will never change their minds), and help the technology get into the mainstream (dumbstream) media.
I really don't think Rossi cares too much about showing off the technology's full potential, at this point. He also does not seem to appear to want the attention of the mainstream media, or at least any more than he thinks he needs. If he did, the test would have been far different, and would have produced such a gigantic amount of excess energy everyone's jaws would have dropped. My jaw dropped when I saw the flat line during self sustain mode (because it proved beyond a doubt the system was producing excess energy), but my jaw did not drop as far as it could have, if the period of operation had lasted longer.
Interestingly, I have known inventors, of unrelated energy technologies, that purposely held back from showing the *best* version of their technology. They did not want to show off too much, because they did not want to deal with the fallout of attracting too much attention. Instead of performing an amazing demonstration, they performed one that proved the point -- at least to their satisfaction -- but would not attraction too much attention. I think Rossi may feel the same way. If he had his way, he would have never done a single test before the launch of the one megawatt plant. It was Focardi that convinced him to do a public test, because he feared that (due to health problems) he may not live long enough to see the technology be revealed to the world.
A longer test (at least 12 hours) in self sustain mode would have been great, exciting, and would have produced even more excess energy. However, in Rossi's mind, it was not needed, for potentially valid reasons (at least from the perspective of someone on the inside).
I would simply like to humbly plead with Rossi, to try and step in the shoes of the outsider, and at the next test allow the module to run for a longer period in self sustain mode.
Modern Testing Methods and Tools
I have looked at the data acquired during the test, but have not had a chance to study it as in depth as I would like to. The data shows a clear gain of energy in my opinion, and confirms that the E-Cat is producing excess energy. As I said before, the test was a success. However, it could have been performed in a more modern way.
For example, all of the temperature measurements, power input measurements, and water flow measurements should have been fed into the same computer, to be recorded in a real time manner. This way all the data would have been automatically recorded into one data set, including the hour and second of every measurement. It seems data collection was not done this way at the test, and some of the data was actually taken by hand!
Because the data was not all automatically recorded into one computer during the test, NyTeknik (who had the exclusive right to be the first to post a report on the test) has not yet posted a graph that charts all the measurements of all the factors of the test. What I would like to see is a single high resolution graph, that shows all of the measurements that were taken of every parameter of the test. If one graph showing everything would be too complex for a non-expert to easily interpret, then a series of graphs would be ideal. This would allow everyone to more simply determine the total energy in, and the total energy out.
The data collected and the manner in which it was collected is good enough to show there was a significant amount of excess energy produced, especially during self sustain mode. It may also be good enough to show even more details about the excess energy produced. Sadly, I'm not an expert in scientific data interpretation, so it takes me more time to interpret data than an expert who does so full time (like Rossi).
I hope that when I have had the time to examine the data in more depth, I will see that Rossi's claims about the results of the test (not just excess energy but a six fold gain of energy, in a worst case scenario) are accurate. At this point, I am not going to doubt him. He is the expert, and there are many people going over the data, and hopefully more data from the test will be coming in the near future.
What I would like to do, is request that he upgrade his data acquisition methods for any upcoming public tests. However, from Rossi's perspective, the way the data was acquired was good enough, and proved the point he wanted to make. I respect his view, but I do hope that he will change his mind in the future.
For the record, I am not stating that I think better data acquisition techniques are needed to verify his technology produces excess energy, and even significant amounts of it. I simply think it would make analysis of test data much simpler, quicker, and precise.
One of the most useful tools in the scientific method is a control. A control is an object or thing that you do not try to change during the experiment. For example, if you were giving an experimental drug to a hundred people, you might want to have a number of additional people who do not receive the drug. You would compare how the drug effects the people who consumed it, to those who did not receive the drug at all. By comparing the two sets of people, those who consumed the drug and those who did not, you could more easily see the effectiveness of the drug -- or if it was doing harm.
In Rossi's test, a control system would have been an E-Cat module that was setup in the exact same way, except it would have not been filled with hydrogen gas. It would have had the same flow of water going through it, the same electrical input, and it would have operated for the same length of time as the E-Cat unit with hydrogen. By comparing the two, you could easily see the difference between the "control" E-Cat (that was not having nuclear reactions take place), and the "real" E-Cat (that was producing excess heat).
If a control had been used in the experiment, the excess heat would be even more obvious. It would have been so obvious, that it could have made the test go from a major success (with some flaws), to the most spectacular scientific test in the last hundred years.
Yes, a control would have made that much of a difference!
I understand that Rossi may not see the need for a control, when the test that was performed clearly showed excess energy without it. A control might have made the experiment so mind blowingly amazing, it could have attracted too much media attention, too many scientists that would want to get involved, and too many individuals wanting additional information. The result could have been that Rossi would not even have the time to finish his one megawatt plant.
However, from the view point of an outsider, I think a control would have greatly benefited the experiment. If it created too much media attention, perhaps someone could volunteer to work for a month as an unpaid intern, filtering through all of the requests from media representatives, and taking care of many non-technical tasks, so Rossi could focus on getting the one megawatt plant ready!
I sincerely hope that during the test of the one megawatt plant, and any tests before then, a control run will be performed, in which no hydrogen is placed in the reactors.
Rossi's Statement about the Test Results
Andrea Rossi responded to an email we sent him that had questions about the test. Here is the email, and his responses.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR CONTINUOUS ATTENTION. PLEASE FIND THE ANSWERS IN BLOCK LETTERS ALONG YOUR TEXT:
Dear Andrea Rossi,
In regards to the latest test of the Energy Catalyzer, I have a number of questions I hope you can answer.
1) My understanding is that if a reactor core is not adjusted to be under-powered (below its maximum potential) in self-sustain mode, it can have a tendency to become unstable and climb in output. If the reactor is left in an unstable self-sustaining mode for too long, the output can climb to potentially dangerous levels. Can you provide some information about how the reactor core in the test was adjusted to self-sustain in a safe manner?
NO, VERY SORRY
a) For example, there was only one active reactor core in the module tested. How was the single reactor core adjusted to be under-powered?
b) Is adjusting the reactor core as simple as lowering the hydrogen pressure?
2) What is the power consumption of the device that "produces frequencies" that was mentioned in the NyTeknik article? Although the power consumption of this device is probably insignificant, providing a figure could help put to rest the idea (that some are suggesting) that a large amount of power was being consumed by the frequency-generating device, and transmitted into the reactor.
THE ENERGY CONSUMED FROM THE FREQUENCY GENERATOR IS 50 WH/H AND IT HAS BEEN CALCULATED, BECAUSE THIS APPARATUS WAS PLUGGED IN THE SAME LINE WHERE THE ENERGY-CONSUME MEASUREMENT HAS BEEN DONE
a) Can you tell us anything more about this frequency generating device and its function?
NO, SORRY, THIS IS A CONFIDENTIAL ISSUE
b) Is the frequency-generating device turned on at all times when a module is in operation, or only when a module is in self-sustain mode?
c) Some are suggesting that this device is "the" catalyst that drives the reactions in the reactor core. However, you have stated in the past that the catalyst is actually one or more physical elements (in addition to nickel and hydrogen) that are placed in the reactor core. Can you confirm that physical catalysts are used in the reactor?
YES, I CONFIRM THIS
3) Does the reaction have to be quenched with additional water flow though the reactor, or is reducing the hydrogen pressure enough to end the reactions on its own?
NEEDS ADDITIONAL QUENCHING
a) If reducing the hydrogen pressure (or venting it completely) is not enough to turn off the module, could it be due to the fact some hydrogen atoms are still bonded to nickel atoms, and undergoing nuclear reactions?
b) If there is some other reason why reducing hydrogen pressure is not enough to quickly turn off the module, could you please specify?
Thank you for taking the time to answer these questions, and for allowing a test to be performed that clearly shows anomalous and excess energy being produced. Hopefully, the world will notice the significance of this test.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, AND, SINCE I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NOT TIME TO ANSWER (I MADE AN EXCEPTION FOR YOU) PLEASE EXPLAIN THAT BEFORE THE SELF SUSTAINING MODE THE REACTOR WAS ALREADY PRODUCING ENERGY MORE THAN IT CONSUMED, SO THAT THE ENERGY CONSUMED IS NOT LOST, BUT TURNED INTO ENERGY ITSELF, THEREFORE IS NOT PASSIVE. ANOTHER IMPORTANT INFORMATION: IF YOU LOOK CAREFULLY AT THE REPORT, YOU WILL SEE THAT THE SPOTS OF DRIVE WITH THE RESISTANCE HAVE A DURATION OF ABOUT 10 MINUTES, WHILE THE DURATION OF THE SELF SUSTAINING MODES IS PROGRESSIVELY LONGER, UNTIL IT ARRIVES TO BE UP TO HOURS. BESIDES, WE PRODUCED AT LEAST 4.3 kWh/h FOR ABOUT 6 HOURS AND CONSUMED AN AVERAGE OF 1.3 kWh/h FOR ABOUT 3 HOURS, SO THAT WE MADE IN TOTAL DURING THE TEST 25.8 kWh AND CONSUMED IN TOTAL DURING THE TEST 3.9 kWh. IN THE WORST POSSIBLE SCENARIO, WHICH MEANS NOT CONSIDERING THAT THE CONSUME IS MAINLY MADE DURING THE HEATING OF THE REACTOR DURING THE FIRST 2 HOURS, WE CAN CONSIDER THAT THE WORST POSSIBLE RATIO IS 25.8 : 3.9 AND THIS IS THE COP 6 WHICH WE ALWAYS SAID. OF COURSE, THE COP IS BETTER, BECAUSE, OBVIOUSLY, THE REACTOR, ONCE IN TEMPERATURE, NEEDS NOT TO BE HEATED AGAIN FROM ROOM TEMPERATURE TO OPERATIONAL TEMPERATURE.
WARMEST REGARDS TO ALL, ANDREA ROSSI
He claims that the test produced 25.8 kilowatt hours of power, and consumed only 3.9 kilowatt hours, not considering the losses from using two circuits of water and a heat exchanger. This would be very impressive for a system that is only using one reactor core (out of three), that has been adjusted to only produce a fraction of its maximum potential power.
However, from my analysis of the data so far (still trying to wrap my head around it), I have not been able to confirm his claim of a COP of 6. I am not saying it is not the case, or not in the data. I simply have yet to fully examine the data, and I am waiting for more data to be released.
Actually, I hope that someone will release all the data in one file and/or graph that will be easier to interpret. Perhaps NyTeknik, if they have not done so already, could contact Rossi or someone else who attended and recorded the data, and ask for any test data they are missing.
Bottom Line - Cold Fusion Is Here
The fact of the matter was that the October 6th test was a success in many ways.
- It documented a gain of energy.
- It documented a gain of energy in self-sustain mode.
- It documented massive "heat after death."
Most importantly, it proved beyond a doubt, that cold fusion is a reality.
Italian scientific journalist Maurizio Melis of Il Sole 24 Ore, who witnessed the test in Bologna,
"In the coming weeks Rossi aims to activate a 1MW plant, which is now almost ready, and we had the opportunity to inspect it during the demonstration of yesterday. If the plant starts up then it will be very difficult to affirm that it is a hoax. Instead, we will be projected suddenly into a new energetic era."
The test could have been made better in many ways. It had flaws. However, it was the most significant test of the E-Cat so far, for one reason in particular....
This graph shows that the E-Cat is a device producing excess energy, because the red line does not go down until after the hydrogen is vented.
- Some may legitimately argue about how much energy was produced, because we don't yet have all the test data in one easy to interpret graph or file.
- Some may point out the flaws in the test, such as the lack of a control, the lack of another several hours of operation in self sustain mode.
- Some may point out ways the test could be improved.
However, that graph by NyTeknik makes it clear the test was a success -- not a failure.
Mainstream media, your alarm clock is buzzing, it's time to wake up!
# # #
This story is also published at BeforeItsNews.
What You Can Do
- Pass this on to your friends and favorite news sources.
- Join the H-Ni_Fusion
technical discussion group to explore the details of the technology.
- Once available, purchase a unit and/or encourage others who are able, to do so.
- Let professionals in the renewable energy sector know about the promise of
- Subscribe to our newsletter
to stay abreast of the latest, greatest developments in the free energy
- Consider investing in Rossi's group once they open to that in October.
- Help us manage the PESWiki
feature page on Rossi's technology.
Other PES Coverage
PESN Coverage of E-Cat
For a more exhaustive listing, see News:Rossi_Cold_Fusion
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- June 6, 2013 - EU Parliament gives LENR thumbs
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- May 30, 2013 - additional info on the E-Cat
3rd party test report (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- May 23, 2013 - E-Cat 3rd Party Results Posted (PESN)
E-Cat Validation Creates More Questions (PESN;
May 21, 2013)
Third-Party E-Cat Test Results
Posted - posted on ArXiv.org
May 20, 2013)
Interview with E-Cat Distributor License Broker, Roger Green (PESN;
May 17, 2013)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- May 9, 2013 - Interview with Rossi about recent 1 MW plant delivery
Interview with Andrea Rossi About 1 MW E-Cat Plant Delivery (PESN;
May 7, 2013)
LENR-to-Market MONTHLY -- April 29, 2013 - E-Cat teases with April 30
delivery date (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- March 28, 2013 - E-Cat 3rd-Party testing
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- March 7, 2013 - more on NASA (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- February 21, 2013 - NASA on nuclear reactor in
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- February 14, 2013 - Piantelli self-sustains 2
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- February 7, 2013 - CF 101 week 2 (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- January 31, 2013 - CF 101 week 1 at MIT (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- January 24, 2013 - Piantelli gets CF patent,
Rossi rebuffs (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- January 17, 2013 - Defkalion joint venture
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- January 10, 2013 - Rossi having problems
finding certification for home application (PESN)
LENR-to-Market Weekly -- January 3, 2013 - Hot-Cat creating
electromotive force? (PESN)

"Have you ever passed a nail salon gasping from the chemicals seeping through the open door, while a dozen women patrons and their handlers are breathing in those same chemicals without a trace of discomfort?"
There was a time shortly before the human genome was sequenced that many believed genetic science was on the cusp of a medical revolution. Our sequenced DNA was thought to hold the key to understanding the onset of disease. Why are some children afflicted with autism? Why do some adults stop producing enough insulin? Why do some otherwise healthy individuals who reach their senior years lose mental functions and memory? Ten years after the human genome was sequenced, biomedical scientists have become more cautious in their optimism about how DNA sequencing will change medicine by revealing the existence of a disease years before its onset or by introducing new therapies with the tools of molecular medicine and stem cells.
The terms "gene-environment interaction" and "epigenetics" are now recognized as the clue to many disease conditions. The switches that turn genes on and off may be more important in understanding clinical pathology than mutations in coding sequences of DNA. These switches, which may stop or modify gene expression, are in the form of protein complexes that overlay the DNA code, such as histones or methyl groups, or the RNA interference molecules that reside in the genome.
On the website of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences we find the following statement: "A good part of who we are is 'written in our genes,' inherited from Mom and Dad. Many traits, like red or brown hair, body shape and even some personality quirks, are passed on from parent to offspring. But genes are not the whole story. Where we live, how much we exercise, what we eat: These and many other environmental factors can all affect how our genes get expressed."
Despite the growing awareness that environmental factors interact with and affect the human genome, most of the research remains focused on the mechanisms operating at the molecular level. Thus, there is much discussion about sequencing the epigenome to gain an understanding of the genetic switches or to probe deeply into non-coding DNA for discovery of RNA sequences that interfere or modulate gene expression.
Meanwhile, we know that around 100,000 people die from adverse drug reactions. Some people are highly sensitive to chemicals in perfumes or outgassing from carpets or plastic. The detoxification mechanisms of people vary widely. Without a sufficient quantity of enzyme production, our bodies cannot break down certain chemicals fast enough before experiencing harm. If we expect to make any major inroads into preventing the many environmentally-induced diseases, each of which may affect a small percentage of the population, then we must use the human genome and the epigenome to acquire an understanding of why some people are more adversely affected by environmental agents. What we need is a massive effort to unravel the "gene-environment" interaction in disease causation. We have over 100,000 chemicals in current industrial use. Many of these chemicals were introduced into commerce without much toxicological evaluation. It takes between 25-50 years to regulate or ban a chemical that has been shown to be harmful to humans. The United States has only banned about a half dozen chemicals over half a century. In part this is because the regulatory system is geared toward industrial interests. The government requires very minimal safety studies to permit a chemical into industrial use, but demands an extraordinary body of replicable scientific studies and cost-benefit analyses before a chemical is removed from the marketplace.
The one area where there have been major contributions in deciphering the gene-environment interaction is in the study of the genetic effects of ionizing radiation. Perhaps radiation effects on health is the low hanging fruit because of the mutations the radiation produces, although low level radiation effects remains highly controversial.
How can we learn what chemicals are adversely affecting the healthy human genome and what chemicals have differential effects on different genomes? How can we detect the detoxification potential of each individual toward a chemical? The differences in people's ability to detoxify a chemical may be the result of shorter genes coding for the relevant detoxifying enzymes, or the enzyme-producing gene is switched off.
Most of the commercial interest in the sequenced human genome has been focused on risk factors for certain diseases that are read from the individual's DNA. There is nothing in direct-to-consumer testing kits that reveals the cause of any disease other than what is encrypted in the code itself. And there are only a small number of illnesses where there is a one-to-one correlation between having a particular form of a gene and a disease, such as cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia and Canavan's disease.
Of course, a massive effort to determine how chemicals interact with the human genome may have unintended consequences. Instead of banning the chemical, it may result in a genetic classification of people-those hypersensitive to chemical X, those with peanut allergies, etc.-putting the onus on them about how to navigate through life. Many people have figured out they are hypersensitive to new carpets, latex or perfumes and learn how to keep away. But if we had a mechanism that showed us these people were not psychologically challenged but rather had a normal genome with less capacity to metabolize chemical toxins, we would have a new regulatory mechanism for removing the chemicals from the environment.
Biomedical scientists have been able to titrate chemotherapy agents to individuals based on genomic information. Gene expression patterns associated with sensitivity and/or resistance to chemotherapy may be used to help provide more effective treatment.
Scientists have used genetic testing to identify patients at high risk of bleeding from the drug warfarin. Two genes account for most of the risk. Recently, genetic variants in the gene encoding Cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2C9, which metabolizes warfarin, and the Vitamin K epoxide reductase gene (VKORC1), has enabled more accurate dosing that takes account of the genome of an individual. Genotyping variants in genes encoding Cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2C9), which metabolize antipsychotic medications, have been used to improve drug response and reduce side-effects. Pain killers like codeine affect people differently. Tests for certain enzymes (P450-2D6) can determine whether someone will be an ultra-rapid metabolizer of codeine, which could induce life-threatening toxicity.
If we can understand through certain enzyme pathways that individuals react differently to drugs and that some of us cannot efficiently metabolize certain chemicals, why couldn't we do the same for industrial toxins within the next 20 years? Once we learn that many people cannot de-toxify a chemical that bioaccumulates in their body, it provides new grounds for finding a substitute for that chemical rather than waiting a quarter century to complete hundreds of studies with mixed results.
Sheldon Krimsky, PhD, is Chair of the Board of Directors and a founder of the Council for Responsible Genetics. He is a Professor of Urban and Environmental Policy and Planning at Tufts University.

A rising tide of drug-resistant staph infections
Spider bites and pimples that just won't heal.
That's how parents are describing their children's skin infections that turn out to be caused by a deadly strain of drug-resistant "staph" bacteria, says C. Buddy Creech, M.D., M.P.H., assistant professor of Pediatric Infectious Diseases.
Creech has been following the rising tide of cases of community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, MRSA, and he's concerned.
He describes deaths of children, particularly adolescents, who are healthy and then develop sudden, devastating disease.
"These are cases where a child has a fever on Saturday night, feels bad on Sunday, collapses in the pediatrician's office on Monday, and then dies. It's horrible."
Skin abscesses are the most common presentation, and recent MRSA outbreaks have occurred among athletes, prisoners and tattoo recipients, with the germ spreading through skin contact or shared items like towels.
Of the skin abscesses treated in the adult and pediatric emergency departments at Vanderbilt from Nov. 1, 2004 to Oct. 31, 2005, about 70 percent were
positive for MRSA, according to a study conducted by Thomas Talbot, M.D., assistant professor of Medicine.
These findings mirror the national scene. A study published this summer
in the New England Journal of Medicine reported that 59 percent of all skin infections among adults treated in emergency rooms in 11 U.S. cities in August 2004 were caused by MRSA.
"We culture every abscess now," Creech says. "Not only do we want to know if it's MRSA, we want to keep tabs on what MRSA is doing – is it becoming resistant to the drugs that we think still work?"
Physicians have been able to turn to some "old" antibiotics to treat community-associated MRSA, sulfa-type drugs like Bactrim that were not being routinely used because other germs had developed resistance to them, Creech says.
"There are two MRSA treatment arms right now – we still have a small number of drugs that are easy to give to people at home for uncomplicated MRSA infections, and we have several intravenous drugs, such as vancomycin, that we reserve for the critically ill patients."
With any of these antibiotics, Creech warns, "it's the finger in the proverbial dike. We will inevitably see resistance – it's just a matter of time."
Wendy Inman, a 30-year-old mother of three from Waynesboro, Tenn., knows about resistance firsthand.
She has battled skin abscesses caused by MRSA for the past three years. Because of repeated boils in her underarm area, both wearing clothing and letting her arms hang at her side have been painful.
Bactrim would help for only about six weeks, then the pus-filled cysts would return. She was referred to Vanderbilt's Patty Wright, M.D., assistant professor of Medicine, in June, and prescribed Bactrim and a decontaminating-cleansing regimen that has kept the skin abscesses at bay.
Twice a day, for the first week of each month, Inman cleanses with a surgical-type scrub and uses an antibiotic nasal ointment. She also takes diluted bleach baths twice a week during that week, and takes a daily dose of Vitamin C. "People who have never had this don't realize how bad this is," she said. "It's like living with a toothache, a constant pain. But, now, it's such a blessing to be free of pain," she says.
- Leigh MacMillan and Nancy Humphrey

In ancient China one’s Zodiac sign was fixed by the position of the planet Jupiter during the year of one’s birth (it takes twelve years for Jupiter to orbit the sun). On this level, Ai Weiwei Circle of Animals/Zodiac Heads represents a system of measuring time and distinguishing characteristics of the human psyche linked to the heavens above.
In the mid-eighteenth century the Qianlong Emperor, ruler of the Qing (Ch’ing) dynasty—a Manchu (not Chinese) by birth—was fascinated by European technology. On the condition that they not proselytize, he invited European Jesuit priests into the Forbidden City, where they worked as scientists, engineers, architects, and artists. These priests spoke, read, and wrote Chinese fluently; in this way they could easily communicate with the most eminent Chinese and Manchu scholar-officials in the Forbidden City. Sent to China by the Vatican with the mission of converting China to the Catholic Church (in which they largely failed), these priests nonetheless had an enormous influence on Chinese intellectual and artistic life.
Among the projects commissioned by the Emperor from the Jesuits was a grand palace known as the Yuan Ming Yuan, or “Palace of Perfect Brightness.” It consisted of a mix of styles: sections built in traditional Chinese wooden architecture and others made of marble, imitating such European palaces as Versailles. In front of one building in the European manner was a large fountain, with twelve animal-headed waterspouts. These functioned as symbols of the Zodiac and of the hours of the day (the Chinese measured the day in units equivalent to two Western hours, which when multiplied by twelve makes up a twenty-four hour day).
In an astonishing irony, in 1860 the entire Palace was destroyed and looted by British and French troops as part of military actions of the Second Opium War. Of the twelve original bronze heads, seven survive. In casting his new Zodiac Heads, Ai Weiwei carefully followed the style of the originals, but exercised considerable artistic license in designing the five heads whose models are missing (including the dragon).
Ai Weiwei’s Zodiac Heads are thus a multi-layered meditation on political power, the nature of time, and the often tormented relationship between China and West, at the same time calling into question the arbitrary nature of such concepts as “national treasure.” That all of this is accomplished with considerable humor is a tribute to Ai’s detachment. I am proud that LACMA is showing this work by one of China’s greatest artists and most courageous social critics.
Stephen Little, curator, Chinese and Korean Art

All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior permission of the publisher.
Requests for permission should be directed to: email@example.com, or mailed to: Cambria Press 20 Northpointe Parkway, Suite 188 Amherst, NY 14228Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lively, Donald E., 1947-
The Constitution, race, and renewed relevance of original intent : reclaiming the lost opportunity of federalism / Donald E. Lively.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-60497-562-8 (alk. paper)
1. Slavery—Law and legislation—United States—History.
2. Race discrimination—Law and legislation—United States—History.
3. Segregation—Law and legislation—United States—History.
4. African Americans—Civil rights—History.
5. Constitutional amendments—United States—History.
6. Constitutional history—United States.
7. Equality before the law—United States.
8. Federal government—United States. I. Title.

Nutrition basics (19)
- Dietary fiber: Essential for a healthy diet
- Artificial sweeteners and other sugar substitutes
- Added sugar: Don't get sabotaged by sweeteners
- see all in Nutrition basics
Healthy diets (12)
- DASH diet: Tips for dining out
- DASH diet: Tips for shopping and cooking
- DASH diet: Healthy eating to lower your blood pressure
- see all in Healthy diets
Healthy cooking (14)
- Healthy chicken recipes
- Meatless meals: The benefits of eating less meat
- Healthy cooking for 1 or 2
- see all in Healthy cooking
Healthy menus and shopping strategies (13)
- Free range and other meat and poultry terms
- Mayo Clinic Healthy Weight Pyramid: A sample menu
- Healthy breakfast: Quick, flexible options to grab at home
- see all in Healthy menus and shopping strategies
Nutritional supplements (3)
- Herbal supplements: What to know before you buy
- Calcium and calcium supplements: Achieving the right balance
- Supplements: Nutrition in a pill?
Whole grains: Hearty options for a healthy diet
Find out why whole grains are better than refined grains and how to add more whole grains to your diet.By Mayo Clinic staff
Grains, especially whole grains, are an essential part of a healthy diet. All types of grains are good sources of complex carbohydrates and some key vitamins and minerals. Grains are also naturally low in fat. All of this makes grains a healthy option. Better yet, they've been linked to a lower risk of heart disease, diabetes, certain cancers and other health problems.
The healthiest kinds of grains are whole grains. The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that at least half of all the grains you eat are whole grains. Chances are you eat lots of grains already. But are they whole grains? If you're like most, you're not getting enough whole grains in your diet. See how to make whole grains a part of your healthy diet.
Types of grains
Also called cereals, grains and whole grains are the seeds of grasses cultivated for food. Grains and whole grains come in many shapes and sizes, from large kernels of popcorn to small quinoa seeds.
- Whole grains. These are unrefined grains that haven't had their bran and germ removed by milling. Whole grains are better sources of fiber and other important nutrients, such as selenium, potassium and magnesium. Whole grains are either single foods, such as brown rice and popcorn, or ingredients in products, such as buckwheat in pancakes or whole wheat in bread.
- Refined grains. Refined grains are milled, a process that strips out both the bran and germ to give them a finer texture and extend their shelf life. The refining process also removes many nutrients, including fiber. Refined grains include white flour, white rice, white bread and degermed cornflower. Many breads, cereals, crackers, desserts and pastries are made with refined grains, too.
- Enriched grains. Enriched means that some of the nutrients lost during processing are added back in. Some enriched grains are grains that have lost B vitamins added back in — but not the lost fiber. Fortifying means adding in nutrients that don't occur naturally in the food. Most refined grains are enriched, and many enriched grains also are fortified with other vitamins and minerals, such as folic acid and iron. Some countries require certain refined grains to be enriched. Whole grains may or may not be fortified.
(1 of 2)
- Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/DGAs2010-PolicyDocument.htm. Accessed June 30, 2011.
- Dole Food Company, et al. Encyclopedia of Foods: A Guide to Healthy Nutrition. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press; 2002.
- Whole white wheat FAQ. Whole Grains Council. http://www.wholegrainscouncil.org/whole-grains-101/whole-white-wheat-faq. Accessed June 30, 2011.
- Maras JE, et al. Whole grain intake: The Baltimore longitudinal study of aging. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis. 2009;22:53.
- Choosing whole grains FAQ. Eat right Ontario. http://www.eatrightontario.ca/en/viewdocument.aspx?id=39. Accessed June 30, 2011.
- Duyff RL. American Dietetic Association Complete Food and Nutrition Guide. 3rd edition. Hoboken, N.J.:John Wiley & Sons; 2006.
- What foods are in the grains group? U.S. Department of Agriculture. http://www.choosemyplate.gov/foodgroups/grains.html. Accessed June 30, 2011.
- O'Neil C., et al. Whole-grain consumption is associated with diet quality and nutrient intake in adults: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2004. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 2010;110:1461.
- Zeratsky KA (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn. July 5, 2011.
- Nelson JK (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn. July 7, 2011.

Job Description: To Explore the Unknown
Curiosity about how life might have evolved on Mars could help reveal more about our own planet.
Planetary studies can spark the imagination. We want to go to Mars. Humans have dreamed of going to another planet and looking for life throughout the ages. We want to better understand the nature of the Solar System and we want to know if we're alone.
We're finding out as much as we can about our nearest habitable neighbor in order to lay the groundwork for the eventual colonization of Mars. There is nothing scientifically stopping us.
A passion for exploration
The discovery of hundreds of worlds around other stars has shown that planets orbit at least 5 to 10 percent of all stars. But how many of these planets are Earth-size, and possibly Earth-like?

This speciesis classified as Vulnerable because remote-sensing data indicate that there has been a dramatic loss of lowland forest across its range and that it is therefore likely to be undergoing a rapid population decline.
Distribution and population
Ninox odiosa is endemic to the island of New Britain Papua New Guinea where although it is rather poorly known, it appears to be not uncommon in suitable habitat. It is suspected to have declined rapidly in recent years owing to ongoing clearance of lowland forest (Buchananet al. 2008).
The population is estimated to be in the band 10,000-19,999 mature individuals, equating to 15,000-29,999 individuals in total, rounded here to 15,000-30,000 individuals.
Buchanan et al. (2008) calculated the rate of forest loss within the species's range on New Britain as 33.8% over three generations. Hence, this decline is expected to continue.
It inhabits lowland rainforest up to 1,200 m. It is thought to tolerate some degree of habitat degradation.
Lowland forest clearance on New Britain for conversion to oil palm plantations has been intense in recent decades and the island accounts for approximately half of Papua New Guinea's timber exports (Buchanan et al. 2008). Over 30% of suitable habitat has been cleared in the last 10 years and this trend is ongoing (Buchanan et al. 2008).
Conservation actions underway
None is known.
Conservation actions proposed
Identify and effectively protect a network of reserves, including some containing large areas of unlogged lowland forest, on New Britain. Continue to monitor trends in forest loss. Research its tolerance of degraded forest. Monitor populations in a number of primary forest and degraded forest sites across the island.
Related state of the world's birds case studies
thank you for your interest to save the Russet Hawk-owl (Ninox odiosa)
If everything looks correct, click sign now. Your signature will not be added until you click the button below.

London: No matter how bright you think your child is, until the age of seven, children are no brainier than the birds.
Researchers at the University of Cambridge during simple experiments found out that birds did just as well as children up until the age of seven, The Daily Mail reported.
By pitting birds against boys and girls using tests inspired by the Aesop's fable in which a thirsty crow is able to drink from a pitcher after using pebbles to raise the water level to within its reach.
In two of the three tests the birds, Eurasian jays, did just as well as the seven-year-old children.
After this, the human mind proved superior to the bird brain.
The experiments built on earlier work in which jays quickly learned that adding stones to a cylinder half-filled with water would bring a tasty treat floating on the surface within reach of their beaks.
In a second task the jays, colourful members of the crow family and about the same size as jackdaws, realized it was better to use pebbles, which sink, than corks, which float.
When Cambridgeshire children, aged four to ten, were set similar tasks, they did as well as the jays on the first, up to the age of seven.
From the age of eight, the pupils learned more quickly than the birds. The pattern was similar with the second task, except four-year-old children did worse than the jays.
However, a third, more complex, task separated the youngsters from the birds.
It again involved dropping objects into water to raise its level. But this time, a U-shaped tube was used, with the join at its bottom hidden; giving the impression it was two separate tubes.
This appeared to confuse the birds. However, the children did as well as before. The researchers said this shows children are better at putting preconceptions aside.
Lucy Cheke, a PhD student, said: "It is a child's job to learn about the world. They can't do that if they're limited by a preconceived idea about what is or is not possible. For a child, if it works, it works. The birds, however, found it much harder to learn what was happening because they were put off by the fact it shouldn’t be happening."
First Published: Thursday, July 26, 2012, 16:22

Photo: James Duncan Davidson
Drawn into controversy
Wearing his wide-brimmed hat, climate scientist James Hansen starts his TEDTalk by asking, ”What do I know that would cause me, a reticent midwestern scientist, to get arrested in front of the White House, protesting?”
Hansen studied under professor James Van Allen, who told him about observations of Venus — there was intense microwave radiation — because it’s hot, and it was kept that way by a thick C02 atmosphere. He was fortunate enough to join NASA and send an instrument to Venus. But while it was in transit, he became involved in calculating what would be the effect of the greenhouse effect here on Earth.
It turns out the atmosphere was changing before our eyes and, “A planet changing before our eyes is more important, it affects and changes our lives.” The greenhouse effect has been understood for a century. Infrared radiation is absorbed by a layer of gas, working like a blanket to keep heat in.
He worked with other scientists and eventually published an article in Science in 1981. They made several predictions in that paper: There would be shifting climate zones, rising sea levels, an opening of the northwest passage, and other effects. All of these have happened or are underway.
That paper was reported on the front page of the NY Times, and led to him testifying to congress. He told them it would produce varied effects, heat waves and droughts, but also (because warmer atmosphere holds more water vapor) more extreme rainfall, stronger storms and greater flooding.
All the global warming ‘hoopla’ became too much, and was distracting him from doing science. In addition, he was upset that the White House had altered his testimony, so he decided to leave communication to others.
The future draws him back in
The problem with not speaking was that he had two grandchildren. He realized he did not want them to say, “Opah understood what was happening, but he didn’t make it clear.”
So he was drawn more and more into the urgency.
Adding carbon to the air is like throwing a blanket on the bed. “More energy is coming in than is going out, until Earth is warm enough to raiate to space as much energy as it recieves from the Sun.” The key quantity is the imbalance, so they did the measurements. It turns out that continents to depths of tens of meters were getting warmer, and the Earth is gaining energy from heat. That amount of energy is equivalent to dropping 400,000 Hrioshima bombs every day, over a year, and there is as much in the pipeline as has already occurred.
If we want to restore energy balance and prevent further warming, we need to reduce the carbon levels from 391 parts per million to 350.
The arguments against
Deniers contend that it’s the sun driving this change. But Hansen notes the biggest change occurred during the low point of the solar cycle — meaning that the effect from the sun is dwarfed by the warming effect.
There are remarkable records in the Earth of what has come before, and we’ve studied them extensively. There is a high correlation between the overall temperature, carbon levels, and sea level. The temperature slightly leads carbon changes by a couple centuries. Deniers like to use that to trick the public. But these are amplifying feedbacks, even through it’s instigated by small effect, a cycle is set up that feed in on itself: More sun in the summer means that ice sheets melt, which means a darker planet, which means more warming. These amplifying feedbacks account for almost entire paleoclimate changes.
The same amplifying feedbacks must occur today. Ice sheets will melt, carbon and methane will be releaseed. “We can’t say exactly how fast these effects will happen, but it is certain they will occur. Unless we stop the warming.”
The view of the future
Hansen presents data showing that Greenland and Antarctica are both losing mass, and that methane is bubbling from the permafrost. That does not bode well. Historically, even at today’s level of carbon, the sea level was 15 meters higher than it is now. We will get least one meter of that this century.
We will have started a process that is out of humanity’s control. There will be no stable shoreline, and the economic implications of that are devastating — not to mention the spectacular loss of speices. It’s possible that 20-50% of all species could be extinct by end of century if we stay on fossil fuels.
Changes have already started. The Texas, Moscow, Oklahoma and other heat waves in recent memory were all exceptional events. There is clear evidence that these were caused by global warming.
Hansen’s grandson Jake is super-enthusiastic, “He thinks he can protect his 2 and a half day old little sister. It would be immoral to leave these people with a climate system spiraling out of control.”
The tragedy is that we can solve this. It could be addressed by collecting a fee for carbon emissions, distributed to all residents. That would stimulate the economy and innovation, and would not enlarge the government. Instead of doing this, we are subsidizing fossil fuels by $400-500 billion per year worldwide.
This, says Hansen, is a planetary emergency, just as important as an asteroid on its way. “But we dither, taking no action to divert the asteroid, even though the longer we wait, the more difficult and expensive it becomes.”
“Now you know some of what I know that is sounding me to sound this alarm. Clearly I haven’t gotten this message across. I need your help. We owe it to our children and grandchildren.”

Fluoride in Drinking Water: A Scientific Review of EPA's Standards (2006)Board on Environmental Science and Toxicology
Each report is produced by a committee of experts selected by the Academy to address a particular statement of task and is subject to a rigorous, independent peer review; while the reports represent views of the committee, they also are endorsed by the Academy. Learn more on our expert consensus reports.
Most people associate fluoride with the practice of intentionally adding fluoride to public drinking-water supplies for the prevention of tooth decay. However, fluoride can also enter public water systems from natural sources, including runoff from weathering of fluoride-containing rocks and soils and leaching from soil into groundwater. Fluoride pollution from various industrial emissions can also contaminate water supplies. In a few areas of the United States, fluoride concentrations in water are much higher than normal, mostly from natural sources. Because it can occur at toxic levels, fluoride is one of the drinking water contaminants regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In 1986, EPA established a maximum allowable concentration for fluoride in drinking water of 4 milligrams per liter (mg/L), a guideline designed to prevent the public from being exposed to harmful levels of fluoride. After reviewing research on various health effects from exposure to fluoride, including studies conducted in the last 10 years, this report concludes that EPA\u0092s drinking water standard for fluoride does not protect against adverse health effects. Just over 200,000 Americans live in communities where fluoride levels in drinking water are 4 mg/L or higher. Children in those communities are at risk of developing severe tooth enamel fluorosis, a condition that can cause tooth enamel loss and pitting. A majority of the report\u0092s authoring committee also concluded that people who drink water containing 4 mg/L or more of fluoride over a lifetime are likely at increased risk for bone fractures.
- A few studies of human populations have suggested that fluoride might be associated with alterations in reproductive hormones, fertility, and Down's syndrome, but their design limitations make them of little value for risk evaluation
- Assessing whether fluoride constitutes a risk factor for osteosarcoma is complicated by the rarity of the disease and the difficulty of characterizing biologic dose because of the ubiquity of population exposure to fluoride and the difficulty of acquiring bone samples in nonaffected individuals.
- Bone fluoride concentrations increase with both magnitude and length of exposure. Empirical data suggest substantial variations in bone fluoride concentrations at any given water concentration.
- Case reports and in vitro and animal studies indicated that exposure to fluoride at concentrations greater than 4 mg/L can be irritating to the gastrointestinal system, affect renal tissues and function, and alter hepatic and immunologic parameters. Such effects are unlikely to be a risk for the average individual exposed to fluoride at 4 mg/L in drinking water. However, a potentially susceptible subpopulation comprises individuals with renal impairments who retain more fluoride than healthy people do.
- Fluoride is an endocrine disruptor in the broad sense of altering normal endocrine function or response, although probably not in the sense of mimicking a normal hormone. The mechanisms of action remain to be worked out and appear to include both direct and indirect mechanisms.
- Gaps in the information on fluoride prevented the committee from making some judgments about the safety or the risks of fluoride at concentrations of 2 to 4 mg/L.
- Groups likely to have increased bone fluoride concentrations include the elderly and people with severe renal insufficiency.
- In light of the collective evidence on various health end points and total exposure to fluoride, the committee concludes that EPA�s MCLG of 4 mg/L should be lowered.
- Little data is available on immunologic parameters in human subjects exposed to fluoride from drinking water or osteoporosis therapy, but in vitro and animal data suggest the need for more research in this area.
- On the basis of information largely derived from histological, chemical, and molecular studies, it is apparent that fluorides have the ability to interfere with the functions of the brain and the body by direct and indirect means.
- On the basis of pharmacokinetic modeling, the current best estimate for bone fluoride concentrations after 70 years of exposure to fluoride at 4 mg/L in water is 10,000 to 12,000 mg/kg in bone ash. Higher values would be predicted for people consuming large amounts of water (>2 L/day) or for those with additional sources of exposure. Less information was available for estimating bone concentrations from lifetime exposure to fluoride in water at 2 mg/L. The committee estimates average bone concentrations of 4,000 to 5,000 mg/kg ash.
- Pharmacokinetics should be taken into account when comparing effects of fluoride in different species. Limited evidence suggests that rats require higher chronic exposures than humans to achieve the same plasma and bone concentrations.
- Studies of the effects of fluoride on the kidney, liver, and immune system indicate that exposure to concentrations much higher than 4 mg/L can affect renal tissues and function and cause hepatic and immunologic alterations in test animals and in vitro test systems.
- The committee did not find any human studies on drinking water containing fluoride at 4 mg/L where GI, renal, hepatic, or immune effects were carefully documented.
- The committee finds that the available epidemiologic data for assessing bone fracture risk in relation to fluoride exposure around 2 mg/L are inadequate for drawing firm conclusions about the risk or safety of exposures at that concentration.
- The committee's conclusions regarding the potential for adverse effects from fluoride at 2 to 4 mg/L in drinking water do not address the lower exposures commonly experienced by most U.S. citizens. The charge to the committee did not include an examination of the benefits and risks that might occur at these lower concentrations of fluoride in drinking water.
- The damage to teeth caused by severe enamel fluorosis is a toxic effect that the majority of the committee judged to be consistent with prevailing risk assessment definitions of adverse health effects.
- The degree to which moderate enamel fluorosis might go beyond a cosmetic effect to create an adverse psychological effect or an adverse effect on social functioning is also not known.
- The single most important contributor to fluoride exposures (approaching 50% or more) is fluoridated water and other beverages and foods prepared or manufactured with fluoridated water.

Filed underWebMD News
For more trusted health
news and information,
visit CBS Denver's
Researchers have revealed a simple trick that may help athletes keep their cool during a game’s high-pressure moments. Their advice to avoid choking under pressure: Clench the fist of your non-dominant hand.
The findings appear in the Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
In the study, right-handed athletes who squeezed a ball with their left hand or clenched their left fist before a competition were less likely to choke in high-stress matches.
Here’s why: The left side of the body is controlled by the right side of the brain.
“Increasing activation in the right hemisphere decreases activation in the left hemisphere,” says study researcher Juergen Beckmann, PhD.
Choking under pressure seems to be caused by a dominant activation in the left hemisphere, which controls key areas of the brain that help us psych ourselves out when under the gun.
Clenching Technique May Reduce Choke Risk
Brain scans show that a decrease of activation in the brain’s left hemisphere boosts performance, says Beckmann. He is the chair of sport psychology at the Technical University of Munich in Germany.
The researchers conducted three studies involving soccer players, judo experts, and badminton players. They tested the athletes’ skills during normal practice and during important matches that took place before a large crowd or video cameras. The researchers only tested right-handed people.
The athletes were less likely to choke under pressure when they squeezed a ball in their left hand than when they squeezed it in their right hand.
This technique seems to work best in situations where movements such as kicking a ball are automatic. Overthinking them, however, can impair performance.
“So far, we know that the technique seems to work only with complex motor tasks which have become automated,” says Beckmann. “It should not only work with sports but also … could be helpful for elderly people to maintain balance when they are afraid that they might fall.”
Break the Thought Cycle
Beckmann and his team are now studying the technique among expert musicians.
“It might also be useful for surgeons or other professions in which precision, pressure, and highly automated tasks combine,” he says. To date, the team has conducted 13 studies, including one with gymnasts. “Whenever the specified conditions were given, the technique never failed.”
David Straker, MD, says some athletes start thinking the worst when they step up to the plate in a baseball game or need to take a foul shot on the basketball court — and then they choke.
“They have likely done this thousands of times. And 99% of the time, they do it perfectly, but still they choke,” he says. Straker is an adjunct assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City. He often recommends a short course of therapy to help people change how they think and overcome self-defeating thoughts.
“See a therapist and try to work on changing how you think in these situations,” he says. “When you start ruminating, take a step back and remind yourself that you have done this so many times and you do it well,” he says. “The fist- or ball-clenching technique used in the new study may also help distract people from the negative thoughts.”
In the Zone
And performance anxiety is not just an issue for athletes. “We know that elderly people are more likely to fall if they are thinking about it, and people also choke during exams even though they know the subject cold,” Straker says. Whatever the scenario, changing the thought process can make a difference.
Sports performance expert Todd Stofka puts it like this: “You think you can or think you can’t.” He is the founder of Philly Hypnosis Performance in Philadelphia and regularly helps athletes think that they can. “Your confidence dictates whether you do better or worse. It is more than positive thinking. It’s desired-results thinking.”
He often tells clients to visualize what they want in that high-stress moment. This process starts with breaking the initial connection.
“Think of it as a series of light switches,” he says. “You can pull your ear or adjust your shirt or do something to stop the negative thoughts, and from there can move toward visualizing hitting the ball out of the park.”
Being calm is also important. “Top performers play their very best when they are relaxed and in the zone,” he says. Getting in the zone starts with stopping anxiety-producing thoughts and anticipation.

CHOSEN PEOPLE.(Redirected from PECULIAR PEOPLE.)
Name for the Jewish people expressive of the idea of their having been chosen by God to fulfil the mission of proclaiming His truth among all the nations. This choice does not imply a superior claim, but a superior duty and responsibility on the part of the Jewish people, inasmuch as they have been pledged by the covenant which God concluded with Abraham, their ancestor, and again with the entire nation on Sinai, to testify, by precept and example, to the truth revealed to them, to lead a holy life as God's priest-people, and, if needs be, sacrifice their very lives for the sake of this truth. In this peculiar sense they are called God's own people; their religious genius, as manifested in their patriarchs, prophets, inspired poets, sages, and heroes, having rendered them the chosen people of religion to a far greater extent than the artistic and philosophical genius of the Greeks made that nation the chosen people of art and philosophy, or the juridical and political genius of the Romans made them the chosen people of law and politics.Consciousness of Selection.
Unlike any other nation, the Jewish people began their career conscious of their life-purpose and world-duty as the priests and teachers of a universal religious truth; and their whole history, with all its tragic sternness, was and to the end of time will be devoted to the carrying out of this purpose and the discharge of this duty. This view is expressed in all the Biblical and rabbinical passages referring to Israel as the chosen people, or to Abraham as their ancestor. "For I have singled him out [A. V., "have known him"] to the end that he may command his children and his house after him, that they may keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment" (Gen. xviii. 1, Hebr.; compare Neh. ix. 7, "Thou art the Lord, the God who didst choose Abram").Conditions of Choice.
That Israel's character as the chosen people is conditioned by obedience to God's commandments is stated in the very words of the Sinai covenant: "Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Ex. xix. 5, 6). "The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people; but because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers" (Deut. vii. 7, 8). The great obligation imposed upon Israel as the chosen people is especially emphasized by the prophet Amos (iii. 2): "You only have I singled out [R. V., "known"] of all the families of the earth: therefore will I visit upon you all your iniquities." Compare Deut. xiv. 2: "Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth," and ib. xxiv. 18, 19, R. V.God's Witnesses and Their Inheritance.
Particularly is the world-mission of the chosen people dwelt upon by Deutero-Isaiah, the seer of the Exile (Isa. xli.; xlii. 1-7; xliii. 10. "Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen"; ib. verse 21, R. V., "The people which I formed for myself that they might set forth my praise"; compare xliv. 1, 2; xlix. 6, 7).
As God's chosen people, Israel is also called His "inheritance" (Deut. iv. 20; ix. 26, 29; xxxii. 9; Ps. xxxiii. 12: "The people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance"; I Kings viii. 53, Jer. x. 16; and elsewhere). As the children of the Patriarchs they are His chosen ones (Ps. cv. 6).—In Rabbinical Literature:
According to the Rabbis, Israel has not been chosen as the people of the Law on account of its racial superiority. "Israel is of all nations the most wilful or headstrong one [
In the Jewish liturgy, praise is frequently offered to God for having chosen Israel from among all thenations of the earth: in Ahabah Rabbah, in the benediction before the reading from the Law, and in the seven benedictions of the holy days and New Moon; concerning which see Geiger's "Jüd. Zeit." vii. 55; and Einhorn, in "Protocolle der Zweiten Rabbinerversammlung," p. 75, Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1845.
"The character of Israel as the chosen people," writes Güdemann ("Das Judenthum," 1902, p. 44) "does not involve the inferiority of other nations. The universality of Israel's idea of God is sufficient proof against such an assumption. Every nation requires a certain self-consciousness for the carrying out of its mission. Israel's self-consciousness was tempered by the memory of its servitude in Egypt and the recognition of its being 'the servant of the Lord.' It was the noblesse oblige of the God-appointed worker for the entire human race."

run the given instructions
Major Section: PROOF-CHECKER-COMMANDS
Example: (do-all induct p prove)Run the indicated instructions until there is a hard ``failure''. The instruction ``succeeds'' if and only if each instruction in
General Form: (do-all &rest instruction-list)
instruction-listdoes. (See the documentation for
sequencefor an explanation of ``success'' and ``failure.'') As each instruction is executed, the system will print the usual prompt followed by that instruction, unless the global state variable
do-all ``fails'', then the failure is hard if and only if
the last instruction it runs has a hard ``failure''.
Obscure point: For the record,
(do-all ins_1 ins_2 ... ins_k) is
the same as
(sequence (ins_1 ins_2 ... ins_k)).

Tata teams up with Aussies for India’s first floating solar plant
The pilot project, which is due to start operations by the end of the year, is based on a Sunengy patented Liquid Solar Array (LSA) technology which uses traditional concentrated photovoltaic technology - a lens and a small area of solar cells that tracks the sun throughout the day, like a sunflower
LSA inventor and Sunengy executive director and chief technology officer, Phil Connor, said that when located on and combined with hydroelectric dams, LSA provides the breakthroughs of reduced cost and "on demand" 24/7 availability that are necessary for solar power to become widely used.
Floating the LSA on water reduces the need for expensive supporting structures to protect it from high winds. The lenses submerge in bad weather and the water also cools the cells which increases their efficiency and life-span.
According to Connor, hydro power supplies 87 percent of the world's renewable energy and 16 percent of the world's power but is limited by its water resource. He said an LSA installation could match the power output of a typical hydro dam using less than 10 percent of its surface area and supply an additional six to eight hours of power per day. Modeling by Sunengy shows that a 240 MW LSA system could increase annual energy generation at the Portuguese hydro plant, Alqueva, by 230 percent.
"LSA effectively turns a dam into a very large battery, offering free solar storage and opportunity for improved water resource management," said Connor. "If India uses just one percent of its 30,000 square kilometers of captured water with our system, we can generate power equivalent to 15 large coal-fired power stations."
Construction of the pilot plant in India will commence in August 2011. Sunengy also plans to establish a larger LSA system in Australia's Hunter Valley by mid-2012 before going into full production.

Smartphones have been around for at least several years now, but they still have certain limitations. Despite having a plethora of wireless technologies built-in--Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, 3G, etc.--there's no simple way to transfer "clippings" of data from one device to another. But a new research project at MIT called Sparsh is aiming to fix that oversight.
Sparsh (the Hindi word for "touch") isn't an app, at least not in the way we generally use the word. It's a tool that's supposed to be part of a mobile operating system, like "undo" or "select all," running within apps at all times. It creates a virtual cloud-based clipboard where any data, like a phone number or photograph, can temporarily live until it's "pasted" to another device.
For it to work, at least two devices need to be Sparsh-enabled. A user wanting to share data becomes, in concept, an avatar for a copy-and-paste-like function. The person touches data on a device, such as a photo or text, and Sparsh sends it to the cloud. The same person then touches another device, and presto! The relevant information is pasted in as if it had been copied from the same machine.
Sparsh isn't the only tool for transferring small amounts of device-to-device data on the scene. Indeed, a popular iPhone app called Bump allows people to trade photos, apps, contact info, and even music from one phone to another simply by bumping the devices together.
Bump is very cool, but it requires both the sender and recipient to be running the app. In addition, it's not open with what it can send or where it can send it--it only works from phone to phone, and while there are many options for things it can send, there are more things it simply can't. Sparsh aims to live in the devices we use at the operating-system level, meaning it would seem intuitive to use and be available within any app for almost any type of data. … Read more

Fuel cells and the electric motor are examples of highly-efficient, electric drive trains. Electric vehicles are expected to one day outstrip sales of combustion engines vehicles. Innovative technologies such as fuel cells, electric motors and electric vehicles will influence our future mobility. The market for electric vehicles boasts the most potential.
Fuel cells, electric motors and electric vehicles are currently experiencing a breakthrough. Fuel cells are being used in new applications such as automobiles or laptop computers. Like electric vehicles, fuel cells are still in the development phase however. The potential is far from being exploited. Because a genuine fuel cell boom is anticipated, mass production is already underway. Like fuel cells, the application potential for electric motors and electric vehicles is still in its infancy stage. The discovery of the relationship between magnetic fields and electricity laid the foundation for the electric motor, and thus the electric vehicle. The electric motor that eventually resulted from this discovery is driven by the Lorentz force, which is the force on an electric charge as it moves through a magnetic field. The development of traditional technologies such as fuel cells and the electric motor has led to a rise in environmentally-friendly electric vehicles. Hybrid vehicles are still dominating the market in the segment for environmentally-friendly automobiles however. Utilizing a combination of combustion and electric motors, hybrid vehicles are slimmed-down versions of the electric vehicle.
Fuel cells are based on the principle of a galvanic process. The composition of a fuel cell is influenced by both electrodes. The fuel cell energy stems from the electrode potential, which is created by the charging of the anode and cathode. The charging results in a potential difference in the fuel cell, which is eventually transformed into electric energy. From its discovery, to today's high-technology status, the fuel cell has experienced an astounding development. Fuel cells are already being used in a variety of applications today. But its impressive career is far from over. Because of their simple operation, the use of fuel cells in electric vehicles represents the market of the future.
Theelectric motor began as an electromechanical transformer. As the description implies, the electric motor is capable of transforming electricity into mechanical energy. The electric motor functions by transforming its mechanical force into motion. Like fuel cell technology, the electric motor is a popular drive train alternative in electric vehicles. The development of the electric motor as a drive train for electric vehicles is still a work in progress however. The first genuine electric motor was produced as early as 1834. Today, state-of-the-art, innovative technologies are still based on discoveries made by researchers nearly 200 years ago, as illustrated by the examples of the fuel cell, electric motor and electric vehicle.
While electric motors and fuel cells were originally used in industrial machine applications, electric vehicles are the technology of the future. At the beginning of their development, electric motors were initially used in locomotives . At this point, the focus is on the development of roadworthy electric vehicles. The key drivers of modern research into the electric vehicle are the electric motor's high degree of efficiency and low CO2 output, two factors that are behind current efforts to combat energy resource and climate change issues. The major issue is energy storage , which is the why researches are focused primarily on this aspect. For this reason, hybrid model electric vehicles - the combination of electric and combustion motors - are still in their infancy stage.
Automotive Engineering highlights issues related to automobile manufacturing - including vehicle parts and accessories - and the environmental impact and safety of automotive products, production facilities and manufacturing processes.
innovations-report offers stimulating reports and articles on a variety of topics ranging from automobile fuel cells, hybrid technologies, energy saving vehicles and carbon particle filters to engine and brake technologies, driving safety and assistance systems.
Fraunhofer-Institut für Werkstoffmechanik IWM13.08.2008 | Read more
The National Academies21.07.2008 | Read more
Fraunhofer Institute for Information and Data Processing IITB11.07.2008 | Read more
Du Pont de Nemours (Deutschland) GmbH11.07.2008 | Read more
University of Portsmouth02.07.2008 | Read more
DOE/Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory06.06.2008 | Read more
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS04.06.2008 | Read more
Fraunhofer-Institut für Betriebsfestigkeit und Systemzuverlässigkeit LBF09.05.2008 | Read more
Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication System02.05.2008 | Read more
Du Pont de Nemours (Deutschland) GmbH09.04.2008 | Read more
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)04.04.2008 | Read more
University of Stuttgart17.03.2008 | Read more
DOE/Argonne National Laboratory26.02.2008 | Read more
DOE/Pacific Northwest National Laboratory25.02.2008 | Read more
Du Pont de Nemours (Deutschland) GmbH20.02.2008 | Read more
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM)14.02.2008 | Read more
A fried breakfast food popular in Spain provided the inspiration for the development of doughnut-shaped droplets that may provide scientists with a new approach for studying fundamental issues in physics, mathematics and materials.
The doughnut-shaped droplets, a shape known as toroidal, are formed from two dissimilar liquids using a simple rotating stage and an injection needle. About a millimeter in overall size, the droplets are produced individually, their shapes maintained by a surrounding springy material made of polymers.
Droplets in this toroidal shape made ...
Frauhofer FEP will present a novel roll-to-roll manufacturing process for high-barriers and functional films for flexible displays at the SID DisplayWeek 2013 in Vancouver – the International showcase for the Display Industry.
Displays that are flexible and paper thin at the same time?! What might still seem like science fiction will be a major topic at the SID Display Week 2013 that currently takes place in Vancouver in Canada.
High manufacturing cost and a short lifetime are still a major obstacle on ...
University of Würzburg physicists have succeeded in creating a new type of laser.
Its operation principle is completely different from conventional devices, which opens up the possibility of a significantly reduced energy input requirement. The researchers report their work in the current issue of Nature.
It also emits light the waves of which are in phase with one another: the polariton laser, developed ...
Innsbruck physicists led by Rainer Blatt and Peter Zoller experimentally gained a deep insight into the nature of quantum mechanical phase transitions.
They are the first scientists that simulated the competition between two rival dynamical processes at a novel type of transition between two quantum mechanical orders. They have published the results of their work in the journal Nature Physics.
“When water boils, its molecules are released as vapor. We call this ...
Researchers have shown that, by using global positioning systems (GPS) to measure ground deformation caused by a large underwater earthquake, they can provide accurate warning of the resulting tsunami in just a few minutes after the earthquake onset.
For the devastating Japan 2011 event, the team reveals that the analysis of the GPS data and issue of a detailed tsunami alert would have taken no more than three minutes. The results are published on 17 May in Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, an open access journal of ...
22.05.2013 | Life Sciences
22.05.2013 | Ecology, The Environment and Conservation
22.05.2013 | Earth Sciences
17.05.2013 | Event News
15.05.2013 | Event News
08.05.2013 | Event News

Located 2,341 feet beneath the surface, in an old iron mine, the lab is deep enough that particle physics experiments see less than 100,000 times the cosmic radiation than on the surface, allowing sensitive searches for exotic particles like neutrinos and dark matter.
The MINOS neutrino experiment and the CDMS2 dark matter search are the two largest projects supplemented by several smaller experiments taking advantage of low background radiation to search for dark matter, measure neutron background underground, and assay experimental equipment to ensure radiopurity.
Summer visitors take tours of the lab and learn about particle astrophysics, and during the school year field trips are popular with Minnesota science classes.
The only operational deep underground lab in the US. Space and infrastructure available for a wide range of neutrino, dark matter, and low background counting experiments.

Human nature and the nature of war
Twenty years ago, Canadian military historian and journalist Gwynne Dyer fascinated the public in 45 countries with his award-winning television series on the nature of war. He followed up that success with an equally remarkable book that grew out of the research that went into the television series. Now Dr. Dyer has published, in his words, "a completely rewritten and updated new edition" of War.
People who have never read the book should certainly do so, but should people who read it back in the 1980s reread it? Yes. It cannot be said too often that modern warfare threatens the very existence of human life on this planet.
Dr. Dyer argues that, with the proliferation of nuclear weapons, there is every reason to suppose that sooner or later a country made desperate by its fear of defeat in a conventional war will resort to the ultimate weapon. In so doing, that country has the potential to destroy or contaminate much of the rest of the world. Every adult needs to understand the nature of war, its evolution into an all-engulfing process, why it is so difficult to stop once it has begun, and what our best hopes are for ending war or at least limiting its dangers.
Several important developments have taken place since Dr. Dyer published the first edition. The Cold War has ended, and the United States is now the world's only superpower. However, the author notes that it won't be long before China and India develop into superpowers, and the danger of an all-out war is bound to increase when some powers are in decline while others, hitherto excluded from the inner circle, are coming to the fore. Nuclear proliferation, the development of chemical and bacterial weapons and the spread of ballistic missile technology means that poor nations or even guerrilla groups can now be a threat to world peace. Finally, the U.S. government decision to adopt unilateral measures, bypassing the United Nations and the International Court of Justice, has jeopardized the slow, tentative process of creating a world body that can prevent war or limit its destructiveness.
New social developments also played a role in Dr. Dyer's decision to write a new edition of War. Recently published findings on primates and the nature of early man, especially the behaviour of hunter-gatherer societies, have caused him to change some of his views about the nature of modern man. The new research has overturned previous assumptions that early man was an essentially peaceful fellow who respected his environment, and the prospect of changing our ingrained behaviour patterns now appears more difficult and challenging. But, he writes, we have to understand the nature of that beast, man, if we are to avoid the path to extinction. For the moment, extinction seems to be the route we have chosen.
Several chapters shed light on today's situation. One chapter describes how the U.S. Marine Corps trains young recruits to become killers and willingly offer themselves up as cannon fodder. Even mature men, given the right kind of indoctrination, will put themselves in the forefront of battle.
Despite such pessimistic accounts of how easy it is to train people to do what is irrational, Dr. Dyer argues that human beings do not enjoy the prospect of killing their fellow humans. Humans have a strong egalitarian, democratic streak; if it's allowed expression, we opt for rational solutions to the disputes that inevitably crop up between nations, ethnic groups, religions and clans.
Consequently, Dr. Dyer believes that spreading democracy is one way of checking the tendency to go to war, since democracies generally do not wage war on other democracies. He argues that those who best understand the problem - diplomats and soldiers - are the ones most likely to see the value of strengthening international bodies like the UN and the International Court at the expense of national sovereignty.
The problem is to convince the peoples of the world and the politicians in charge that this is what we must learn to do. The end of the Cold War has given us a temporary reprieve. But if we do not use this opportunity to strengthen the UN, we may not be able to avoid the doom that surely awaits us.
War by Gwynne Dyer, Toronto, 2004, 484 pages, $39.95, cloth.
Dr. Benazon is a retired English professor from Champlain Regional College, Quebec.

Safety in the gym begins with the design and equipping of the gym. In order to do everything possible to ensure the safety of gymnasts, certain design concepts must be incorporated into the building and layout or redesign of any gymnastics facility.
Emergency Response Equipment and System
While we plan to make sure the safety of all gymnasts is so aggressively protected that no serious injury will ever occur, it is a prime responsibility of a gym designer to design and provide an emergency response system. A proper emergency response system will include both emergency response equipment and hardware and safety plans and safety training for all staff.
Emergency Situations to Plan for and Provide Emergency Response Equipment for
- Emergencies when the coach is alone in the gym (no other coaches or office staff)
- Emergencies when no other staff person notices the problem.
- Emergencies when the coach cannot leave the accident area at all
- Emergencies in the waiting areas or other parts of the facility other than the gym
The concept of clear pathways to emergency exits is a commonly ignored gym design problem. In any emergency, especially in case of fire, clear, quick access to exits is necessary. Clear pathways are also needed to provide easy access to all gym areas for emergency personnel. When gym areas are not separated for age groups, walkways provide safe passage for preschoolers and other young gymnasts through areas where larger, older gymnasts are working out.
Separate Cordoned-Off Preschool Areas
Mixing small inexperienced preschoolers with older larger gymnasts in the same areas can be a prescription for accident and injury. Separate areas can still be a problem when preschoolers must travel from preschool area to preschool area but must travel through areas with older larger gymnasts. It is also probably a very good idea to provide separate areas for younger beginner gymnasts as well as preschoolers.
Pits are one of the biggest safety feature innovations in the history of gymnastics and sports training. As a minimum there should be pits available for training bar dismounts and release moves and also vault and tumbling pits. Pits for beam dismounts, p-bar dismounts, ring dismounts should also be available for maximum safety.
Training pits should logically be longer and wider than competition matting requirements. Since gymnasts have not yet mastered the skills they are performing, like they would be in competitions, they need a larger margin of safety in the size of the safe landing areas. Gymnasts landing in pits may fall backwards or sideways striking the edge of the pit if the pit is not wide or ling enough.
8″ Pit Side Mats
For the same reasons as above, falls backwards or sideways, the sides of the pit should be fully padded with mats soft enough to really cushion a fall against them. The commonly used inch and a ¼ mats over concrete are not really enough protection.
Type of Pits Must Match Training Style and Systems
There are loose foam bungee pits, loose foam pits, bungee resi-pits and resi-pits. It is extremely common for coaches to place 8″ foam or competition mats over loose foam pits for more stable landings as gymnasts progress. Ideally all of those pits would be available for training progressions providing the full range of landing and release move safety progression. If only one pit type is available, it should likely be the softest landing, the loose foam bungee pit. The style of training progressions normally used by the coaches should match the type of pit being used. More gymnast skill and experience is required for safe landings on the harder pit surfaces as opposed to the softer ones.
Unless gymnasts are training for competitive trampoline competition, it is much safer for all trampolines in the gym to be sunk in the ground with the bed level with the rest of the floor. Then, in case an athlete should fly off of the trampoline, the fall is to a level floor (suitably matted) and not down and additional four and a half feet fall from an above ground trampoline.
Open View of Whole Gym for General Supervision Visibility
All gyms should have at least one person or more designated with responsibility for general supervision of the gym at all times. General supervision means that someone should be watching the entire gym, not just one class to look for possible dangerous situations, like wandering preschoolers or non-class members, accidents, etc. In order for this to happen the gym must be completely open so that one person can see the whole gym.
View into Gym from all Offices and other Rooms
For the same general supervision reasons as above, ideally all offices and other rooms in the gym should have a view into the gym so as much supervision as possible occurs, including from staff members not in the gym itself. Windows or other openings into the gym from all, or as many as possible, rooms in the building make general supervision of the gym easier and more effective.
Available Hydration and Air Conditioning for Safe Summer Workouts
In certain climates or during certain seasons of the year, heat stroke or heat exhaustion are things all coaches should be aware of and taking precautions to prevent. From a design perspective, this means that where applicable, air conditioning should be available in the gym to lessen the possibilities. Equipment or a system should be in place to allow proper hydration for gymnasts. This would show up in gym design by having a sufficient number of water fountains or water sources, spread throughout the gym.
Complete Matting and Safety Margins
One of the most important safety measures for gym design, in terms of gym equipment layout is allowing sufficient space for safe matting and allowing for a sufficient matting margin of error. To us, that means that matting should extend to any and all places that might even possibly need to be padded against a fall from the equipment. Sufficient space for and sufficient matting should always be designed into any gym design.
Fire Control Detection and Suppression System
Considering the dangers from the smoke from burning foam and smoke inhalation in general, smoke detectors or a smoke detector system should be a requirement for gymnastics facilities. In addition, because of the flammability of foam, it would be good policy to have a fire detection and suppression system throughout the entire gym.
You can learn much more about designing a safer gym in our Secrets to Gymnastics Gym Design e-book.

Office of Environment and Energy
The Energy web site describes HUD energy initiatives, policies and how federal government wide energy policies affect HUD programs and assistance.
HUD faces many challenges when it comes to energy policy. For an overview, see Implementing HUD's Energy Strategy, a report to Congress dated December 2008, that includes a summary of progress toward implementing planned actions .
First, utility bills burden the poor and can cause homelessness. There is a Home Energy Affordability Gap Index based on energy bills for persons below 185 percent of the Federal Poverty Level. The gap was $34.1 billion at 2007/2008 winter heating fuel prices . The burden on the poor is more than four times the average 4 percent others pay.Twenty-six percent of evictions were due to utility cut-offs in St. Paul, MN.
Second, HUD programs are affected by energy costs. HUD's own "energy bill" - the amount that HUD spends annually on heating, lighting, and cooling its portfolio of public and assisted housing and section 8 vouchers - reached the $5 billion mark in 2007 . Public Housing utilities cost more than $1 billion per year.
Third, energy costs affect economic development. Importing fuel drains millions of dollars from local economies .
Database of State Incentives for Renewables & Efficiency (DSIRE)
Information on state, local, utility and federal incentives and policies that promote renewable energy and energy efficiency from a database funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.
Edison Electric Institute’s Electric Company Programs
Information on energy efficiency and low-income assistance programs offered by various utilities across the nation.
HUD’s Public and Indian Housing Environmental and Conservation Clearinghouse
Sources of funding for energy conservation and utility cost reduction activities from HUD’s Public and Indian Housing Environmental Clearinghouse.
Promoting Energy Star through HUD’s HOME Investment Partnerships Program
Resources for promoting Energy Star through the HOME program.
Additional HUD Resources
Useful documents, publications, and information related to resource conservation in public housing from HUD’s Public and Indian Housing Environmental Clearinghouse.
Energy Star For New Construction Assisted By The Home Program
HUD has worked with EPA to promote the use of ENERGY STAR standards in construction of houses. Here are the results of that production by the HOME Program for Fiscal Year 2009.
Energy Star for Grantees
Energy Efficiency with CDBG HOME
Energy Star Awards for Affordable Housing
Regional Energy Coordinators reviewed applications for Energy Star Awards for Affordable Housing in 2008, 2009, and 2010.
HUD CHP Screening Tools
HUD's 2002 Energy Action Plan committed HUD to promote the use of combined heat and power (cogeneration) (CHP) in housing and community development. HUD developed a Q Guide explaining CHP to building owners and managers. HUD and DOE Oak Ridge National Laboratory then developed a Level 1 feasibility screening software tool to enable them quickly to get a rough estimate of the cost, savings and payback for installing CHP. The Level 1 screening tool requires only monthly utility bills and a little information about the building and its occupants.
PDF | Download Software | more...
HUD and ORNL have now produced a Level 2 Combined Heat and Power (CHP) analysis tool for more detailed analysis of the potential for installing combined heat and power (cogeneration) in multifamily buildings. Level 2 works from hourly utility consumption and detailed information about the building and its equipment.
ORNL Level 2 Tool
"HUD CHP Guide #3 Introduction to the Level 2 Analysis for Combined Heat and Power in Multifamily Housing" explains how it was developed and provides links to ORNL for downloading the tool, its Users' Manual and training material. It also provides an exercise to demonstrate how it works. The tool is complex and calls for analysis by those with advanced ability to understand building energy use and simulation.
Green Homes and Communities
This website has very good energy information, including references to Sustainable Communities, DOE EECBG funding etc.
Energy Efficiency in CPD Programs
 - See Table on page 13 for planned actions developed by the Energy Task Force.
 - See Fisher, Sheehan and Colton, On the Brink 2008; The Home Energy Affordability Gap
 - See Table B-1, in "Implementing HUD's Energy Strategy"
 - See Energy and Economic Development Phase I | Phase II.

Project looked at massive mobile launch platform, shuttle transporter
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. - Sandia National Laboratories recently conducted a series of tests to help NASA understand the fatigue on the space shuttle caused during rollout from the Kennedy Space Center assembly building to the launch pad - a four-mile trip.
The tests are part of NASA's return-to-flight mission, with the first flight scheduled between May 15 and June 3.
Sandia, a National Nuclear Security Administration laboratory, helped NASA design the test and instrumentation to measure the dynamic vibration environment during rollout. Sandia also computed the input forces the crawler applies to the Mobile Launch Platform (MLP). These computations are being used by Boeing and NASA to determine the fatigue life for critical shuttle components.
Sandia engineer Tom Carne assisted in a series of tests beginning in November 2003 to develop the data necessary to understand the environment and the response of the space shuttle vehicle during rollout.
"NASA requested Sandia to assist them in this project because of our expertise in planning and conducting structural dynamic tests on very large structures," Carne says.
Sandia's solid mechanics/structural dynamics group has done numerous structural analysis projects on large structures including the I-40 Rio Grande bridge in Albuquerque, large wind turbines up to 110 meters tall, and the Department of Energy's Armored Tractor. One of the group's main missions is analysis and testing of the shock and vibration environments for weapons.
The three-million-pound shuttle sits on the eight-million-pound mobile launch platform, which is carried by a six-million-pound crawler. The crawler transports the vehicle and platform four miles from the Vehicle Assembly Building to the launch pad.
Moving the shuttle that distance, which normally takes five to six hours at 0.9 mph, had been considered a relatively low-stress process during most of the life of the shuttle system. As the equipment ages, however, more emphasis is being given to understanding how the rollout may fatigue the transport system.
Data were collected for rollouts of the MLP-only and the MLP with the two solid rocket boosters, at five different speeds ranging from 0.5 to 0.9 mph. For the tests more than 100 accelerometers were placed on the MLP, crawler, and solid rocket boosters. A data acquisition system installed inside the MLP for the road test measured and recorded the accelerations. The data were analyzed so that the character of the rollout environment is understood and can be analytically imposed on the shuttle using a finite-element computer model to predict fatigue damage to critical components. Even though these stresses are much lower than those seen during the launch, the five- to six-hour duration of the transport and the low-frequency vibration could cause fatigue in components within the orbiter.
Carne says the rollout analysis team determined that there are two families of forcing harmonics caused by the crawler drive train that vibrate the platform as a function of crawler speed, in addition to the random inputs induced by the road bed. Fortunately, he says, the harmonic forcing frequencies can be adjusted by merely changing the drive speed of the crawler, resulting in less damaging frequencies.
The team used a Sandia-developed algorithm, the Sum of Weighted Accelerations Technique (SWAT), to estimate the applied forces. Carne says the SWAT results were beneficial in choosing a new rollout speed that will extend the fatigue life of the shuttle components that were affected by rollout.
The SWAT-generated input forces have subsequently been used as the force input for NASA's NASTRAN structural analysis of the mobile launch platform, emulating the test conditions. The correlation between the rollout-measured data and the predictions from the NASTRAN analysis has engendered confidence in both the SWAT-computed forces and the NASTRAN model of the MLP and solid rocket boosters, he says.
The analyses showed that the shuttle's vibration response can be much reduced when the driving frequencies are shifted away from the shuttle's own resonant natural frequencies. They helped NASA determine that merely reducing crawler speed from 0.9 mph to 0.8 mph would significantly reduce the vibrations in the shuttle by shifting the impact frequency of the crawler treads.
Source: Eurekalert & othersLast reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 21 Feb 2009
Published on PsychCentral.com. All rights reserved.
Affirmations are like prescriptions for certain aspects of yourself you want to change.
-- Jerry Frankhauser

This coin represent King Eukratides I of Bactria, a land in central Asia (Afghanistan) that was conquered by Alexander. The adoption of the title 'Great King', implying imperial rather than merely royal status, followed some years after Eukratides' consolidation of control over Bactria. He established himself as king of "the thousand cities of Bactria" and set out to enlarge his kingdom in all directions. While returning from one of his campaigns, he was killed by one of his sons, who seized the throne. Bactrian coins were made to the Greek Standard, and this is one of the most beautiful coins of the late Hellenistic period. Known for their strongly realistic portraits, this tetradrachm of Eukratides is no exception. He is depicted as a formidable warrior, wearing a cuirass and a bronze helmet over his diadem. His features are individualized, his expression stern. On the reverse, his parents, Heliocles and Laodice, have been memorialized.
How many hands have touched a coin in your pocket or your purse? What eras and lands have the coin traversed on its journey into our possession? As we reach into our pockets to pull out some change, we rarely hesitate to think of who touched the coin before us, or where the coin will venture to after us. More than money, coins are a symbol of the state that struck them, of a specific time and place, whether contemporary currencies or artifacts of long forgotten empires. This stunning hand-struck coin reveals an expertise of craftsmanship and intricate sculptural detail that is often lacking in contemporary machine-made currencies. This coin is a memorial an ancient king and his kingdom passed from the hands of civilization to civilization, from generation to generation that still appears as vibrant today as the day it was struck. - (LC.025)

Robert Bridges, ed. (18441930). The Spirit of Man: An Anthology. 1916.
From Pulvis et umbra
Robert Louis Stevenson (18501894)
POOR1 soul, here for so little, cast among so many hardships, filled with desires so incommensurate and so inconsistent, savagely surrounded, savagely descended, irremediably condemned to prey upon his fellow lives: who shd have blamed him had he been of a piece with his destiny and a being merely barbarous? And we look and behold him instead filled with imperfect virtues: sitting down, amidst his momentary life, to debate of Right and Wrong and the attributes of the Deity .. To touch the heart of his mystery, we find in him the thought of Duty; the thought of something owing to himself, to his neighbour, to his God: an ideal of decency, to which he would rise if it were possible; a limit of shame, below which, if it be possible, he will not stoop .. It matters not where we look, under what climate we observe him, in what stage of society, in what depth of ignorance, burthened with what erroneous morality; by camp-fires in Assiniboia, the snow powdering his shoulders, the wind plucking his blanket, as he sits, passing the ceremonial calumet and uttering his grave opinions like a Roman senator; in ships at sea, a man inured to hardships and vile pleasures; in the slums of cities, moving among indifferent millions to mechanical employments,.. a fool, a thief, the comrade of thieves, even here keeping the point of honour and the touch of pity, often repaying the worlds scorn with service, often standing firm upon a scruple, and at a certain cost rejecting riches:everywhere some virtue cherished or affected, everywhere some decency of thought and carriage, everywhere the ensign of mans ineffectual goodness:ah! if I could show you this! if I could show you these men and women, all the world over, in every stage of history, under every abuse of error, under every circumstance of failure, without hope, without help, without thanks, still obscurely fighting the lost fight of virtue, still clinging, in the brothel or on the scaffold, to some rag of honour, the poor jewel of their souls! They may seek to escape, and yet they cannot; it is not alone their privilege and glory, but their doom; they are condemned to some nobility; all their lives long, the desire of good is at their heels, the implacable hunter ..

Bonding, Sealing and Gasketing
Bonding and sealing equipment for an array of materials, products, markets and end-uses
Bonding is joining two work pieces with a liquid or semi-liquid material to create a long-lasting bond
Automotive Hem-Flange Bonding
Bonding solutions for automotive metal
Adhesive dispensing equipment for structural adhesives
Equipment solutions for creating a secondary seal on insulating glass.
Adhesive handling equipment for bonding filter elements into assemblies
Equipment to create liquid gasketing from beads of two-component silicone or polyurethane
Equipment to create liquid gasketing from single-component RTV silicone
Roll coating refers to coating a laminate with an adhesive.
Sealing is the process of closing or securing a part or assembly with a fluid-tight, air-tight adhesive.

Many soldiers fighting in the First World War suffered from trench foot. This was an infection of the feet caused by cold, wet and insanitary conditions. In the trenches men stood for hours on end in waterlogged trenches without being able to remove wet socks or boots. The feet would gradually go numb and the skin would turn red or blue. If untreated, trench foot could turn gangrenous and result in amputation. Trench foot was a particular problem in the early stages of the war. For example, during the winter of 1914-15 over 20,000 men in the British Army were treated for trench foot. Brigadier-General Frank Percy Crozier argued that: " The fight against the condition known as trench-feet had been incessant and an uphill game."
Arthur Savage pointed out that trench foot had serious consequences: "My memories are of sheer terror and the horror of seeing men sobbing because they had trench foot that had turned gangrenous. They knew they were going to lose a leg." Brigadier-General Frank Percy Crozier explained how the officers tried to solve the problem: "Socks are changed and dried in the line, thigh boots are worn and are dried every four days when we come out."
The only remedy for trench foot was for the soldiers to dry their feet and change their socks several times a day. By the end of 1915 British soldiers in the trenches had to have three pairs of socks with them and were under orders to change their socks at least twice a day. As well as drying their feet, soldiers were told to cover their feet with a grease made from whale-oil. It has been estimated that a battalion at the front would use ten gallons of whale-oil every day.
The trenches were wet and cold and at this time some of them did not have duckboards and dug-outs. The battalion lived in mud and water. Altogether about 200 men were evacuated for trench feet and rheumatism. Gum boots were provided for the troops in the most exposed positions. Trench feet was still a new ailment and the provision of dry socks was vitally important. Part of the trench was reserved for men to go two at a time, at least once a day, and rub each other's feet with grease.
If you have never had trench feet described to you. I will tell you. Your feet swell to two or three times their normal size and go completely dead. You could stick a bayonet into them and not feel a thing. If you are fortunate enough not to lose your feet and the swelling begins to go down. It is then that the intolerable, indescribable agony begins. I have heard men cry and even scream with the pain and many had to have their feet and legs amputated.
My memories are of sheer terror and the horror of seeing men sobbing because they had trench foot that had turned gangrenous. They knew they were going to lose a leg. Memories of lice in your clothing driving you crazy. Filth and lack of privacy. Of huge rats that showed no fear of you as they stole your food rations. And cold deep wet mud everywhere. And of course, corpses. I'd never seen a dead body before I went to war. But in the trenches the dead are lying all around you. You could be talking to the fellow next to you when suddenly he'd be hit by a sniper and fall dead beside you. And there he's stay for days.
Some of their feet were horrible to look at: raw skin and bleeding blisters and big, angry sores. Their army boots rarely fitted comfortably. They were made in a few standard sizes, and a man was lucky if he got a pair that was neither too big nor too small. To march all day in them with blistered feet must have been a torment... The men marched like beasts of burden with heavy packs on their backs, rifles and bandoliers of ammunition slung across their shoulders. Sometimes they would break into a marching song to ease the misery, but now and then, as I marched at the head of my platoon, I would hear a clatter behind me and turn to see a man lying prostrate in the road.
The sergeants were instructed to prod them and order them to get up. There was always the possibility that the man had decided that he had taken as much as he could bear and had staged his collapse to get out of it. But most of them were genuine - down and out.
The fight against the condition known as "trench-feet" had been incessant and an uphill game. However, science and discipline had conquered, and now we seldom have a case, and if we do there is trouble. Socks are changed and dried in the line, thigh boots are worn and are dried every four days when we come out. Things are better, but the weather gets worse.

Image: Blazing volcano
"This is an erupting volcano, showing the process of releasing lava and smoke. Volcanoes erupt because heat within the Earth melts rocks and creates a substance called magma. Magma rises and pushes through the Earths surface and the volcano erupts. Once out of the volcano, magma is called lava. Volcanoes are one of the landforms of the Earth"
- Brix Orolfo, age 12yrs.
- © Brix Orolfo
Winner, Geology rocks drawing competition 2011, secondary school category

Understanding SQL's underlying theory is the best way to guarantee that your SQL code is correct and your database schema is robust and maintainable. On the other hand, if you're not well versed in the theory, you can fall into several traps. In SQL and Relational Theory, author C.J. Date demonstrates how you can apply relational theory directly to your use of SQL. With numerous examples and clear explanations of the reasoning behind them, you'll learn how to deal with common SQL dilemmas, such as:
- Should database access granted be through views instead of base tables?
- Nulls in your database are causing you to get wrong answers. Why? What can you do about it?
- Could you write an SQL query to find employees who have never been in the same department for more than six months at a time?
- SQL supports "quantified comparisons," but they're better avoided. Why? How do you avoid them?
- Constraints are crucially important, but most SQL products don't support them properly. What can you do to resolve this situation?
Database theory and practice have evolved since Edgar Codd originally defined the relational model back in 1969. Independent of any SQL products, SQL and Relational Theory draws on decades of research to present the most up-to-date treatment of the material available anywhere. Anyone with a modest to advanced background in SQL will benefit from the many insights in this book.

How will the technology and policy changes now sweeping through the industry affect the architecture of the utility grid? Will America build an increasingly robust transmission infrastructure, or...
Unforeseen consequences of dedicated renewable energy transmission.
Growth in renewable electricity (RE) generation will require major expansion of electricity transmission grids, and in the U.S. this could require building an additional 20,000 miles of transmission over the next decade—double what’s currently planned. To facilitate this, government policymakers are planning to build what are sometimes called “green” transmission lines that are restricted to carrying electricity generated by renewable sources, primarily wind and solar.
However, state and local jurisdictions are resisting siting of transmission unless it serves local constituents and existing power plants. If such transmission is built and local access is allowed, then the major beneficiaries of the added transmission might be existing power generation facilities, especially coal plants. Many of these facilities have very low electricity generating costs and their capacity factors are transmission-constrained. Their access to added transmission lines could enable them to sell electric power at rates against which RE can’t compete.
20,000 Miles of Wire
JP Morgan studied a possible federal renewable energy standard (RES) and its impact on the growth rate of RE. 1 We used JP Morgan data to estimate the potential impact of an RES and the transmission required to facilitate it on the existing fleet of power plants. The analysis focused primarily on coal plants because they can increase their capacity factors, whereas U.S. nuclear plants already have capacity factors above 90 percent. Given the location of the coal plants throughout the U.S. and their current capacity factors, we estimated the impact of expanded electricity transmission lines on RE generation and costs and on conventional electricity generation and costs.
The locations of the RE central station technologies and their distances from major load centers largely determine the new transmission that will be required. Geothermal will be installed in a small number of Western states, 2 while biomass will be installed primarily in the northern Great Plains, the Pacific Northwest, and perhaps parts of the South. Solar thermal (ST) and photovoltaics (PV) will be installed in some Western and Southwestern states, and wind will be installed primarily in the northern Great Plains.
The major load centers are primarily metropolitan areas in the coastal states, the Boston-Washington corridor, the West Coast corridor, and major Midwestern cities. In general, increased transmission capability is desirable, because a robust interstate electric transmission system is in everyone’s interest—consumers, power producers, and governments. An expanded transmission network will allow for power system growth, provide greater flexibility in expanding generation at existing plant sites, and facilitate construction of new generating plants at optimal locations.
However, there’s a mismatch between RE resources and load centers: Most of the best RE sites are west of the Mississippi river, but most of the load centers are east of the river or on the West Coast. Even West Coast load centers are far from the best RE sites. We estimated how much new transmission needs to be built to

05-11-2009 / Fluvirin – Fighting Against Influenza
04-30-2009 / Fluzone For Children
04-14-2009 / Flu Vaccines And Protein Chemistry
04-10-2009 / X Ray, Viral Structure And Flu Vaccines.
04-07-2009 / The History Of Influenza
04-06-2009 / Flu Vaccine Contamination And Quality Control
03-22-2009 / Egg Allergies And Flu Vaccines
03-12-2009 / Australian Discovery May Improve Existing Vaccines
03-06-2009 / How Humidity Affects Flu Outbreaks
03-05-2009 / Preservative-Free Flu Shots
03-04-2009 / Flu Strains Developing Resistance to Tamiflu
03-03-2009 / The History Of Influenza
02-23-2009 / Preservative-Free Flu Vaccines
Egg Allergies And Flu Vaccines
The majority of flu vaccines are made using processes that employ fertilized hen eggs. This process of manufacturing causes the vaccines to pick up small amounts of egg proteins. Even the nasal mist flu vaccine has as much or more egg protein as the injectable variety.
For most people, this is no problem. The majority of us pick up hundreds of times more egg protein from our diet than in a flu shot. Even excluding the obvious source, eggs, we get exposed to egg proteins from baked goods or foods processed with eggs on a regular basis. But there is a small, yet real section of the population that has an allergy to eggs. For those individuals, the flu shot can be a serious problem.
This is not a matter of one manufacturer against another: the fertilized hen's egg method is used throughout the vaccine industry. There are some different vaccine development methods on the horizon, however, that will use bacteria that have been genetically engineered to make flu vaccines. But until that day, the egg method and the egg protein in flu vaccines are here to stay.
The amount of egg protein varies from one vaccine manufacturer to another. If you are concerned about allergic reactions, you should talk with your doctor and request a vaccine with the least egg protein available. A skin test to determine whether or not you will have an allergic reaction to the vaccine is a good idea before getting a flu shot. If it is determined that you can have the vaccine, the best course of action is not to leave the medical facility for at least 30 minutes afterwards, so that the staff can observe you and respond promptly to any distress that you may have.
If your allergies are too severe for vaccination, there’s still a way to minimize the effects of the vaccine. You can have the vaccine administered in small doses over a period of time, instead of getting the full dose in one sitting. This, of course, should also take place under close medical supervision. In the cases of the most severe egg allergies, it will probably be safer to not have the vaccine at all and take antiviral medications if you are exposed to or catch the flu.
Sign Up For Your

June 1st 1584
Perth's HammermenThe Hammermen’s Incorporation of Perth embraced a whole collection of crafts including silversmiths, goldsmiths, clocksmiths and watchmakers, gunsmiths, locksmiths, blacksmiths and others. At the head of the organisation was the Deacon who was responsible, not only for the testing and quality of the articles made by the various crafts, but also for such matters as the employment of apprentices and the times and places of public selling. He had the authority to punish either by fines or in extreme cases by expulsion.
Another important member was the boxmaster or treasurer who had responsibility for ‘Saint Eloyis Box’, a wooden chest which contained money, valuables and securities of all kinds. As a rich and powerful organisation, the Hammermen were able to safeguard the interests of their group and also to provide welfare and education for the widows and orphans of their former members. This was considered to be an important aspect of their work.
From 1584 all transactions and business transacted by the Hammermen were recorded in the Hammermen’s Book. The book itself was provided by “William Lauder, burgess of Perth, as maister joynit with the Craft of the Hammermen as buik binder and pearchment maker.” From 1589, the Hammermen had their own seats in the gallery of St John’s Kirk.
There are few records of the early work of silversmiths or goldsmiths and the unsettled political conditions of the time were not conducive to the production of fine silverware. It was not until the late 18th Century that there was something of a boom in the trade. Even so it continued to be strictly functional, plain communion cups, plain spoons and teapots with the minimum of decoration.
It was early in the 19th Century before more ornate work appeared. This came in particular from Robert Keay the elder and his nephew Robert Keay the younger who between them carried on business for sixty five years, until 1865. Other well known names were John Pringle, John Hogg, Charles Murray, John Scott, Charles Sheddon and David Greig the elder. But already there were two factors which between them were to kill the craft of silversmithing in Perth. In 1836 an Act was passed requiring all silver to be essayed in Glasgow or Edinburgh. This had the effect of concentrating production in these cities. Then by 1850 the new cheaper process of electro-plating took over much of the cheaper end of the market.
Perhaps the last successful Perth silversmith was David MacGregor who was active from 1860 until his death in 1908.

Author:Inam Abidi Amrohvi
“The tyrant dies and his rule ends, the martyr dies and his rule begins.” — Soren Kierkegard
The straight path or the right path is always the most difficult one to travel but one that rewards the most, and so we are told when young. This battle of good versus the evil is an age old phenomenon. Every religion has some story or the other to show us the ‘right’ path from the ‘wrong’ one.Hinduism celebrates the victory of Lord Krishna over the demon Narakasura (among other stories) as Diwali, Christians remember the crucification of Jesus Christ as a supreme sacrifice in the way of God, and so do Muslims observe Moharram (the month in which the tragedy of Karbala took place) to commemorate the supreme sacrifice of Imam Husain, the grandson of the Prophet [PBUH].
“Think not of those who are slain in Allah’s way as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Lord.”—Surah Aal-e-Imran (Chapter 3), Verse 169
The tragedy of Karbala took place some 49 years after the death of Prophet Mohammad [PBUH] in 61 Hijri (AD 680).
The Events Leading Up To Karbala
The Muslim Caliphate briefly came to Imam Hasan (elder grandson of the Prophet [PBUH]) after the martydom of Ali bin Abi Talib (son-in-law of the Prophet [PBUH] and the Fourth Caliph of Islam). Sensing a possible split in the Muslim empire Hasan entered into a peace treaty with Amir Mu’awiyah, the son of Abu Sufyan and father of Yazid.
“Hasan agreed to relinquish all authority to Mu’awiyah in exchange for an agreement not to harm any of the supporters of Ali, and to govern by the book of God and the examples of the Prophet. This he would do by letter and by word, explaining to the congregation in the Kufa mosque that he had ceded his right to rule ‘for the best interest of the community and for the sake of sparing blood’. Mu’awiyah acknowledged that ‘the reign would belong to Hasan after him’ (though this would soon be quietly forgotten) and that to avoid all future strife the next Caliph was to be decided by a formal council.”
—The Heirs of the Prophet Muhammad and the roots of the Sunni-Shia Schism, Barnaby Rogerson
All the first four Caliphs had first been acclaimed by the people of Medina but this right and duty had now been brushed aside in favour of the courtiers at Damascus. The solemn pledge to hold a ’shura’ was broken. None of the previous Caliphs had thought to impose their own sons on the community, and had looked beyond the narrow loyalties of a family, towards their brother in faith. When Mu’awiyah died, Yazid was acclaimed as the Caliph. It marked the decisive emergence of dynastic monarchy triumphing over the religion of God.
The moment Yazid came to power he started demanding the oath of allegiance (bay’ah) from everyone using unfair means. Paying allegiance was an old Arab practice which was carried out in important matters such as that of rulership and authority. Those who were ruled, and specially the well known among them, would give their hand in allegiance, agreement and obedience to their king or the one in authority and in this way would show their whole-hearted support for his actions without any opposition to him. The approach of Yazid was proof enough of the kind of Muslim he was. He showed complete disregard for the tenets of Islam.
*Ibne Aseer (A renowned historian Allamah Ali bin Abil Karam more famous as Ibne Aseer Jazari) in his Tareekhe Kamil has this to say for Yazid, “Yazid was notorious and well known for his love of numerous musical instruments, passion for hunting and play with young boys, dogs, monkeys, etc. Every morning he rose still drunk. His monkeys and young boys wore gold caps. If a monkey died, he spent a considerable time in mourning it.”
“Traditions inform us that Yazeed loved worldly vices, would drink, listen to music, kept the company of boys with no facial hair, played drums, kept dogs, making frogs, bears and monkeys fight. Every morning he used be intoxicated and use to bind monkey with the saddle of a horse and make the horse run.”
—Al Bidayah Wal Nihayah, Ibn Kathir
Yazid’s message was delivered to Imam Husain as well but he said a firm no. Acknowledging Yazid’s authority by the Prophet’s [PBUH] grandson at this point would have meant confirmation of his evil deeds and Caliphate. For Yazid, Husain’s seal of approval was the one most needed.
*Abul Hasan Ali bin Husain Mas’oodi in his Muroojuz Zahab wa ma’adinul Jawahir reported, “Whoever accepted the slavery of Yazid by swearing fealty at his hands was spared, otherwise he was subjugated. Thus the meaning of allegiance to Yazid was not merely the acceptance of a new caliph, but it meant to sell one’s Religion and faith in slavery to a tyrant.”
The Kufans urged Husain in Medina to ride north and lead them against the usurpation of the Islamic world by Yazid, and to reclaim his rightful place as the head of the Muslim nation. Husain, encouraged by the chief men of Medina, decided to respond and rode out of the oasis to assume the leadership of the true army of Islam. But not a soul left the garrison city to join him on the desert trail. The Kufans too would betray him! When Husain settled at a land devoid of water or vegetation named Karbala (‘Karb’ in Arabic means grief and ‘bala’ is for trials) he had just 72 loyal soldiers with him.
Battle For Truth
The battle of Karbala finds great similarity with the one at Badr – Islam’s first battle. It was the holy Prophet [PBUH] at Badr who fought with 313 die-hard supporters against a formidable army of some 1000 men. That day against all odds the small group won a decisive victory, and paved the way for a future Muslim empire. 56 years later it was his grandson with just 72 loyal men, who fought against an impossible opposition of several thousands to save Islam from the clutches of tyranny.
Karbala was a battle of truth against falsehood, humanity against villainy, righteousness against evil, justice against corruption. The much loved grandson of the Prophet [PBUH] stood in the scorching heat of Karbala along with his companions, devoid of water but determined. His loved ones, including his six month old son, fell martyr one after the other. In spite of this he repeatedly invited the other party towards righteousness and forbade them from evil and immorality, but it all fell on deaf ears. When the time arrived for him to march ahead all alone, he did it in a fashion which was reminiscent of his illustrious father Ali.
One of those who fought the battle of Karbala against him says, “I have never seen a person bereaved of his sons, menfolk and his companions more Lion-hearted than him. The foot soldiers were scattering to his right and left like goats when a wolf come upon them.” —–Ibne Aseer, Tareekh Kamil
Husain fell in the desert of Karbala on that fateful Friday, the 10th of Moharram 61H. Worse was to follow. The bodies of the martyrs including the Imam were not only refused a proper burial but were trampled under the horses’ hooves and were left for the birds. The Kufan army looted the belongings of Husain. Imam’s family including his women-folk and tender children were humiliated and taken captives after burning down their camps. The women were paraded with uncovered heads. It wasn’t Islam!
“If Hussain fought to quench his worldly desires, then I do not understand why his sisters, wives and children accompanied him. It stands to reason therefore that he sacrificed purely for Islam.” —Charles Dickens
The severed heads of the martyrs including Husain were raised on spears. How Yazid played with Husain’s head and the emotions of Imam’s family is a well documented fact. Karbala to this day remains a heart-wrenching story of exemplary courage and bravery to uphold the real principles of Islam.
“In a distant age and climate, the tragic scene of the death of Husain will awaken the sympathy of the coldest reader.”—Edward Gibbon
Abdullah Yusuf Ali, the famous English translator of Qurán, has beautifully summed up the whole essence of this epic battle.
There is of course the physical suffering in martyrdom, and all sorrow and suffering claim our sympathy, —- the dearest, purest, most outflowing sympathy that we can give. But there is a greater suffering than physical suffering. That is when a valiant soul seems to stand against the world; when the noblest motives are reviled and mocked; when truth seems to suffer an eclipse. It may even seem that the martyr has but to say a word of compliance, do a little deed of non-resistance; and much sorrow and suffering would be saved; and the insidious whisper comes: “Truth after all can never die.” That is perfectly true. Abstract truth can never die. It is independent of man’s cognition. But the whole battle is for man’s keeping hold of truth and righteousness. And that can only be done by the highest examples of man’s conduct – spiritual striving and suffering enduring firmness of faith and purpose, patience and courage where ordinary mortals would give in or be cowed down, the sacrifice of ordinary motives to supreme truth in scorn of consequence. The martyr bears witness, and the witness redeems what would otherwise be called failure. It so happened with Husain. For all were touched by the story of his martyrdom, and it gave the deathblow to the politics of Damascus and all it stood for.
Lessons From Karbala
Karbala stands for courage, self-sacrifice, integrity, honesty, vision, and bravery beyond words. It symbolises all that is pure and true. Karbala teaches us that real battles are always fought in the minds and not on ground. Yazid was powerful and yet he lost the battle for truth.
“I learned from Hussain how to be wronged and be a winner.” —Mahatma Gandhi
Also, being in the majority need not necessarily make you right.
“The best lesson which we get from the tragedy of Karbala is that Hussain and his companions were the rigid believers of God. They illustrated that numerical superiority does not count when it comes to truth and falsehood. The victory of Hussain despite his minority marvels me! —Thomas Carlyle
As the old adage goes, “Nothing lasts for ever.” Husain and his followers made sure that their martyrdom gave a fatal blow to Yazid’s oppressive rule. Karbala haunted Yazid till his eventual death two years later.
“Imam Husayn uprooted despotism forever till the Day of Resurrection. He watered the dry garden of freedom with the surging wave of his blood, and indeed he awakened the sleeping Muslim nation. Husayn weltered in blood and dust for the sake of truth. Verily he, therefore, became the bed-rock (foundation) of the Muslim creed; la ilaha illa Allah (There is no god but Allah).”—Sir Muhammad Iqbal
It also teaches us to be patient and stand up against any form of wrong treatment. We curse Yazid and his army for their inhuman treatment of people, yet the cruel treatment of captives by the so called jihadis meets little protest. Muslims must recognize and protest against the savagery of inhuman treatment at all times, no matter who does it and where it takes place.
“If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to abide therein (For ever): And the wrath and the curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him.”— Surah An-Nisa (Chapter 4), Verse 93
The best homage that we can pay to the great tragedy is to do some soul-searching. Do we have the right to be called the followers of the Prophet [PBUH]? Have we really understood the message of Imam Husain? Are the tears for Husain drawn merely by the scenes of mere butchery? Would we ever stand up to the false narrations of the events at Karbala by some maulanas to generate excessive grief? Was Karbala a political war or a struggle for true faith? Are we ready to shed aside our differences and respect each others’ view during our religious discourses during Moharram?
And when we finally have all the answers then we would understand the real message of Karbala.
“Shah ast Hussain, Badshah ast Hussain,
Deen ast Hussain, Deen e Panah ast Hussain,
Sar dad, na dad dast, dar dast-e-yazeed,
Haqaa key binaey La ila ast Hussain”
“It’s Hussain the Prince, it’s Hussain the king,
He is Faith, and Faith’s Defender most daring,
He preferred death to Yazid’s allegiance,
With his blood, Islam has verily been living.”
—Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti

A mobile phone user outside a mobile payment facility in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
our goal: to alleviate poverty by expanding access to digitally-based financial tools and services.
At A Glance
Increasing poor people’s access to financial services can help them weather personal financial crises and increase their chances of climbing out of poverty.
About 80 percent of the world’s poor adults do not have a bank account or use other formal financial services—not only because of poverty but also due to costs, travel distance, and other barriers.
Our strategy aims to capitalize on rapid advances in mobile communications and digital payment systems to connect poor households to affordable and reliable financial tools.
Our Financial Services for the Poor strategy, updated in 2012, is led by Rodger Voorhies, director, and is part of the foundation’s Global Development Division.
Poor people do not live in a static state of poverty. Every year, many millions of people transition out of poverty by successfully adopting new farming technologies, investing in new business opportunities, or finding new jobs. At the same time, large numbers of people fall back into poverty due to health problems, financial setbacks, and other shocks. If available at critical moments, effective tools for savings, payment, credit, and insurance can help households capture an opportunity to climb out of poverty or weather a crisis or emergency without falling deeper into poverty.
Worldwide, approximately 2.5 billion people do not have a formal account at a financial institution, according to the World Bank’s Global Financial Inclusion Database. As a result, most poor households operate almost entirely in the cash economy, particularly in the developing world. This means they use cash, physical assets (such as jewelry and livestock), or informal providers (such as money lenders and payment couriers) to meet their financial needs—from receiving wages to saving money for fertilizer. However, these informal mechanisms tend to be insecure, expensive, and complicated to use. And they offer limited recourse when major problems arise, such as a serious illness in the family.
A growing body of evidence suggests that increasing poor people’s access to better financial tools can help accelerate the rate at which they move out of poverty and help them hold on to economic gains. However, it is costly to serve poor people with financial services, in part because most of their transactions are conducted in cash. Storing, transporting, and processing cash is expensive for banks, insurance companies, utility companies, and other institutions, and they pass on those costs to customers.
A foundation-supported initiative allows Rwandan farmers to access markets for their beans and maize using mobile phones.
In wealthier countries, people conduct most of their financial activities in digital form, and value is stored virtually and transferred instantaneously. The global revolution in mobile communications, along with rapid advances in digital payment systems, is creating opportunities to connect poor households to affordable and reliable financial tools through mobile phones and other digital interfaces.
In fact, research has shown that the most effective way to significantly expand poor people’s access to formal financial services is through digital means. In addition to cost savings, digital financial services offer a wide array of benefits:
- They connect poor people to the formal financial sector and enable them to become customers and suppliers within the wider economy.
- Financial flows can be accurately tracked, resulting in safer and speedier transactions and less corruption and theft.
- Providers can use financial histories to develop products that are better suited to customers’ needs, cash flow, and risk profiles, including fee-for-service offerings and smaller-unit transactions.
- Direct deposits (including wages and government assistance) allow money to “bypass” the home, helping users save rather than spend and often giving women more financial authority within the family.
- Automatic reminders, positive default options, and other choices offered via mobile phone menus offer convenience and save time.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s Financial Services for the Poor program aims to play a catalytic role in broadening the reach of digital payment systems, particularly in poor and rural areas, and expanding the range of services available on these platforms. Until the infrastructure and customer base are well established, this might involve a combination of mobile banking services that are accessible via cell phones and brick-and-mortar stores where subscribers can convert cash they earn into digital money (and vice-versa).
Our approach has three mutually reinforcing objectives:
- Reducing the amount of time and money that poor people must spend to conduct financial transactions
- Increasing poor people’s capacity to weather financial shocks and capture income-generating opportunities
- Generating economy-wide efficiencies by digitally connecting large numbers of poor people to one another, financial services providers, government services, and businesses
A tea vendor in Uttar Pradesh, India, checks her bank balance on her mobile phone.
We are not focused on a particular product or distribution channel, but rather on innovative ways to expand access and encourage markets. At the same time, we are aware that interventions in this and other areas too often involve technologies that are made available to the intended users but are not adopted. To address this demand-side challenge, we are supporting research and product design experiments to identify design features, price incentives, and marketing messages that will encourage poor people to adopt and actively use digital financial services. We are also supporting policymakers as they work to develop policies and regulations that facilitate these developments.
We believe that the combined effect of these interventions will accelerate the rate at which poor people transition out of poverty and decrease the rate at which they fall back into poverty. Our strategy also recognizes that countries are at different stages in developing an inclusive digital financial system and that we must tailor our interventions accordingly.
Areas of Focus
Our work falls into four areas:
Digital payment systems
In countries with a minimum level of connectivity in poor and rural areas, we work with in-country providers to extend the reach of digital payment systems into those communities and encourage poor people to adopt these systems through a mobile phone or other digital interface. Payment systems are crucial because they enable people to collect payments from customers, buy goods, pay for water and electricity, and send money to friends, family, and business partners. They also enable governments to collect taxes and disburse social payments. When these transactions are costly and inconvenient, economic activity is impeded.
Digital financial services
In countries where digital payment systems have taken hold in poor and rural communities, we work with banks, insurance companies, and other providers to increase the range of financial services that people can access in digital form. Many of these services are designed to meet the specific household management needs of low-income people, particularly smallholder farmers and women.
We work at the global level with governments, donors, financial standards-setting bodies, and the private sector to maximize our collective impact on poor people’s access to financial services.
Research and innovation
We collect data to measure the impact of our grants and interventions and to help key stakeholders make better decisions. We also conduct research and nurture innovations that could lead to longer-term improvements in delivering digital financial services on a broad scale.

A new carbon cycle model developed by researchers in Europe indicates that global carbon emissions must start dropping by no later than 2015 to prevent the planet from tipping into dangerous climate instability.
The finding is likely to put new pressure on the world’s top two carbon emitters — China and the US — both of which were widely blamed for failure to reach a binding global accord on carbon reductions in Copenhagen last December. Furthermore, the non-binding outcome of Copenhagen has global carbon emissions peaking in 2020 — five years too late, according to the latest model.
The model, developed by researchers at Germany’s Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, suggests the world’s annual carbon emissions can reach no more than 10 billion tonnes in five years’ time before they must be put on a steady downward path. After that, the researchers say, emissions must drop by 56 per cent by mid-century and need to approach zero by 2100.
Those targets are necessary to prevent average global temperatures from rising by more than 2 degrees C by 2100. Under that scenario, though, further warming can still be expected for years to come afterward.
“It will take centuries for the global climate system to stabilise,” says Erich Roeckner, a researcher at the Max Planck Institute.
The new model is the first to pinpoint the extent to which global carbon emissions must be cut to prevent dangerous climate change. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide have risen by 35 per cent, to around 390 parts per million today. Stabilising the climate will require concentrations to climb to no higher than 450 parts per million.
“What’s new about this research is that we have integrated the carbon cycle into our model to obtain the emissions data,” Roeckner says.

Conservation work completed on one of Glasgow’s most historic buildings
27 February 2013
Glasgow Cathedral has recently received £30,000 worth of conservation work by Historic Scotland to repair the damage inflicted by last year’s gales.
Despite being the only medieval cathedral on the Scottish mainland to have survived the 1560 Reformation virtually complete, the weathercock and spike on top of the landmark did not escape last year’s merciless strong winds unscathed.
The spike of the church was no longer vertical due to corrosion and a closer examination of the weathercock showed damage to some of the rivets with the tail being completely blown off. A further structural inspection also found an area of the steeple was in need of re-pointing.
Overseeing the conservation work was Historic Scotland's District Architect, Ian Lambie. While the conservation itself was a fairly simple task, it was made more complex by the height of the building and the narrow conditions.
Ian Lambie said: “The only way of accessing the spire head was by climbing up inside the steeple using steep narrow ladders and squeezing and crawling through small windows at the apex. Making repairs at this sort of height has its challenges but it's always worth it for the view!”
Now that the necessary repairs are complete, the weathercock should be able to withstand the worst of the wind and the re-pointing should hold for at least another ten years.
Notes for editors:
Historic Scotland around the web:
- Historic Scotland is an executive agency of the Scottish Government charged with safeguarding the nation’s historic environment. The agency is fully accountable to Scottish Ministers and through them to the Scottish Parliament.

Essentials oils have been used throughout history medicinally and as Fragrance, and interest has revived over the past several years with an increase in the popularity of aromatherapy. Natural essential oils stimulate our mind and body, promote circulation and support skin cell function, and contain fungicidal and anti-bacterial properties making them a valuable component in beauty and health products. In fact tea tree oil for example, is the strongest known antibiotic in the world.
What are Essential Oils?
Essential oils are concentrated oils extracted from fruit, flowers, leaves, and stems of plants. These fragrant oils help plants to attract insects and protect them against harmful organisms.
Each plant's oil carries a distinctive scent (or essence) with unique properties from the plant, flower, or fruit from which they are derived. Some, like Lavender and rose, are used to soothe and calm. Other essential oils are more invigorating — basil and rosemary — and used to boost energy and bring about mental clarity.
How are Essential Oils Produced?
Essential oils are generally produced via two main methods of extraction; steam distillation and cold-pressing. During steam distillation, oil is released from the plant. Oil and water then separate providing the plant's essential oil, called hydrosol or floral water. Lavender, peppermint, and eucalyptus oils are obtained through distillation.
Most citrus oils are produced using the cold-press method of extraction. The rinds are ground down and pressed mechanically, releasing a mixture of oil and liquid.
Use in Cosmetics
Many natural cosmetics manufacturers use a blend of natural essential oils to compose their individual product fragrances, Lavera included. These oils are a much safer alternative to synthetic Fragrance, which have been linked to skin irritation, headaches, and even birth defects.
Essential oils are also used as a preservative method in cosmetics. We utilize a blend of 18 essential oils and vitamins to preserve our products and prevent bacterial growth. As a result, Lavera products have a 2-3 year shelf life from date of manufacture, without the use of Parabens and other synthetic preservatives.
Concerns Over Safety
Some essential oils, like citrus peel extracts, are very effective insecticides and considered to be of low toxicity to mammals. While these oils may be detrimental to the safety of insects and small mammals, the doses used are much higher than those used in cosmetic products, and the subject is much smaller than a human. Essential oils are highly concentrated and should not be applied directly to the skin, but diluted with a base oil, like Jojoba or Sweet Almond. Essential oils should be avoided in high concentrations and not ingested unless prescribed by a health practitioner.
Essential Oils Used in Lavera Products
The essential oils used in Lavera products are 100% natural and pharmaceutical-grade. Our essential oil blend used to impart the Lavera scent is listed on Lavera labels as "Fragrance (Parfum)" with a footnote stating that only natural essential oils are used, never synthetic fragrance. For more information on fragrance labeling in cosmetics please read The Dirty Dozen on our blog.
The primary essential oils used in Lavera products for preservation are:
- Citral — found in Lemon Oil, Orange Oil, Lemon-Grass Oil and Bergamot Oil
- Citronellol – found in Geranium Oil, Muscatel Sage, Sandalwood and Citronella Oil
- Eugenol – found in Clove Oil
- Coumarin – found in Sweet grass and sweet clover
- Geraniol – found in Rose Oil, Geranium Oil, Palmarosa Oil, Lavender Oil and Ylang-Ylang Oil
- Limonene – found in Lemon Oil, Orange Oil, Grapefruit Oil, Bergamot Oil, Fennel Oil and Lavender Oil
- Linalool – found in Lavender Oil, Bergamot Oil, Geranium Oil and Ylang-Ylang Oil
Each of these natural essential oils is used in Lavera products at a range of 0.1% or less to ensure safety and gentleness. These are safe levels of essential oils that not only provide our natural and unique aroma blends, but keep our products fresh and help to prevent harmful bacterial growth. A much healthier alternative to products with synthetic fragrance and preservatives.
Natural essential oils, when used properly, are a safe and effective means of conveying fragrance in a cosmetic product, as well as ensuring the product’s safety.

Early Detection is Key in the Fight Against Ovarian Cancer
Northwestern Memorial experts urge women to recognize warning signs; receive appropriate screenings
Ovarian cancer is a rare but often deadly disease that can strike at any time in a woman’s life. It affects one in 70 women and in the past was referred to as a silent killer, but researchers have found that there are symptoms associated with ovarian cancer that can assist in early detection. Experts at Northwestern Memorial say the best defense is to make use of preventive methods, understand the risks and recognize potential warning signs of ovarian cancer.
“Currently, there is no reliable screening test to identify early ovarian cancer. Women need to focus on good health habits, listen to their bodies and tell their doctor if a change occurs,” said Diljeet Singh, MD, gynecological oncologist and co-director of the Ovarian Cancer Early Detection and Prevention Program at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.
Catching ovarian cancer early increases five-year survival odds from 30 percent to more than 90 percent. But the symptoms of ovarian cancer often mimic other less dangerous conditions making it difficult to recognize. Singh says women should be aware of possible early warning signs which include:
• Pelvic or abdominal pain
• Difficulty eating or feeling full quickly
• Urinary symptoms (urgency or frequency)
• Increased abdominal size (pants getting tighter around waist)
Singh comments that the frequency and number of symptoms is important and women who experience a combination of these symptoms almost daily for two to three weeks should see their doctor.
Doctors say it is not clear what causes ovarian cancer but there are factors that increase the odds of developing the disease including carrying a mutation of the BRCA gene, having a personal history of breast cancer or a family history of ovarian cancer, being over the age of 45 or if a woman is obese. If a woman is high-risk, doctors recommend screening begin at age 20 to 25, or five to 10 years earlier than the youngest age of diagnosis in the family. In addition, there are genetic tests available that can identify women who are at a substantially increased risk.
While ovarian cancer is difficult to detect, specialized centers such as the Northwestern Ovarian Cancer Early Detection and Prevention Program, a collaborative effort between the hospital and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Centerof Northwestern University, have strategies for monitoring women at risk. Patients are monitored with physical examinations, ultrasound and blood tests every six months. “The goals of the program are to help women understand their personal risks and what they can do to decrease their risk, to help develop methods of early detection and prevention and to identify women who would benefit from preventive surgery,” said Singh, also an associate professor at the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine and member of the Lurie Cancer Center.
Studies have shown there are ways to reduce the risk of developing the disease. Women who use birth control pills for at least five years are three-times less likely to develop ovarian cancer. In addition, permanent forms of birth control such as tubal ligation have been found to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer by 50 percent. In cases where women have an extensive family history of breast or ovarian cancer, or who carry altered versions of the BRCA genes, may receive a recommendation to remove the ovaries and fallopian tubes which lowers the risk of ovarian cancer by more than 95 percent.
“Eating a diet rich in fruits and vegetables, getting regular exercise, maintaining a normal body weight and managing stresses are all ways women can help decrease their risk of ovarian cancer,” added Singh.
Treatment for ovarian cancer usually begins with surgery to determine if the cancer has spread. Doctors at Northwestern Memorial also use a form of chemotherapy called intraperitoneal chemotherapy, which is injected directly into the abdominal cavity and has been linked to a 15-month improvement in survival.
“The best scenario would be to prevent this cancer entirely but until that day comes women need to focus on good health behaviors, listen to their bodies and know their family history” stated Singh.
For more information please call 312-926-0779.
Jennifer Monasteri, Manager

A large-scale screen in Drosophila cells has shown how RNA interference can provide insights into the pathways controlling cell morphology.
When thinking of genetic screens in Drosophila, the Nobel-prize-winning screens for embryonic developmental phenotypes spring to mind. Loss-of-function mutational analysis has proved to be a powerful approach for dissecting complex processes such as morphogenesis and wing development. But historically the fruitfly community has focused much less on the study of cells in culture. All that may now be about to change. In this issue of Journal of Biology , Amy Kiger and colleagues describe the results of a powerful strategy for conducting high-throughput systematic loss-of-function screens in Drosophila tissue-culture cells (see 'The bottom line' box for a summary of the work).
Picking apart signaling pathways
The study was led by Norbert Perrimon, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator who runs a Drosophila laboratory at Harvard Medical School in Boston, USA. Perrimon has focused his lab on developing large-scale genetic screens to dissect signal transduction pathways by analysis of mutant phenotypes. The Perrimon lab has a collection of hundreds of mutants with interesting developmental defects, each one waiting for a creative postdoc to track down the gene and work out what it does. "One can assume that genes with similar phenotypes are related and act in the same pathways," says Perrimon. This approach had allowed the lab to define groups of mutants, which have then been used to dissect conserved signal transduction pathways, such as those involving the Wnt family of intercellular signaling molecules and the Jak-Stat intracellular signal transducers.
Completion of the Drosophila melanogaster genome-sequencing project three years ago  encouraged the fly community to explore new approaches. "Now we had 16,000 pieces of the puzzle, and working out what they each did was going to be an enormous challenge," says Perrimon. When RNA-interference (RNAi) technology appeared on the scene as a new way of inactivating genes whose sequence is known (see the 'Background' box), it seemed an appealing way to speed up the task of dissecting complex genetic pathways: genes could be systematically inactivated and loss-of-function phenotypes studied on a large scale. But applying the RNAi approach - which had worked so spectacularly in Caenorhabditis elegans [3,4] - to Drosophila proved not to be so straightforward, and early attempts at injecting interfering RNAs into embryos were plagued by technical problems and inconsistent results. It was not until Jack Dixon's group at the University of California in San Diego showed that gene silencing by RNAi works well in fly cells in culture  that the stage was set for a screen on the scale that fly geneticists are used to.
"The cell biology community has a real 'nuts and bolts' view of the way that nature works," says Buzz Baum, who was a postdoctoral fellow in the Perrimon group. "Lots of cell biologists were beginning to use RNAi [when we began this work], but they still hadn't learnt to think as geneticists. What I wanted to do when I joined Norbert's lab was to take genetics to cell biology." So, he and Amy Kiger began to set up the methodologies for a large-scale screen. "We began exploring ways in which RNAi in cell culture could be used in a much more far-reaching way," recalls Amy Kiger, a postdoc in the Perrimon lab and lead author on the study.
Screening for cell morphology
"We needed to set up a pilot screen to work out the methodologies," says Perrimon. "We were interested in genes involved in morphogenesis, so we decided to focus on changes in cell morphology and genes that regulate the cytoskeleton." They hoped that some of the genes identified would be on the same pathways as those that they had already studied in flies. The Perrimon group was fortunate to be surrounded by a number of laboratories with experience of cell-based screening and robotic technologies, including automated microscopes.
"The thing that can be difficult about taking an assay to high throughput is that the way that the cells and microscopes behave can be quite different when you scale up," says Baum, who now runs his own laboratory at the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research in London, UK. "The most important thing was finding cell lines where we could study the sort of things that we were interested in. We had to learn quite a bit about fly cell culture. We got cell lines from all over the world and tested them with thirty-odd RNAs. We got all these specific cellular phenotypes - it was really quite magical!" They selected two hemocyte cell lines for the screen; these were chosen because of their different shapes - Kc167 cells are small and round, whereas the S2R+ cells are large, flat and strongly adherent (Figure 1). It seemed likely that defining the sets of genes that generated the cell shape in these two cell lines would give clues about basic cell morphology and fly morphogenesis.
Perrimon and colleagues then scaled up operations by constructing a library of double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) representing around a thousand genes that could be used as a 'tool kit' for exploring cell morphology phenotypes; the kit included genes thought to be involved in regulating the cytoskeleton, such as putative GTPases and kinases. The library of dsRNAs was introduced into cells in 384-well optical-bottom plates, to allow image-based screening. The team recorded all visible changes three days after introduction of the RNA, using automated microscopy. Around 16% of the genes gave visible phenotypes in at least one of the two cell lines.
The group then had to work out a formalized process for dealing with all the information that came out of the screen. After familiarizing themselves with the range of phenotypes that appeared, they developed a system of 'phenotypic annotation' to record the effects of silencing each one of hundreds of genes, starting out by defining seven major phenotypic categories on the basis of defects in actin filaments, microtubules, DNA, cell shape, cell size, cell number and cell viability. Each class was then further subdivided into a number of categories that describe specific morphological attributes; for example, changes in cell shape were categorized using descriptions such as round or flat, retracted, bipolar, spiky or stretchy. Obviously these phenotypes overlap in many cases, so that the effects of each RNAi can be defined in terms of its phenotypic profile. Christophe Antoniewski, at the Institut Jacques Monod in Paris, notes that "the use of a 'phenotype matrix' provides an opportunity for statistical analysis of the results using clustering approaches on qualitative traits instead of quantitative traits." As with all genetic screens, genes with similar profiles might be expected to participate in common morphogenetic functions. For example, RNA specific for the Rho1 GTPase and the Pebble Rho-GTP exchange factor, as well as for an uncharacterized predicted kinase (CG10522), all generated enlarged, multinucleated cells, reflecting defects in cytokinesis; Kiger et al. suggest that CG10522 may be a novel effector, downstream of Rho1 and with a role in cytokinesis.
The most commonly seen phenotypes were changes in actin organization and cell shape. Several of the genes identified are thought to limit the rate of formation of filamentous (F) actin and encode proteins with F-actin capping functions. Some of these regulators seemed to play similar roles in both the adherent or non-adherent fly cell lines. But by comparing the adherent S2R+ cells with the round Kc167 cells, Kiger et al. were able to study genes involved in maintaining a particular (round or flat) cell shape. They expected to identify a set of genes that were differently expressed in the two cell lines and were responsible for their distinct morphologies. Indeed, they found that 78% of the morphological RNAi phenotypes were seen in only one of the cell types. For example, dsRNAs targeting genes involved in actin filament formation caused Kc167 cells to flatten, whereas dsRNAs for genes involved in cell-matrix adhesion functions caused S2R+ cells to round up and detach. Analysis of the levels of expression of the integrin adhesion receptors, which are known to mediate cell-matrix adhesion, showed that they are not expressed at lower levels in Kc167 cells, although the expression of the cytoskeletal component talin was significantly lower. The authors conclude that both integrin-mediated adhesion and reorganization of the cortical F-actin network are necessary to determine cell spreading.
The Perrimon group was very satisfied to see how successfully this pilot screen worked. Having established the 'proof of principle' they have now scaled up to perform whole-genome screens in Drosophila cells in culture (see the 'Behind the scenes' box for more on the development of the work). "It's really changing completely the way we do science," says Perrimon enthusiastically. "Everything now comes down to the assays that we design. You can be as imaginative as you want. We need to do more and more screens and to compile databases of annotated information so that we can build correlations between components of different pathways. The long-term experiment is to see how much of the complexity in the cell can actually be reduced by finding these kinds of correlations."
Others in the field agree. "It's exciting to see RNAi technology in cultured cells being adapted to a high-throughput format and being used to screen for genes involved in cell morphogenesis and cytoskeletal function," says Matthew Welch, a cell biologist working at the University of California, Berkeley. "Although the classical genetic approach has been used very successfully for many years to study cell morphogenesis in yeast and other organisms, the ability to systematically silence a large number of genes in cultured animal cells using RNAi has brought this approach to new systems and will help answer outstanding questions in new ways." And Antoniewski concurs. "This type of approach is fascinating because it actually combines both 'forward' and 'reverse' genetics in a single screen. Kiger et al. have coupled systematic knock-down technology to a phenotypic screen, so systematic 'reverse genetics' is guided by the functional assay. This is new and important." Baum predicts that deciphering the meaning of such large datasets will probably require new ways of thinking and the help of mathematicians and physicists. These approaches are being incorporated into the broad field of 'systems biology'.
To help the application of this technology throughout the fly and cell biology communities, Perrimon and collaborators have set up the Drosophila RNAi Screening Center (DRSC) , to make the relatively expensive and sophisticated technology accessible to all interested researchers; it also has the advantage of permitting valuable functional comparisons across many studies and the creation of an information database with a standardized format. The DRSC is currently performing screens for cell growth and viability and is accepting applications for potential collaborative screens. "We may need many different assays to dissect a single pathway," says Perrimon. He is interested in any proposal with a good cell-based assay. The Center is able to perform a whole-genome screen in just one week. But at a cost of US$10,000 per screen the DRSC will be carefully selecting screens with a high chance of success.
The cell biology community is keen to use the RNAi approach to probe basic questions about cell functions. "This type of approach, like classical genetics, is very flexible and can be applied to a wide range of cellular processes," says Welch. "What's also exciting is that open access to information from large-scale efforts like this one will be extremely useful for other researchers interested in a range of issues, from the function of their favorite gene or protein to more global issues of how gene function is integrated and coordinated during complex processes like cell morphogenesis." And as Antoniewski points out, "in a third of cases, an RNAi phenotype identified a previously uncharacterized gene that lacked a corresponding mutant allele in Drosophila. This is extremely important, because it shows that RNAi screens can identify new functions that could not have been identified by classical genetics using mutagenesis." An additional aspect of the potential for this type of approach is highlighted by Kiger. "Now that large-scale reverse-genetic or 'functional genomic' approaches are possible in yeast, worms and fly cells, it is interesting to consider how we might eventually be able to make functional comparisons across species that could shed light on common (or contrasting) cellular mechanisms throughout evolution."
Other groups are using RNAi technology in a more focused way to tackle biological questions. Ronald Vale's group at the University of California in San Francisco has used RNAi targeting specific gene families to investigate cytoskeletal function in Drosophila S2 cells. They targeted dynein and all 25 Drosophila kinesins to investigate the role of molecular motors during mitosis , and also identified sets of genes important for regulating actin dynamics during lamella formation . Rogers et al.  suggest, "If proper cues are provided to these cells, cell migration and cell polarity may be amenable to investigation as well." A combination of genome-wide screens and studies focused on specific gene families will be needed to identify and then characterize components of the specific pathways involved in complex cellular processes. It will also be interesting to apply the tricks of the classic geneticists' trade, such as screens for modifiers and suppressors.
"I think the power of the RNAi screens will come when we combine RNAi screening data with data from other sources, like genomic sequence, microarray data, proteomic data, and so on," adds Baum. "This opens up the possibility of real systems biology: generating a more global understanding of the logical circuitry that underlies cell behavior. This approach is going to have a big impact - because I think that a lot of the apparent complexity in cell biology is a product of over-expression studies, and loss-of-function data can clarify some of these situations."
"And then we will have to go back to the fly," says Perrimon. "The next step will be to take what we have learned from the cell-based assays and validate them in vivo, either using defined existing mutations or by trying to generate them using classical methods or a promising gene-knockout methodology. Or we can also express [RNA] hairpins, which basically give an in vivo RNAi effect." Many of the lessons learnt by classical fly genetics have subsequently been confirmed and explored further in cellular systems. Now it looks as though researchers can begin by doing genetics in cells and then return to the whole fly to investigate further.
Gonczy P, Echeverri G, Oegema K, Coulson A, Jones SJ, Copley RR, Duperon J, Oegema J, Brehm M, Cassin E, et al.: Functional genomic analysis of cell division in C. elegans using RNAi of genes on chromosome III.

Problem 367Published on Saturday, 14th January 2012, 10:00 pm; Solved by 247
Bozo sort, not to be confused with the slightly less efficient bogo sort, consists out of checking if the input sequence is sorted and if not swapping randomly two elements. This is repeated until eventually the sequence is sorted.
If we consider all permutations of the first 4 natural numbers as input the expectation value of the number of swaps, averaged over all 4! input sequences is 24.75.
The already sorted sequence takes 0 steps.
In this problem we consider the following variant on bozo sort.
If the sequence is not in order we pick three elements at random and shuffle these three elements randomly.
All 3!=6 permutations of those three elements are equally likely.
The already sorted sequence will take 0 steps.
If we consider all permutations of the first 4 natural numbers as input the expectation value of the number of shuffles, averaged over all 4! input sequences is 27.5.
Consider as input sequences the permutations of the first 11 natural numbers.
Averaged over all 11! input sequences, what is the expected number of shuffles this sorting algorithm will perform?
Give your answer rounded to the nearest integer.

This book provides readers with an overview of how Americans have commemorated and remembered the Civil War.
The Civil War was one of the most divisive, dramatic, and deadly events in the course of American history. It involved not just northerners and southerners, but whites and blacks, women and men, and the elites, and the lower class. Not surprisingly, the ways in which this conflict is remembered and commemorated varies widely.
Most Americans are aware of statues or other outdoor art dedicated to the memory of the Civil War. Indeed, the erection of Civil War monuments permanently changed the landscape of U.S. public parks and cemeteries by the turn of the century. But monuments are only one way that the Civil War is memorialized.
This book describes the different ways in which Americans have publicly remembered their Civil War, from the immediate postwar era to the early 21st century. Each chapter covers a specific historical period. Within each chapter, the author highlights important individuals, groups, and social factors, helping readers to understand the process of memory. The author further notes the conflicting tensions between disparate groups as they sought to commemorate "their" war. An epilogue examines the present-day memory of the war and current debates and controversies.
• Presents events related to the commemoration of public memory of the Civil War chronologically, from 1865 to the present
• Illustrated with photographs of monuments, individuals, and events related to commemoration activities, as well as selected political cartoons related to Civil War memory from popular publications
• Bibliography includes both primary and secondary sources on the subject of Civil War memory
• Provides readers with a broad overview of an extremely popular topic in Civil War history in an easy-to-read, narrative form
• Summarizes the most recent scholarship on the subject into one volume
• Provides both in-depth critical analyses and clear summaries of the key themes
• The role of memory in shaping historical consciousness is a timely scholarly topic

NSAIDs include both prescription and over-the-counter medication. They are often used to relieve pain or reduce inflammation from conditions such as arthritis. However, NSAIDs can make your body retain fluid and decrease the function of your kidneys. This may cause your blood pressure to rise even higher, putting greater stress on your heart and kidneys.
Common NSAIDs that can raise blood pressure include:
You may also find NSAIDs in over-the-counter medication for other health problems. Cold medicine, for example, often contains NSAIDs. It's a good idea whenever you purchase an over-the-counter drug to check the label for NSAIDs. Ask your doctor if any NSAID is okay for you to use. Your doctor may be able to recommend alternatives, such as using acetaminophen instead of ibuprofen.
Cough and Cold Medications
Many cough and cold medications contain NSAIDs to relieve pain. As mentioned above, NSAIDs may increase your blood pressure. Cough and cold medications also frequently contain decongestants. Decongestants can make blood pressure worse in two ways:
Decongestants may make your blood pressure and heart rate rise.
Decongestants may prevent your blood pressure medication from working properly.
Pseudoephedrine (Sudafed) is a specific decongestant that can increase blood pressure.
What can you do? Avoid using cough and cold medicine that contains NSAIDs or decongestants, especially pseudoephedrine. Ask your doctor for suggestions about other ways to ease congestion symptoms such as antihistamines or nasal sprays which should minimize cardiovascular effects.
Migraine Headache Medications
Some migraine medications work by tightening blood vessels in your head. This relieves migraine pain. However, they also constrict blood vessels throughout your body. This makes your blood pressure rise, perhaps to dangerous levels.
If you have high blood pressure or any other type of heart disease, talk with your doctor before taking a drug for migraines or severe headaches.
Weight Loss Drugs
Some weight loss drugs may make heart disease worse:
Appetite suppressants tend to "rev" up your body. This can make blood pressure rise and put more stress on your heart.
Before using any weight loss drug, whether prescription or over-the-counter, be sure to check with your doctor. These medications can be useful for weight loss but may do you more harm than good.
More Tips for Avoiding Medication Problems
Be sure any medications you choose to use are safe for people who have high blood pressure. These suggestions can help:
Give a list of ALL the medications you use, both prescription and over-the-counter, to every doctor you visit.
Read medication labels before buying over-the-counter products. Make sure the medicine doesn't contain ingredients that could make your high blood pressure worse, such as NSAIDs or decongestants.
Talk to your doctor before using any over-the-counter medication, herbal preparation, vitamins, or other nutritional supplements. Ask for alternatives to potentially harmful medicines.

Profile: In the late 1600s, King Louis XIV of France brought Breton and Norman horses to the region of North America now known as Canada. They are believed to be the ancestors of the modern Canadian Horse, which still possesses traits similar to the Arabian, Andalusian and Barb bloodlines that the Breton and Norman horses also displayed. These French horses bred with little interference for hundreds of years, and the resulting breed became known as the Canadian Horse, or Cheval Canadien. Met with harsh weather and sparse food supplies, the Canadian Horse became a sturdy animal and remains hardy today. In the mid-1800s, the Canadian Horse could be found in Canada and the United States, and was crossbred to improve the strength of other breeds. The Morgan, Tennessee Walking Horse, Standardbred and American Saddlebred are said to trace back to the Canadian Horse. Canadian Horses were exported to southern Africa for the Boer War, to work on sugar plantations in the West Indies, and for the Civil War in America. With this exportation and the introduction of machinery replacing horse power, the Canadian Horse nearly became extinct. The first studbook was produced in 1886 by a group of concerned enthusiasts, and the Canadian Horse Breeders Association was formed in 1895. Today, the breed is still listed as critical by the American Livestock Conservancy. Characteristics: The Canadian Horse has a beautifully arched neck with a long, flowing mane and tail. Its head is refined with a short forehead and small throatlatch. The chest is deep and the back is short and strong. Long, sloping shoulders and broad hindquarters give way to muscular legs with clean joints and bone structure.

Animal bites and scratches, even when they are minor, can become infected and spread bacteria to other parts of the body. Whether the bite is from a family pet or an animal in the wild, scratches and bites can carry disease. Cat scratches, for example, even from a kitten can carry "cat scratch disease," a bacterial infection. Other animals can transmit rabies and tetanus. Bites that break the skin are even more likely to become infected.
For superficial bites from a familiar household pet who is immunized and in good health:
For deeper bites or puncture wounds from any animal, or for any bite from a strange animal:
Call your doctor or other health care provider for any flu-like symptoms, such as a fever, headache, malaise, decreased appetite, or swollen glands following an animal bite.
Rabies is a viral infection of certain warm-blooded animals and is caused by a virus in the Rhabdoviridae family. It attacks the nervous system and, once symptoms develop, it is 100 percent fatal in animals, if left untreated.
In North America, rabies occurs primarily in skunks, raccoons, foxes, coyotes, and bats. In some areas, these wild animals infect domestic cats, dogs, and livestock. In the U.S., cats are more likely than dogs to be rabid.
Individual states maintain information about animals that may carry rabies. It is best to check for region specific information if you are unsure about a specific animal and have been bitten.
Travelers to developing countries, where vaccination of domestic animals is not routine, should talk with their health care provider about getting the rabies vaccine before traveling.
The rabies virus enters the body through a cut or scratch, or through mucous membranes (such as the lining of the mouth and eyes), and travels to the central nervous system. Once the infection is established in the brain, the virus travels down the nerves from the brain and multiplies in different organs.
The salivary glands are most important in the spread of rabies from one animal to another. When an infected animal bites another animal, the rabies virus is transmitted through the infected animal's saliva. Scratches by claws of rabid animals are also dangerous because these animals lick their claws.
The incubation in humans from the time of exposure to the onset of illness can range anywhere from five days to more than a year, although the average incubation period is about two months. The following are the most common symptoms of rabies. However, each individual may experience symptoms differently. Symptoms may include:
Rabies: Stage 1
Rabies: Stage 2
The symptoms of rabies may resemble other conditions or medical problems. Always consult your doctor for a diagnosis.
In animals, the direct fluorescent antibody test (dFA) performed on brain tissue is most frequently used to detect rabies. Within a few hours, diagnostic laboratories can determine whether an animal is rabid and provide this information to medical professionals. These results may save a person from undergoing treatment if the animal is not rabid.
In humans, a number of tests are necessary to confirm or rule out rabies, as no single test can be used to rule out the disease with certainty. Tests are performed on samples of serum, saliva, and spinal fluid. Skin biopsies may also be taken from the nape of the neck.
Unfortunately, there is no known, effective treatment for rabies once symptoms of the disease occur. However, there are effective new vaccines (HDCV, PCEC) that provide immunity to rabies when administered soon after an exposure. It may also be used for protection before an exposure occurs, for persons such as veterinarians and animal handlers.
Being safe around animals, even your own pets, can help reduce the risk of animal bites. Some general guidelines for avoiding animal bites and rabies include the following:
If you or someone you know is bitten by an animal, remember these facts to report to your health care provider:
Click here to view the
Online Resources of Non-Traumatic Emergencies

Want to stay on top of all the space news? Follow @universetoday on Twitter
When astronauts return to the moon for long duration missions, they will need reliable sources of power. Solar energy will be plentiful for the 14 Earth-day- long lunar daytime, but what about the equally as long lunar night? NASA engineers are exploring the possibility of nuclear fission to provide the necessary power. If you’re having visions of a Three Mile Island nuclear reactor on the moon, put your fears to rest. A nuclear reactor used in space is much different than Earth-based systems, says Lee Mason of the NASA Glenn Research Center, who is the principal investigator for testing a fission powered system for the moon. There are no large concrete cooling towers, and the reactor is about the size of an office trash can. Of course, it won’t produce as much energy as the big reactors on Earth, but it should be more than adequate for the projected power needs of a lunar outpost.
“Our goal is to build a technology demonstration unit with all the major components of a fission surface power system and conduct non-nuclear, integrated system testing in a ground-based space simulation facility,” said Mason. “Our long-term goal is to demonstrate technical readiness early in the next decade, when NASA is expected to decide on the type of power system to be used on the lunar surface.”
A fission surface power system on the moon has the potential to generate a steady 40 kilowatts of electric power, enough for about eight houses on Earth. It works by splitting uranium atoms in a reactor to generate heat that then is converted into electric power. The fission surface power system can produce large amounts of power in harsh environments, like those on the surface of the moon or Mars, because it does not rely on sunlight. The primary components of fission surface power systems are a heat source, power conversion, heat rejection and power conditioning, and distribution.
Glenn recently contracted for the design and analysis of two different types of advanced power conversion units as an early step in the development of a full system-level technology demonstration. These power conversion units are necessary to process the heat produced by the nuclear reactor and efficiently convert it to electrical power.
Two different companies have designed concepts that can produce a total of 12 kilowatts of power. One uses piston engines and the other a high speed turbine coupled with a rotary alternator.
“Development and testing of the power conversion unit will be a key factor in demonstrating the readiness of fission surface power technology and provide NASA with viable and cost-effective options for nuclear power on the moon and Mars,” said Don Palac, manager of Glenn’s Fission Surface Power Project.
A contractor will be selected after a year of design and analysis. Testing of the non-nuclear system is expected to take place in 2012 or 2013 to verify the performance and safety of the systems and determine if these systems can easily be used on the moon, or even on Mars.

for National Geographic News
To swat a fly can be a lesson in futility. The insect darts from each swipe with uncanny precision, altering its course to zip off in nearly the opposite direction.
Precisely how a fly achieves its aerial acrobatics is more than a curiosity of annoyance for Michael Dickinson, a bioengineer at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. Dickinson has built an entire research lab, not to mention professional career, seeking an answer to just how a fly's brain controls its muscles in precision flight.
"An interest in the brain led to an interest in flight and aerodynamics," said Dickinson. "I've spent a lot of time with folks in the lab trying to figure out the basic aerodynamics of insect flight."
Together with Steven Fry, a biologist at the University of Zurich in Switzerland, and Rosalyn Sayaman, a research assistant also at the California Institute of Technology, Dickinson determined how common fruit flies use their wings to make 90-degree turns at speeds faster than a blink of the human eye, let alone the swoosh of a swatter.
The researchers discovered that the mechanics of how flies execute such turns were contrary to what they initially believed.
To turn, a flying creature must generate enough twisting force, or torque, to offset two forces working against itthe inertia of its own body (think forward motion on a bicycle, once you stop pedaling) and the viscous friction of the air, which for small insects is thought to be like syrup.
Scientists had long assumed that the viscosity of the air, and not inertia, was the greater force for insects such as flies to overcome. Inertia, they believed, was primarily the bane of larger animals like birds.
"No one challenged the notion because there was no indication that it might be different," said Fry. "The results actually proved the opposite."
The research team found that fruit flies make subtle changes in the tilt of their wings relative to the ground and the size of each wing flap to generate the forces that allow them to turn. Flies then create an opposite twisting force with their wings to stop the inertia of the turn, preventing an out of control spin.
This finding, say the researchers, indicates that inertia, and not friction, is the greater force for the fruit fly to overcome in the turn.
Ron Fearing, an electrical engineer at the University of California at Berkeley who is developing a tiny robotic insect capable of autonomous flight, said that the research team has "shown a quite surprising result, in that very subtle changes in wing motion are responsible for rapid maneuvers."
The Fly Tests
SOURCES AND RELATED WEB SITES

Statement of Purpose
THE CIVIL WAR CENTER
The Civil War was arguably the most important event in the history of the United States. The conflict fundamentally altered the relationship of the states to the federal government, freed four million slaves, and changed the socio-economic development of the nation. Few states were affected more by this tumultuous period than Georgia. Georgia furnished substantial natural resources, manpower, and political and military leadership to the Southern Republic’s war effort. Important figures such as Vice President of the Confederacy Alexander Stephens, General William J. Hardee, and General James Longstreet led the way in the South’s fight for its independence. Critical battles at Dalton, Resaca, Dallas, New Hope Church, and Kennesaw Mountain were fought only a short distance from our own Kennesaw State University. Georgia’s society – men and women, white and black, slave and free – experienced change on a scale never witnessed before or since. However, despite Georgia’s key role in the war, no research center exists in the state where scholars, students, and interested citizens can go to find out about Georgia’s experience in the nation’s greatest calamity.
The Civil War historian in Kennesaw State University’s Department of History and Philosophy recognized this void and secured the support of the College of Humanities and Social Science to begin developing the Center. After nearly a year of planning and designing, the Civil War Center became a functioning unit within the college. Thus, the mission and purpose of the Center is clear: compile and organize key resources and help educate the public on all aspects of the South's role in the Civil War period.
No other event in American history affected the development of the United States more than the Civil War. The Civil War era is defined broadly to include primarily the nineteenth century, yet events before and after are related to the war as well. The nineteenth century witnessed dramatic social, economic, and political changes that reshaped American life and culture. While the Civil War is central to the experience, the decades before and after contain the seeds and bitter harvest of the national ordeal. The Center will, therefore, include resources on the causes, course, and repercussions of the war within the historic South. This region encompasses the states of Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.
To summarize, then, the Civil War Center is committed to the following:
WHY KENNESAW STATE UNIVERSITY IS AN
The Atlanta area is an ideal location to house such a center because of its transportation networks, historic sites, and the abounding enthusiasm the Civil War generates among the citizens of the state and region. First and foremost an educational repository, the Civil War Center will offer the following advantages to instructors and students in the area:
KENNESAW STATE UNIVERSITY’S ROLE
Kennesaw State University is the third largest university out of thirty-five institutions in the University System of Georgia. It supports a growing student population of approximately 20,000 from 132 countries. KSU lies in the center of an area replete with key resources, events, and expertise with which to study Georgia's and the historic South's role in the Civil War. Critical battles at Dalton, Resaca, Dallas, New Hope Church, and Kennesaw Mountain were fought only a short distance from our own KSU, making the university a logical site to house the Civil War Center. Enthusiasm for the period abounds among the citizens of the area, and KSU's proximity to Atlanta, the Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park, nearby historic Civil War sites, and interstate access will no doubt attract visitors from across the state, region, and country.
The Center will, in both the present and future, enhance KSU's reputation through the following:
KSU and the College of Humanities and Social Science are committed to supporting the Center through funding from the capital campaign, staffing as needed and budget allows, purchasing of equipment and other materials, and housing for the collection.
Created in 2006, the Center has already generated a flurry of interest and excitement in the area. Fundraising efforts are gaining momentum, and the archival collections are growing rapidly. In its brief tenure, the Center has made great strides in perpetuating its mission to educate the public on the importance of the Civil War to the nation's history.

- Digital Resources
Positive Health Information
Pattern number within this pattern set:74
Health information in the developed world exists in vast quantities, not only for the general public but also for health professionals. Much of this information depicts good health in terms of vigilance against the failings of our own bodies. This serves to create dependency on a high tech, commodity health system.
The style of language and the content of information are very important in how information makes people perceive the world. Authors in many fields have noted patterns of communication that create distrust and enforce dependency by emphasizing danger from external, uncontrollable forces. If people have a sense of helplessness in the face of this threat, they do not act upon their own feelings and perceptions.
Negative language has the effect of emphasizing threats, magnifying fears, and creating dependency. Reminding people of their mortality tends to make them hold more closely to traditional culture (Pyszczynski, Solomon, & Greenberg, 2003); this has implications for mental health, and can also be used to influence mass opinion and behavior. A recent example is the US administrations use of language to create fear and mistrust among the public by creating the specter of a constant external threat (Brooks, 2003).
Much health information, especially advertising from hospital corporations and pharmaceutical companies, uses this technique. A paternalistic (doctor knows best) and commodity-driven medical system produces an endless stream of information that encourages the perception that natural processes, such as growing older or pregnancy, are fraught with danger. This inhibits the spread of health information that is not based on the treatments that this system has to offer.
Language may not only be negative; it can also be empty (Brooks, 2003); complex issues are broken down into broad statements with little meaning. In health care information, this pattern of communication places the cause of ill health on the individual. The complexity of individuals relationships to the world they live in and the effects on individual health of pollution, poverty, and unhealthy social norms and values are ignored. People come to construe healthy behavior in terms of dependency on a medical industry that constantly invents not only new cures, but new diseases for the cures it already possesses (Blech, 2006).
Empty language is like empty calories. It tastes good and you can eat a lot of it, but you dont obtain much benefit. A great deal of health information tempts us to feel that we are well-informed. We are bombarded by advertising and public health campaigns that do little more than create mistrust of the inherent healthy processes we possess. To reduce complex health issues to taking a pill ignores peoples emotional needs and the complex connection between body and mind; instead it emphasizes the negative aspects of their health.
The use of estrogen replacement in post-menopausal women illustrates this. Estrogen replacement was pushed on women as a way if combating the problems of growing old such as osteoporosis, heart disease, memory loss and drying skin. The unspoken message was that there was something wrong with growing old that taking medication could correct it. Preventative approaches, that emphasized a lifetime of healthy behaviors and the inherent correctness of aging, were ignored.
In pattern 47, Health Center, Alexander et al. (1977) describe a medical system that emphasizes sickness over health. By contrast, they show the Pioneer Health Center in Peckham, an experiment from the 1930s, as an example of medical care that focuses on health instead of sickness. In the same manner, health information must distinguish between healing and medicine. We need to hear messages of what is right with us and what needs to be done to stay in touch with the inherent health of our bodies.
Many alternative health practices, such as yoga, polarity treatment, or acupuncture focus on the inherent healthiness of the body. In these practices, the underlying concept is on healing, the natural process by which the body repairs itself. The rise of alternatives to conventional medicine reflects, in part, the lack of substance people feel from the information they receive after a visit to a doctor. Health-related discussion forums, that include both lay and professional perspectives but avoid the disease-mongering (Marshall & Aldhous, 2006) influence of industry funding, offer a way to make sense of information from various health related sources without falling victim to negative language and information; people put information into the context of everyday life and validate positive perceptions of themselves. This type of information has substance to it, not only because it is active rather than passive; it has the positive effect of engaging people in independent, creative thinking.
Health information should emphasize the idea that people are inherently healthy. It must inspire trust in the bodys ability to heal itself, once a healthy path has been taken. Where information of this kind is insufficient, either create it or supplant it with participant-controlled interactive forums.
Verbiage for pattern card:
Health information in the developed world often depicts health in terms of vigilance against external, uncontrollable forces. This fosters distrust and dependency on a high-tech, commodity health system. Positive Health Information is built on the fact that people are inherently healthy. It inspires trust in the body's ability to heal itself, once a healthy path has been taken.

Twas on the thirty-first of May,
In eighteen sixty-two,
The rebels met our Union force,
To see what they could do.
McClellan was near Richmond then,
That nasty rebels den,
Where whites the gentlemen are crowned,
Where Negroes are not men.
They met and fought with iron will
Each eager to obtain
The mend that every solider loves—
The victor’s glorious name.
The cannon sent her iron hall,
The market, showers of lead,
Which filled the air with dying groans,
And strewed the field with dead
The Ninety-Second stood firm in front,
In Palmer’s bold brigade,
Until in “Dixie’s land” they had
Some scores of widows made.
But when they saw they were out-flanked,
They wheeled about and fled,
While many of our Northern braves
Were numbered with the dead
The double guide our soldiers took,
Soon left me far behind—
That aimble step I could not take,
Although so well inclined.
The rebels came with savage yells,
A Yankee they had found,
With curses bid me “face about,”
And march away to town.
They marched me down with many more,
Through mud and mire to town,
And there with bars and prisons walls,
Yours honor did surround.
They [?] tobacco with in those walls,
In times of peace and trace,
But now the bedbugs and the lice
Hold nightly dress parades.
They gave us rations twice each day,
But nothing for our beds,
With fleas and bedbugs without number
Gently crawling round our heads.
Our morning rations were of bread,
A slice of sinking meat,
Which hunger made us soon devour,
And ever lasted sweet.
At night we had a little soup,
Some water bolled with peas,
And then we took our prison beds,
To dream of lice and fleas.
We were confined three days and nights
Within those iron bars,
When, oh! the welcome news then came,
To get abound the cars.
They marched us through their nasty streets,
That all the crowd might see,
The “hiding Yankees” from the North,
That in than land run free.
The crowd was dense on either side,
Composed of whites and blacks,
While many shouted in the crowd,
To shoot them in their tracks.
We traveled all this days and night,
Oppressed by dust and heat;
We got some muddy water,
But nothing for to eat.
At length each man face crackers got,
All counted our with care,
And this they thought a liberal thing,
Considering who we were.
Again we traveled all day and night,
As we had the day before,
With nothing for our rations,
While our seats were getting sore.
Again our scanty breakfast came;
Five crackers as before,
And this thought a heavy draft
On old Jeff’s three years store.
This morning found us all within
The north Carolina state,
With Salisbury’s prison walls ahead,
Where we could read our face,
We found Carolina on the fence,
A leg on either side;
She says it’s Southern fashion
For ladies so to ride.
She sends her troops to help the North,
Then Northern Prisoners keep;
But vengeance sure is on her track,
And Vengeance never sleeps.
Our prison walls were large and high,
For Spinning cotton made,
When “old King Cotton” ruled as king,
And Negroes were in trade.
But when they found his glory gone,
And cotton would not sell,
They turned their fields into burying-grounds,
Their factories into hells.
They fired upon our stars and stripes,
They stole our arms and money,
And then they cried, “let us alone,”
In accents sweet as honey.
The rebels sung throughtout the South,
In Dixie’s land they’d stand,
And, if they ever lived to die,
They’d die in Dixie’s land.
We found them standing when we came,
When not too drunk or tipsy
“Right smost” they’d rather run and live,
Than die to live in Dixie.
The people here are ignorant,
And iced as tools by rouges,
They’ve herded with the blacks so long,
They’ve got the laugh and brogue.
School houses here you never find,
Such sights are seldom seen,
With truant boys and red-checked girls,
A romping on the green.
I’m proud to say I’m from the North,
Where no one lacks for knowledge,
For every mile or two you go,
You’ll find a school or college.
They keep their slave pens and often sell
Their very blood and bone,
For crosses with the negro slave,
There gently never own.
They keep their slaves in ignorance,
They’re never taught to read,
For knowledge and old slavery
Have never yet agreed.
They breed and sell the negro here
As Northern men would cattle,
The whiter they can get the skin,
The more come in the chattle.
They buy our huts, caps, coats and rings,
And trinkets we have wrought,
As keepsakes of those Yankee boys
They, in their battles caught.
The only way they have to live,
And save our preclous lives,
Is to manufacture rings from bones,
And trade for cakes and pies.
If they should get to Heaven’s gate,
And find all Union there,
They would serve at once to Hell,
And Join their kindred there.
And now we’ve sung about the South,
And of their doings there,
Now let us step within the bars,
And learn the prisoners face.
They give us rations twice each day,
Their coarsest negro’s fare,
And this they think is generous,
Considering who we were.
Our morning rations are of bread,
The loves are very small,
A little slice of bacon,
From which the maggots fall.
They take the liquor from this meat,
Stir in a little rice,
And this we have for supper,
Its flavor very nice.
Our rations here are always fresh,
Because they have no salt,
And if they hear a man complain,
He’s told it’s his even fault.
At night we sleep upon the floor,
We often lay in tiers,’
While body lice in whose battalions,
Charge upon our fronts and rears.
They turn us out a while each day,
Upon our prison health,
To pick the lice from off our clothes,
The maggots from our teeth.
They keep a bake house near our den,
To bake our daily bread,
You’d think some children had the dough,
To make some from cats heads.
The bakers lake our flour and rice,
To make sweet cake and pie,
The half-starved Yanks think they must eat,
So to bakers fly.
They give the prisoner scanty fare,
To rob them of their money;
They say our hungry boys must have,
Some cakes as sweet as honey.
Our generous keeper says to us,
Tells to us one and all,
I fear your dally rations
May sometimes be too small.
If any want more rations here,
To keep your souls alive,
Just step into my sutler’s shop,
And buy sweetmeats and ples.
If any lack the dime of scrip,
Or think his fare is hard,
Just take him to the guard-house,
Or “buck” him in the yard.
And now we’ve sung about our den,
And how we live in there;
Now let us sing about our dead,
In “Dixie’s land so fair.”
When any of the prisoners die,
No matter what their grades,
They get a negro with his cart
To take him to the shades.
They’d get a negro with his cart,
Drawn by a stubborn mule,
To show their height of chivalry
If southern power could rule.
The fifteenth of August Carolina called,
And to the prisoners said,
Just jump aboard my cattle cars,
With some of my “nice bread.”
I’m pledged to take you to your lines,
My pledges seldom fall,
You’ll find my seats are rather hard,
But easier than my rail.
With bounding hearts we heard her through,
Then through the gate did spring,
And when aboard her cattle cars,
We made the welkin ring.
In highest glee we started off,
No joys our tongues could tell;
But instead of going to our lines,
We went to “Island Belle.”
Belle Island is a sandy plain,
Without a tree or shade,
Or cooling spring to quench the thirst,
That heat and hunger made.
Our rations here are very small,
Some bread and stinking beef,
Which only sharpens appetite,
And gives but saint relief.
When beef is scarce we sometimes get
A soup of hugs and files;
And if perchance there should be bears,
They seldom show their eyes.
This nasty, stinking, scorch fare,
We often fail to get;
And then with rage we’d gnash our teeth,
Like madmen in a fit.
Here many of the prisoners lie
Upon the burning sand;
Two weak by far to walk around,
While many cannot stand.
Starvation stares us in the face,
His laws are open wide;
Unless our friends send quick relief,
We down his throat must glide.
Our numbers here grow less and less,
The strongest soon must fall,
For old Grim death is on our track,
And soon will on us call.
Some six or eight die every day,
This face none can deny;
While many with their dying breath,
For food and rations cry.
It’s hard to die in distant lands,
Without a kindred near,
To wipe the death sweat from our face,
Or drop one friendly tear.
A lady came into our camp,
To bring us small supplies;
They dragged her to the old guard-house,
For selling cakes and pies.
They “gagged” and “bucked” a prisoner here
Until he could not stand,
The blood flowed freely from his mouth
Upon the burning sand.
The only crime he did commit,
The only wrong he’d done—
His Northern pride it would not stoop
To [?] those southern guns.
We are ragged set of men,
This prison has no charms;
But “Uncle Sam” will own his boys,
And give them all a farm.
I long to see my friends again,
Of which I fondly dreampt;
But I’d rather see my country free,
And old Jeff. pulling hemp.
Old Jeff. you’d better pack your kit,
For Richmond soon must fall,
For little Mac is stepping back
To mount upon your wall.
Your only hope, “the Old Stone Wall,”
Must soon to ruin go;
He’s run around your land so long,
You thought all safe you know.
And now your health is failing fast,
And your blood is getting low;
You’d better call your boys all home,
Before you go below.
The Stars and Stripes again must float,
O’er Dixie’s sunny land:
And Southern rebels must soon obey,
Old Abram’s just demands.
Now here’s a toast for Uncle Abe,
May he live one thousand years;
And for his firmness in this war,
We’ll give three hearty cheers.
Now here’s another for Jeff.—
May the gallows claim its own:
And when he dangles from the rope,
We’ll give three doleful groans.
Farewell old Richmond’s prison wall,
Farewell old Salisbury too;
And now farewell to Island Belle—
Four weeks on you will do.
And now you’ve heard my story through,
That happy day has come,
When I can bid Secesh farewell,
And leave this Isle for—ANNAPOLIS.

Eating and drinking
My partner is so restless now that he can’t seem to sit and finish a meal. But he’s happy to take a sandwich and eat it as he goes.
I used to get so upset when my sister ate with her fingers in company. I used to try to make her use her fork and for a while I didn’t invite anyone round. But then I thought about it and I decided that it really didn’t do anyone any harm. She wasn’t worried and my friends all said they didn’t mind – it was just me being embarrassed. So I decided not to worry about it any more.
You may have found that mealtimes are becoming more and more difficult. Perhaps the person with dementia makes a mess eating and you need to help them handle knives and forks. This might irritate you or make you feel embarrassed in front of guests. You may find that they eat more often because they forget having eaten or that they forget to eat altogether. They might start to eat everything or just one thing. They might also be perturbed by the difficulties they are experiencing. They might feel embarrassed or frustrated at not being able to eat correctly and suffer from other problems such as constipation, forgetting to chew food and loss of or disturbance of their sense of taste. Eating and drinking can clearly be problematic for you both. However, there are a number of ways you can help the person to maintain a healthy diet and enjoy meals, whilst at the same time contributing to maintaining a certain level of independence.
How to cope with eating and drinking
Provide assistance, whilst encouraging independence
So as not to make the person with dementia feel like a child or embarrassed, it is best to encourage them to do as much as possible themselves. For example, if they cannot handle a knife, instead of spoon-feeding, you could prepare bite-sized pieces of food or cut it up before serving it. By changing the way to eat or serve food, you can leave the person with the chance to remain independent longer. Sometimes, a simple reminder (e.g. to use a spoon instead of a fork) may be all that is needed. It might help to have your own meal at the same time. However, at some stage, you may find that spoon-feeding is necessary. If this occurs, you should be careful not to try when the person is drowsy, agitated or lying down, as otherwise they could choke. Certain medication can lead to problems swallowing as food becomes lodged in the person’s mouth. If they have difficulty swallowing, the following guidelines might be useful to bear in mind.
Make sure that the person sits upright, keeps their chin down and takes small sips of drink. Avoid vessels which force the head back too much (specially designed cups and mugs exist). Alternate food and drink to help clear the mouth. Encourage the person to try to swallow each mouthful of food twice (e.g. to swallow a second time even if the mouth is empty). If they have not swallowed, it can be useful to present an empty spoon. Encourage frequent swallows to counteract dribbling. Avoid mixtures of liquid and solid food (e.g. certain soups or cornflakes), stringy textures (e.g. cabbage, runner beans); floppy textures (e.g. lettuce, cucumber) and small, hard textures (e.g. peanuts and sweet corn).
Making mealtimes a pleasant experience
As a result of these difficulties, the person with dementia may start to dislike mealtimes, seeing them as an ordeal rather than a pleasant experience. However, giving the person enough time to try to manage alone or a little assistance may help them to feel more relaxed. Background music might also help contribute to a relaxed atmosphere. They might not manage to eat without being slightly messy or untidy, but in this case, it is perhaps best not to draw attention to it, as it could make them less inclined to try. Finally, they might want to be more involved, e.g. help to prepare food or clear the table. Mealtimes provide an ideal opportunity to give the person with dementia the chance to remain active and feel useful.
How to prevent problems with eating and drinking
You may be able to prevent some problems from occurring, by taking certain precautions or slightly adapting the way you normally prepare food and serve it.
- The routine : Give more time; serve plates of food instead of having self-service; remove condiments once used; have smaller meals more often if the person forgets having eaten; serve the main meal at midday to prevent night-time indigestion, etc.
- The utensils and layout : Try to find out about specially designed utensils, non-breakable dishes, non-slip mats and drinking containers that cannot be knocked over; use mugs if possible for certain food as the ability to hold a mug tends to be retained longer than the ability to use a knife and fork; provide a sharp contrast between plates and the table and avoid strong patterns on table cloths as this can cause confusion.
- The kind of food served : Prepare finger foods if the person has difficulty handling a knife and fork or is restless and cannot stay long at table; bite sized pieces avoid the need to use a knife; prepare food in a liquidiser rather than serving baby food if they cannot manage solid food so as to avoid embarrassment; avoid milk or citrus juice which tends to produce more mucus and can aggravate respiratory problems and drooling, if this is a problem.
Ensure a sufficient amount of liquid per day
It is important that you try to give the person with dementia enough to drink to avoid dehydration, constipation and more confusion. If possible, try to encourage them to drink 1½ litres (8 cups) of liquid per day. However, there are certain cases where even more attention needs to be taken, e.g. with people who have vomiting, diarrhoea or diabetes and people who are taking diuretics (water pills) or heart medication. On the more practical side, you will need to make sure that drinks are not too hot, as otherwise the person might scald themselves without realising. If they tend to become agitated, it is best to limit drinks which are stimulants (e.g. coffee, tea, hot chocolate, etc.). Possible alternatives include fruit and milk drinks, as well as decaffeinated drinks. Otherwise let them drink what they are used to.
Consult a doctor in case of loss of appetite
You should not worry too much if the person with dementia loses weight, as this can be a natural consequence of the disease. They might even be eating normally. However, it is nevertheless a good idea to contact your doctor just to check that there is not a physical cause and in case nutritional supplements should be given.
Last Updated: jeudi 06 août 2009

By Isaac Sever, Cypress Semiconductor
Stepper motors convert electrical energy into discrete mechanical rotation. They are ideally suited for many measurement and control applications where positional accuracy is important. Stepping motors have the following advantages:
- Full torque when rotation is stopped. This is in contrast to brushed and brushless DC motors, which cannot provide full torque continuously when the rotor is stopped. This aids in maintaining the current position.
- Precise open-loop positioning and repetition. Stepper motors move in discrete steps as long as the motor stays under the maximum torque and current limits. This allows the rotor position to be determined by the control sequence without additional tracking or feedback. High quality stepping motors have three to five percent precision within a single step.
- Quick starts, stop, and reverse capability.
- High reliability because there is no brush or physical contact required for commutation. The life span of a stepping motor is dependent on the performance of the bearings.
- Microstepping mode can be used allowing direct connection to a load without intermediate gearing.
- A wide speed range can be controlled by varying the drive signal timing.
- Inherent resonance can cause noise, jerky rotation, and at extreme levels, loss of position.
- It is possible to lose position control in some situations, because no feedback is natively provided.
- Power consumption does not decrease to zero, even if load is absent.
- Stepping motors have low-power density and lower maximum speed compared to brushed and brushless DC motors. Typical loaded maximum operating speeds for stepper motors are around 1000 RPM.
- Complex electronic controls are required.
Figure 1: Structure of motors.
Types of stepping motors
There are several basic types of stepping motors:
- Variable reluctance motors with metal teeth.
- Permanent magnet motors.
- Hybrid motors with both permanent magnets and metal teeth.
Variable reluctance stepping motors have three to five windings and a common terminal connection, creating several phases on the stator. The rotor is toothed and made of metal, but is not permanently magnetized. A simplified variable reluctance stepping motor is shown in Figure 2. In this figure, the rotor has four teeth and the stator has three independent windings (six phases), creating 30 degree steps.
Figure 2: Simple variable reluctance stepping motor.
The rotation of a variable reluctance stepping motor is produced by energizing individual windings. When a winding is energized, current flows and magnetic poles are created, which attracts the metal teeth of the rotor. The rotor moves one step to align the offset teeth to the energized winding. At this position, the next adjacent windings can be energized to continue rotation to another step, or the current winding can remain energized to hold the motor at its current position. When the phases are turned on sequentially, the rotor rotates continuously.
The described rotation is identical to a typical BLDC motor. The fundamental difference between a stepper and BLDC motor is that the stepper is designed to operate continuously stalled without overheating or damage.
Rotation for a variable reluctance stepping motor with three windings and four rotor teeth is illustrated in Figure 3.
1, 2, 3, 1 → 3 steps → quarter turn
12 steps per rotation
As shown in Figure 3, energizing each of the windings in sequence moves the rotor a quarter turn, 12 steps are required for a full rotation.
Table 1: Variable reluctance stepper motor in Figure 3.
The three steps shown in Figure 3 move the rotor a quarter turn. A full rotation requires 12 steps for a variable reluctance stepper motor.
Typical variable reluctance motors have more teeth and use a tooth pole along with a toothed rotor to produce step angles near one degree.
Figure 3: Rotation control of variable reluctance stepping motor.
Permanent magnet stepping motor
A permanent magnet stepping motor consists of a stator with windings and a rotor with permanent magnet poles. Alternate rotor poles have rectilinear forms parallel to the motor axis. Stepping motors with magnetized rotors provide greater flux and torque than motors with variable reluctance. The motor, shown in Figure 4, has three rotor pole pairs and two independent stator windings, creating 30 degree steps.
Motors with permanent magnets are subjected to influence from the back-EMF of the rotor, which limits the maximum speed. Therefore, when high speeds are required, motors with variable reluctance are preferred over motors with permanent magnets.
Figure 4: Permanent magnet stepping motor.
Rotation of a permanent magnet stepping motor is produced by energizing individual windings in a positive or negative direction. When a winding is energized, a north and south pole are created, depending on the polarity of the current flowing. These generated poles attract the permanent poles of the rotor. The rotor moves one step to align the offset permanent poles to the corresponding energized windings. At this position, the next adjacent windings can be energized to continue rotation to another step, or the current winding can remain energized to hold the motor at its current position. When the phases are turned on sequentially the rotor is continuously rotated.
Rotation for a permanent magnet stepping motor with two windings and three pairs of permanent rotor poles (six poles) is shown in Figure 5.
Winding in sequence:
1 +/-, 2 +/-, 1 -/+, 2 -/+ → 3 steps → quarter turn
12 steps per rotation
Table 2: Permanent magnet stepping motor in Figure 5.
With one winding energized, the three steps move the rotor a quarter turn. A full rotation requires 12 steps for a permanent magnet stepper motor (bipolar) with both windings energized in each step. As shown in Figure 5, energizing each winding in sequence through each polarity moves the rotor a quarter turn. As before, 12 steps are required for a full rotation.
Figure 5: Rotation control of permanent magnet stepping motor, sequencing individual windings.
Another alternative to rotate a permanent magnet rotor is to energize both windings in each step. The vector torque generated by each of the coils is additive; this doubles the current flowing in the motor, and increases the torque. More complex control is also required to sequence the turning on and off of both windings.
As shown in Figure 6, energizing two windings in each step, sequencing through each combination of polarities moves the rotor a quarter turn. As before, 12 steps are required for a full rotation.
Table 3: Permanent magnet stepping motor in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Rotation control of permanent magnet stepping motor using both windings together.
Typical permanent magnet motors have more poles to create smaller steps. To make significantly smaller steps down to one degree, permanent magnet rotors can add metal teeth and toothed windings. This hybrid motor is described in the next section.
Hybrid stepping motor
Hybrid stepping motors combine a permanent magnet and a rotor with metal teeth to provide features of the variable reluctance and permanent magnet motors. Hybrid motors are more expensive than motors with permanent magnets, but they use smaller steps, have greater torque, and have greater maximum speeds.
A hybrid motor rotor has teeth placed on the directional axes. The rotor is divided into parts between constant magnet poles. The number of rotor pole pairs is equal to the number of teeth on one of the rotor’s parts. The hybrid motor stator has teeth creating more poles than just the main poles containing windings. The rotor teeth provide a smaller magnetic circuit resistance in some rotor positions, which improves static and dynamic torque. This is provided by corresponding teeth positioning; some parts of the rotor teeth are placed opposite the stator teeth and the remaining rotor teeth are placed between the stator teeth. Dependence between the number of rotor poles, the stator equivalent poles, and the phase number define step angle:
Figure 7: Hybrid stepping motor.
Rotation of a hybrid stepping motor is produced with the same control method as a permanent magnet stepping motor, by energizing individual windings in a positive or negative direction. When a winding is energized, a north and south pole are created, depending on the polarity of the current flowing. These generated poles attract the permanent poles of the rotor and the finer metal rotor teeth. The rotor moves one step to align the offset magnetized rotor teeth to the corresponding energized windings.
Stepping motor control
A step motor is a synchronous electric motor. Its fixed rotor equilibrium position occurs when aligned with the stator magnetic field. When the stator changes position, the rotor rotates to occupy a new equilibrium position.
There are several stepper motor drive modes:
- Full-step mode.
- Double-step mode.
- Half-step mode.
- Microstep Mode.
Stepping motors can be controlled in a variety of ways, trading off implementation requirements with greater accuracy and smoother transitions. Rotation control with full-steps, half-steps, and microsteps is described as follows:
Full-step mode for a permanent magnet and hybrid stepping motor is detailed in the Stepper Motor Introduction. Figure 5 illustrates one-phase full-step mode in which only one winding is turned on at a time. In this mode, the rotor’s balanced position for each step is in line with the stator poles. With only half of the motor coils used at a given time, the full torque obtained is limited.
Two-phase, full-step mode shown in Figure 6 uses both windings energized in each step. This doubles the current through the motor and provides 40 percent more torque than when only one phase is used at a time. With two windings energized, the rotor’s balanced position for each step is halfway between the two energized stator poles.
The full-step and double-step drive modes can be combined to generate half-steps of rotation for half-step mode. First one winding is turned on, and then the second winding is energized, moving the rotor half a step towards the second, as shown in Figure 8.
A half-step with the combination of one and two windings energized in full-step mode produces higher resolution, but does not provide constant torque throughout rotation.
Figure 8: Three half steps, 1/8 of a rotation.
Microstepping mode is an extension of the half-step drive mode. Instead of switching the current in a winding from on to off, the current is scaled up and down in smaller steps. When two phases are turned on and the current of each phase is not equal, the rotor position is determined by the current phase ratio. This changing current ratio creates discrete steps in the torque exerted on the rotor and results in smaller fractional steps of rotation between each full-step. Microstep mode reduces torque ripple and low-speed resonance present in the other modes and is required in many situations.
Microstepping creates rotation of the rotor by scaling the contributions of the two additive torque vectors from the two stepper motor windings.
Figure 9: Torque in microstepping control mode.
The total torque exerted on the rotor is the vector addition of the torque from the two rotors. Each of the torques is proportional to the position of the rotor and the sine/cosine of the step angle.
These equations can be combined and solved for the position of the rotor.
Fractional steps are created by scaling torque contributions between windings. Because torque is proportional to magnetic flux that is proportional to the current in the winding, the position of the rotor can be controlled by controlling the current flowing in each winding. To create smooth microsteps between full-steps, the current is varied sinusoidally with a 90 degree phase shift between the two windings as shown in Figure 10.
The current is scaled by controlling the root mean square (RMS) current using a current mode buck converter, commonly called a chopper drive when used with stepper motors. The phase current is converted into a voltage using a sense resistor in each phase ground path. This voltage is routed to a comparator that disables the output whenever the phase current rises above a reference. The comparator reference is provided by a voltage digital-to-analog converter (VDAC). By changing the VDAC supplied current limit for each microstep, the total motor torque remains approximately constant for each step of the sinusoidal current waveform.
Figure 10: VDAC current limit for microstep mode.
Microstepping allows the rotor position to be controlled with more accuracy and also has advantages in the rotation. Advantages of microstepping are:
- Position is controlled with more accuracy.
- Rotation can be stopped at specific fraction of a step.
- Transitions are smoother.
- Damp resonance creates fewer oscillations as motor steps (especially at startup and slowdown).
Figure 11: Smooth transitions between steps and limited oscillations and settling in microstep mode.
PSoC 3 introduction
The CY8C3866AXI device is in the PSoC 3 architecture. A block diagram of the device is shown in Figure 12 with the blocks used in the stepper application highlighted.
Figure 12: PSoC 3 (CY8C3866AXI) block diagram.
The PSoC 3 digital subsystem provides unique configurability of functions and interconnects. The stepper motor control uses these digital resources to implement timers, pulse width modulator (PWM) blocks, control registers, and a hardware lookup table (LUT).
The PSoC 3 analog subsystem provides the device the second half of its unique configurability. The stepper motor uses dedicated comparators, voltage DACs, and programmable gain amplifiers (PGA).
Stepper motor control based on PSoC 3
The block diagram of the stepper motor control based on the CY8C3866AXI is shown in Figure 13. The PSoC Creator™ schematic is shown in Figure 14.
Figure 13: Block diagram of PSoC 3 stepper motor controller.
Input control signals to the PSoC 3 device are:
- Motor Current Sensing: Analog input pins to detect motor phase current on shunt resistor. Used to limit current of the motor phases. See details in the following section.
- User Interface Pins
- User Input: Analog pin to read potentiometer for parameter input. Two digital pins for Menu control buttons.
- Character LCD: Digital output port (seven pins) to drive the character LCD on the DVK for menu options and user feedback.
- PWM signals to the high-side drivers (four digital output pins).
- PWM signals to the low-side drivers (four digital output pins).
Figure 14: PSoC Creator schematic for stepper motor control.
The PWMs are not used to produce the typical pulse width modulation output used with other motors. Instead, the PWMs act more as a timer to ensure a maximum chopping frequency to avoid overheating the drivers. Additionally, the PWM ‘kill circuit’ natively includes the cycle kill mode that implements the chopper drive method by disabling the drive outputs for the remainder of the current PWM cycle after the comparator trips.
The PWM signals are routed to a look up table (LUT) logic block, along with the current stepping stage index. This logic block implements a LUT using the PLD capabilities of a universal digital block (UDB) and routes the PWM signals to the eight legal output control combinations based on the current polarity of each phase. These control signals are routed through GPIOs to the external power driver circuits that drive the stepper motor. In the demonstrated chopper drive topology, transistors or MOSFETs are typically used to switch the high voltages and currents used to drive the stepper motors. The sequencing of the PWM control signals on the external power drivers produces the step by step rotation of the motor.
A timer generates periodic interrupts that generate each step (or microstep) of the motor. This timer can be used to run the motor at a specific speed, or to a specific position (exact number of steps). To set the speed of the motor, the interrupt period of the timer is updated by firmware.
PSoC 3 also implements current limiting for motor overcurrent protection and microstepping in hardware. This is described in the following section.
Microstepping and current protection implementation
Microstepping limits the current flowing in the motor windings to create smooth and well-controlled transitions between full-steps. This functionality also builds protection in hardware for overcurrent that shields the motor from damage. The block diagram of the system with the current feedback sensing paths is shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15: Overcurrent protection block diagram for microstepping.
Motor current is measured with two shunt resistors in the ground paths of the power driver MOSFETS (R1 and R2 in Figure 15). This voltage is low-pass filtered on the board and connected to two analog pins on PSoC 3 (labeled Curr_A and Curr_B).
The input voltages are fed into programmable gain amplifiers (PGA) implemented with the analog continuous time (CT) blocks. The PGA buffers the input voltage and drives it to a continuous time comparator. This voltage level from the sense resistor is compared to the current limit, set by an 8-bit voltage DAC. For microstepping the DACs’ output, sine and cosine waveforms are generated from a software lookup table. This limits the motor current sinusoidally for smooth microstepping.
The output of the comparator is connected to the PWM block and kills the PWM output when the current limit threshold is exceeded. This provides cycle-by-cycle current limiting to the motor and creates smooth microstepping transitions. The implementation of the current limiting protection in PSoC Creator is shown in Figure 16.
Figure 16: PSoC Creator schematic implementation of current limiting block for microstepping.
The PSoC 3 resources used in current limiting are:
- Two continuous time (CT) blocks implement the PGAs.
- Two fixed analog comparators are dedicated analog resources and do not use any SC/CT blocks.
- Two 8-bit PWMs implemented in UDBs (the same PWMs used to control the power device drivers). The output of the comparator triggers the kill input to the PWM when a current limiting condition is detected.
- Two 8-bit VDACs. These built in 8-bit voltage DACs are used to set the threshold for the comparator current limit.
Shown in Figure 17 are the settings for each DAC and rotation index, and the microstep pointer (ramping 1-128).
Figure 17: Current limit versus time step for 128 step microstepping.
The currents flowing in the two windings are measured with small sense resistors between the power devices and ground. The value of the current detection shunt resistor is a trade-off between power efficiency and robustness of the detection blocks. For a given current limit, enough change in voltage must be generated by the motor current to accurately detect the change with the comparator, but increasing the resistor increases heat and reduces efficiency.
The current limiting protection mechanism implemented in PSoC 3 hardware is an on-chip low-cost solution.
The output PWM drivers are controlled by a hardware lookup table. The table takes inputs from the two PWM blocks and a control register that holds the rotation index (as shown in Figure 18).
In Table 4, the PWM control hardware LUT receives the stage index and PWM signals as inputs and outputs the eight PWM driver signals.
Table 4: PWM control hardware LUT.
Figure 18: PSoC Creator schematic LUT implementation of PWM output control.
When operating with microstep drive mode, the PWM outputs for PWM_A and PWM_B cycle through 01, 10, and 11. When the stepper motor operates under full-step mode, both PWMs are on (11). In this case, the LUT simplifies to the following table the rotation sequence described in the full-step descriptions earlier.
In Table 5, the simplified MPhase output control hardware LUT receives the stage index and PWM signals as inputs and outputs the eight PWM driver signals.
Table 5: MPhase output control hardware LUT.
The stepper motor can be run at a fixed speed or to a desired position. To run at a fixed speed, the timer period that triggers each step (or microstep) is adjusted. The 16-bit timer terminal count triggers an interrupt that is used to initiate each step. Input frequency of the timer is 100 kHz to ensure precision speed control. PSoC 3 is also able to receive step pulse commands from an external controller such as a PLC.
In Figure 19, the timer terminal count triggers an interrupt that initiates each step.
Figure 19: PSoC Creator schematic implementation of speed control timer.
To run in position control mode, the stepper motor turns a specific number of steps and then stops. (Position control mode is not supported with the user interface in the stepper motor demo). An internal counter is used to count the desired steps. When the desired position is reached, the step control from the timer interrupt is masked until the user requests another action.
When the motor stops, phase current is lowered automatically to save power and reduce heating.
The ability to control the position in an open loop configuration by counting steps (or microsteps) is dependent on the stepper motor operating within the torque and motor load limits. If the torque/load limits are exceeded, the motor can miss steps and the absolute rotational position information is lost.
There is one main loop and one interrupt service routine (ISR) for control of the motor, the timer ISR. The timer ISR generates an interrupt that triggers the step control function (see Figure 19). Each time the step function is called, the motor takes one step (or microstep). The step function looks up the sinusoidal values from a table and sets the DAC output voltage to control the phase currents. A flow chart of the firmware operation is shown in Figure 20. Other ISRs for the UART and ADC are also used for the demo project UI and GUI interfaces.
Figure 20: Stepper motor control firmware flow chart.
PSoC resource utilization
The stepper motor uses resources from the digital and analog portions of the PSoC 3 device. The highest use of resources stem from the VDACs and comparators. Two VDACs and two comparators are used for the stepper motor microstepping control. This constraint limits the CY8C3866AXI-040 device to a maximum of two stepper motor controllers.
Table 6: Stepper motor demo CY8C3866AXI-040 resource utilization (blocks with none used are not shown).
Table 7: Stepper motor demo on CY8C3866AXI-040 memory utilization (Keil™ Complier, Level-5 optimization)
Cypress’ stepper motor control with PSoC 3 incorporates current limiting and microstepping control for an optimized solution. Up to 128 microsteps is suitable for precision position control. The PSoC 3 stepper motor control solution has low total system cost and leaves significant PSoC 3 resources available for additional system functions.
- Cypress Application Note AN2229, “Motor Control - Multi-Functional Stepping Motor Driver” by Victor Kremin and Ruslan Bachinsky.
Discover the benefits of becoming a My Digi-Key registered user.
• Enjoy faster, easier ordering with your information preloaded.
• View your order status, web order history
• Use our BOM Manager tool
• Import a text file into a RoHS query

Pacific ecosystem: An ochre sea star makes a kelp forest home in Monterey Bay, California.
Image courtesy of Kip F. Evans
Ocean Literacy - Essential Principle 5
The ocean supports a great diversity of life and ecosystems.
Fundamental Concept 5a.
Ocean life ranges in size from the smallest virus to the largest animal that has lived on Earth, the blue whale.
Fundamental Concept 5b.
Most life in the ocean exists as microbes. Microbes are the most important primary producers in the ocean. Not only are they the most abundant life form in the ocean, they have extremely fast growth rates and life cycles.
Fundamental Concept 5c.
Some major groups are found exclusively in the ocean. The diversity of major groups of organisms is much greater in the ocean than on land.
Fundamental Concept 5d.
Ocean biology provides many unique examples of life cycles, adaptations and important relationships among organisms (symbiosis, predator-prey dynamics and energy transfer) that do not occur on land.
Fundamental Concept 5e.
The ocean is three-dimensional, offering vast living space and diverse habitats from the surface through the water column to the seafloor. Most of the living space on Earth is in the ocean.
Fundamental Concept 5f.
Ocean habitats are defined by environmental factors. Due to interactions of abiotic factors such as salinity, temperature, oxygen, pH, light, nutrients, pressure, substrate and circulation, ocean life is not evenly distributed temporally or spatially, i.e., it is “patchy”. Some regions of the ocean support more diverse and abundant life than anywhere on Earth, while much of the ocean is considered a desert.
Fundamental Concept 5g.
There are deep ocean ecosystems that are independent of energy from sunlight and photosynthetic organisms. Hydrothermal vents, submarine hot springs, methane cold seeps, and whale falls rely only on chemical energy and chemosynthetic organisms to support life.
Fundamental Concept 5h.
Tides, waves and predation cause vertical zonation patterns along the shore, influencing the distribution and diversity of organisms.
Fundamental Concept 5i.
Estuaries provide important and productive nursery areas for many marine and aquatic species.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
The Winter 2009 issue of The Earth Scientist
, focuses on Earth System science, including articles on student inquiry, differentiated instruction, geomorphic concepts, the rock cycle, and much more!
You might also be interested in:
About 70% of the Earth is covered with water, and we find 97% of that water in the oceans. Everyone who has taken in a mouthful of ocean water while swimming knows that the ocean is really salty. All water...more
Oxygen is a chemical element with an atomic number of 8 (it has eight protons in its nucleus). Oxygen forms a chemical compound (O2) of two atoms which is a colorless gas at normal temperatures and pressures....more
The deep ocean is very cold, under high pressure, and always dark because sunlight can not penetrate that far. The only light comes from bioluminescence – a chemical reaction inside the bodies of some...more
Photosynthesis is the name of the process by which autotrophs (self-feeders) convert water, carbon dioxide, and solar energy into sugars and oxygen. It is a complex chemical process by which plants and...more
Methane is gas that is found in small quantities in Earth's atmosphere. Methane is the simplest hydrocarbon, consisting of one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms. Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas....more
The intertidal zone is the area along a coastline that is underwater at high tide and above the water at low tide. Whether it’s a rocky coast, a sandy beach, or a salt marsh, life in the intertidal zone...more
The ocean makes Earth habitable. Fundamental Concept 4a. Most of the oxygen in the atmosphere originally came from the activities of photosynthetic organisms in the ocean. Fundamental Concept 4b. The first...more

Rurik DynastyArticle Free Pass
Rurik Dynasty, princes of Kievan Rus and, later, Muscovy who, according to tradition, were descendants of the Varangian prince Rurik, who had been invited by the people of Novgorod to rule that city (c. 862); the Rurik princes maintained their control over Kievan Rus and, later, Muscovy until 1598.
Rurik’s successor Oleg (d. 912) conquered Kiev (c. 882) and established control of the trade route extending from Novgorod, along the Dnieper River, to the Black Sea. Igor (allegedly Rurik’s son; reigned 912–945) and his successors—his wife, St. Olga (regent 945–969), and their son Svyatoslav (reigned 945–972)—further extended their territories; Svyatoslav’s son Vladimir I (St. Vladimir; reigned c. 980–1015) consolidated the dynasty’s rule.
Vladimir compiled the first Kievan Rus law code and introduced Christianity into the country. He also organized the Kievan Rus lands into a cohesive confederation by distributing the major cities among his sons; the eldest was to be grand prince of Kiev, and the brothers were to succeed each other, moving up the hierarchy of cities toward Kiev, filling vacancies left by the advancement or death of an elder brother. The youngest brother was to be succeeded as grand prince by his eldest nephew whose father had been a grand prince. This succession pattern was generally followed through the reigns of Svyatopolk (1015–19); Yaroslav the Wise (1019–54); his sons Izyaslav (1054–68; 1069–73; and 1077–78), Svyatoslav (1073–76), and Vsevolod (1078–93); and Svyatopolk II (son of Izyaslav; reigned 1093–1113).
The successions were accomplished, however, amid continual civil wars. In addition to the princes’ unwillingness to adhere to the pattern and readiness to seize their positions by force instead, the system was upset whenever a city rejected the prince designated to rule it. It was also undermined by the tendency of the princes to settle in regions they ruled rather than move from city to city to become the prince of Kiev.
In 1097 all the princes of Kievan Rus met at Lyubech (northwest of Chernigov) and decided to divide their lands into patrimonial estates. The succession for grand prince, however, continued to be based on the generation pattern; thus, Vladimir Monomakh succeeded his cousin Svyatopolk II as grand prince of Kiev. During his reign (1113–25) Vladimir tried to restore unity to the lands of Kievan Rus; and his sons (Mstislav, reigned 1125–32; Yaropolk, 1132–39; Vyacheslav, 1139; and Yury Dolgoruky, 1149–57) succeeded him eventually, though not without some troubles in the 1140s.
Nevertheless, distinct branches of the dynasty established their own rule in the major centres of the country outside Kiev—Halicz, Novgorod, and Suzdal. The princes of these regions vied with each other for control of Kiev; but when Andrew Bogolyubsky of Suzdal finally conquered and sacked the city (1169), he returned to Vladimir (a city in the Suzdal principality) and transferred the seat of the grand prince to Vladimir. Andrew Bogolyubsky’s brother Vsevolod III succeeded him as grand prince of Vladimir (reigned 1176–1212); Vsevolod was followed by his sons Yury (1212–38), Yaroslav (1238–46), and Svyatoslav (1246–47) and his grandson Andrew (1247–52).
Alexander Nevsky (1252–63) succeeded his brother Andrew; and Alexander’s brothers and sons succeeded him. Furthering the tendency toward fragmentation, however, none moved to Vladimir but remained in their regional seats and secured their local princely houses. Thus, Alexander’s brother Yaroslav (grand prince of Vladimir, 1264–71) founded the house of Tver, and Alexander’s son Daniel founded the house of Moscow.
After the Mongol invasion (1240) the Russian princes were obliged to seek a patent from the Mongol khan in order to rule as grand prince. Rivalry for the patent, as well as for leadership in the grand principality of Vladimir, developed among the princely houses, particularly those of Tver and Moscow. Gradually, the princes of Moscow became dominant, forming the grand principality of Moscow (Muscovy), which they ruled until their male line died out in 1598.
What made you want to look up "Rurik Dynasty"? Please share what surprised you most...

There are really two decisions that must be made regarding the hidden layers: how many hidden layers to actually have in the neural network and how many neurons will be in each of these layers. We will first examine how to determine the number of hidden layers to use with the neural network.
Problems that require two hidden layers are rarely encountered. However, neural networks with two hidden layers can represent functions with any kind of shape. There is currently no theoretical reason to use neural networks with any more than two hidden layers. In fact, for many practical problems, there is no reason to use any more than one hidden layer. Table 5.1 summarizes the capabilities of neural network architectures with various hidden layers.
Table 5.1: Determining the Number of Hidden Layers
|Number of Hidden Layers||Result|
|none||Only capable of representing linear separable functions or decisions.|
|1||Can approximate any function that contains a continuous mapping from one finite space to another.|
|2||Can represent an arbitrary decision boundary to arbitrary accuracy with rational activation functions and can approximate any smooth mapping to any accuracy.|
Deciding the number of hidden neuron layers is only a small part of the problem. You must also determine how many neurons will be in each of these hidden layers. This process is covered in the next section.
Deciding the number of neurons in the hidden layers is a very important part of deciding your overall neural network architecture. Though these layers do not directly interact with the external environment, they have a tremendous influence on the final output. Both the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each of these hidden layers must be carefully considered.
Using too few neurons in the hidden layers will result in something called underfitting. Underfitting occurs when there are too few neurons in the hidden layers to adequately detect the signals in a complicated data set.
Using too many neurons in the hidden layers can result in several problems. First, too many neurons in the hidden layers may result in overfitting. Overfitting occurs when the neural network has so much information processing capacity that the limited amount of information contained in the training set is not enough to train all of the neurons in the hidden layers. A second problem can occur even when the training data is sufficient. An inordinately large number of neurons in the hidden layers can increase the time it takes to train the network. The amount of training time can increase to the point that it is impossible to adequately train the neural network. Obviously, some compromise must be reached between too many and too few neurons in the hidden layers.
There are many rule-of-thumb methods for determining the correct number of neurons to use in the hidden layers, such as the following:
These three rules provide a starting point for you to consider. Ultimately, the selection of an architecture for your neural network will come down to trial and error. But what exactly is meant by trial and error? You do not want to start throwing random numbers of layers and neurons at your network. To do so would be very time consuming. Chapter 8, “Pruning a Neural Network” will explore various ways to determine an optimal structure for a neural network.

Friday Flyby May Trigger 'Asteroid-Quake' on Space Rock
The close flyby of Earth by asteroid 2012 DA14 on Friday (Feb. 15) could trigger a quake on the space rock, scientists say.
"We are going to be looking closely for evidence of seismic activity on 2014 DA14 as it passes by," Richard Binzel, a professor of planetary science at MIT, said in a statement. "This is the first case of an object coming close enough to experience quakes and where we have enough notice to plan observations."
During the unprecedented close approach, 2012 DA14, which is about half the size of a football field, will cruise within 17,200 miles (27,700 kilometers) of the planet. It poses no threat to Earth, but the flyby marks the first time scientists like Binzel have had the chance to observe such a big space rock this close-up.
Binzel believes many near-Earth asteroids get shaken up when they fly too closely to our planet's gravitational field, which could help explain why some space rocks seem to shed a worn-looking outer coating caused by "space weathering." [Asteroid 2012 DA14's Flyby: Complete Coverage]
"As asteroids move through space, they slowly turn dark red," Binzel said. "This phenomenon, called space weathering, is caused by long exposure to cosmic rays and solar radiation. For decades, however, we have known about a handful of small asteroids that looked [light and fresh]; they were not space-weathered."
Binzel and his colleagues calculated the orbits of those squeaky-clean asteroids and found out what they all had in common: close encounters with Earth in the past million years.
"Gravitational forces during the flybys can stretch, rattle and torque these asteroids, causing dark, space-weathered material on the surface to be overturned, revealing the fresh stuff underneath," Binzel said.
Compared to quakes on Earth, asteroid-quakes would look quite minor. Binzel said an astronaut floating next to an asteroid during a tremor might notice its surface sway by a few centimeters or spot "gentle avalanches" on the space rock's steepest crater slopes.
"These asteroids experience [seismic activity] in the milli- to micro-g range," he said. "That might not sound like much, but remember these are small bodies. Gravity is not very strong, so just a little shaking or stretching goes a long way."
Binzel and his colleagues will be looking for changes in the color, spin, shape and reflectivity of asteroid 2012 DA14 as it passes by.
SPACE.com is providing complete coverage of asteroid 2012 DA14's flyby. Visit SPACE.com on Friday for day-long coverage as the asteroid buzzes Earth.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MORE FROM SPACE.com

The World Heritage Committee,
1. Having examined Documents WHC-08/32.COM/8B and WHC-08/32.COM/INF.8B1,
2. Inscribes the Al-Hijr Archaeological Site (Madâin Sâlih), Saudi Arabia,on the World Heritage List on the basis of criteria (ii) and (iii);
3. Adopts the following Statement of Outstanding Universal Value:
The archaeological site of Al-Hijr is a major site of the Nabataean civilisation, in the south of its zone of influence. Its integrity is remarkable and it is well conserved. It includes a major ensemble of tombs and monuments, whose architecture and decorations are directly cut into the sandstone.
It bears witness to the encounter between a variety of decorative and architectural influences (Assyrian, Egyptian, Phoenician, Hellenistic), and the epigraphic presence of several ancient languages (Lihyanite, Talmudic, Nabataean, Greek, Latin).
It bears witness to the development of Nabataean agricultural techniques using a large number of artificial wells in rocky ground. The wells are still in use.
The ancient city of Hegra/Al-Hijr bears witness to the international caravan trade during late Antiquity.
Criterion (ii): The site of Al-Hijr is located at a meeting point between various civilisations of late Antiquity, on a trade route between the Arabian Peninsula, the Mediterranean world and Asia. It bears outstanding witness to important cultural exchanges in architecture, decoration, language use and the caravan trade. Although the Nabataean city was abandoned during the pre-Islamic period, the route continued to play its international role for caravans and then for the pilgrimage to Mecca, up to its modernisation by the construction of the railway at the start of the 20th century.
Criterion (iii): The site of Al-Hijr bears unique testimony to the Nabataean civilisation, between the 2nd and 3rd centuries BC and the pre-Islamic period, and particularly in the 1st century AD. It is an outstanding illustration of the architectural style specific to the Nabataeans, consisting of monuments directly cut into the rock, and with facades bearing a large number of decorative motifs. The site includes a set of wells, most of which were sunk into the rock, demonstrating the Nabataeans' mastery of hydraulic techniques for agricultural purposes.
The testimony borne by Al-Hijr to the Nabataean civilisation is of outstanding integrity and authenticity, because of its early abandonment and the benefit over a very long period of highly favourable climatic conditions.
The State Party has begun to set up an extremely comprehensive Local Management Unit, and this process is now under way. The announced management plan should enable satisfactory protection of the property. With this in mind, the plan should organise systematic monitoring of the conservation of the site, and prepare a project for the presentation of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property for the benefit both of visitors and of the population of the region.
4. Requests the State Party to:
- a) implement the established management plan;
- b) in the framework of the management plan and the Local Management Unit, conduct regular monitoring;
5. Recommends that:
- a) the new framework law on the Kingdom's Antiquities and Museums be promulgated;
- b) care be taken to ensure that the development of reception facilities at the property and future developments in the wider surroundings of the property do not impact on the expression of the property's Outstanding Universal Value.

: Grade-2 English Games
Sight Words is a simple vocabulary and memory exercise for kids. It is designed to introduce kids to some common dolch sight words. Early readers recognize sight words from having memorized them. In this exercise, kids will learn to recognize and recall dolch sight words by flipping the cards and making a pair of the matching words. Kids will enjoy as they sharpen their memory skills and build their vocabulary. This will help kids in improving their reading skills also.

Last week a curious, free release popped up on Steam: Moonbase Alpha, a NASA-funded game where up to six players can team up in order to save a near-future Lunar base crippled by a meteor strike. The game is just the first release from NASA's Learning Technologies program, which aims to help raise interest in the space program through gaming.
Ars spoke with Daniel Laughlin, project manager of Learning Technologies, to learn more about the game and what we can expect to see in the future.
The game was codeveloped by Army Game Studio and Virtual Heroes, two of the leading developers of "serious games." And according to Laughlin, NASA's decision to move into the game space was influenced a great deal by the success of the studios' previous releases. "The project was inspired in part by America's Army," Laughlin told Ars. "It started as an effort to prove we could create a commercial quality game using NASA content that is fun. NASA was looking for a project at the same time the Army Game Studio was looking to branch out from America’s Army. It helped that Army Game Studio and NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center are co-located at Redstone Arsenal in Alabama. Virtual Heroes has a history for with America’s Army so we were excited to see them selected to support the Army Game Studio on the game."
Though development of the game didn't start until last year, Laughlin actually began researching the prospect of using games as an educational tool back in 2004. The main impetus for the project was the decline in interest in STEM education—science, technology, engineering and mathematics—amongst the American population.
"The US is facing a crisis in technical fields," explained Laughlin. "There are not enough students studying science, technology, engineering and mathematics to fill our national needs in those areas. NASA literally cannot function without STEM graduates. The big goals for NASA Education are to get more students into STEM fields of study and graduating into STEM careers. It’s also the president’s goal with the Educate to Innovate initiative. Moonbase Alpha was developed in support of those goals."
In addition to funding the game, NASA also had a hand in ensuring that it was as accurate as possible, going so far as to have several engineers and scientists review the game for accuracy. Meanwhile, all of the models for the structures, vehicles and space suits were based on NASA’s lunar architecture plans.
The game itself only takes around 20 minutes to play, and despite its sophisticated 3D visuals—the game utilizes Unreal Engine 3—Moonbase Alpha is really just a proof of concept. NASA has another, much more ambitious project in the works: an MMO tentatively titled Astronaut: Moon, Mars and Beyond.
And, according to Laughlin, the success of Moonbase Alpha could have a big affect on the development of the MMO.
"Summaries of the player feedback from Moonbase Alpha will be going to the design team for Astronaut: Moon, Mars and Beyond," he told Ars. "Even more importantly, Moonbase Alpha has the potential to make or break the MMO project. A big negative reaction would mean revisiting the rationale for the MMO and reconsidering the project. A big positive reaction will give momentum and support to Astronaut: Moon, Mars and Beyond."
Moonbase Alpha is currently available as a free download on Steam.

NICAEA, ARABIC CANONS OF, name applied to several series of canons that are missing in the Greek or Latin canonical collections. They appear to have been reworked from the Syriac, at least in part. In the latter language the texts attributed to the Council of NICAEA in 325 are said to have come from the pen of the bishop Maruta of Maipherkat (in Arabic Mayyafaraqin, today a town in Turkey). At all events, who the translator, or rather the adapter, was is not known, nor at what date the canons were adopted by the Copts. It will be noted—this is not a proof that they were previously unknown—that in his Nomocanon the twelfth-century patriarch GABRIEL II IBN TURAYK knew only the twenty canons counted in the Greek collections, while MIKHA’IL, bishop of Damietta, cited two series of canons of Nicaea, one of twenty canons and one of eighty-four. Given that the grouping of these texts diverges greatly in the manuscripts, it has seemed better to follow the exposition given by Abu al-Barakat IBN KABAR in his religious encyclopedia Misbah al-Zulmah. This passage was translated into French in J. M. Vansleb's Histoire de l'église d'Alexandrie (1677, pp. 265ff.).
Ibn Kabar divides the documents attributed to the Council of Nicaea into three books. In the first book (according to him, it is the second in the Greek collections) he groups a history of CONSTANTINE I and his mother, Helena, as well as a presentation of his incentives for the convocation of the council, which forms a kind of introduction. The collection of Macarius, a monk of Dayr Abu Maqar in the fourteenth century, adds at this point a list of heresies and sects and a list of the 318 bishops who participated. Then comes the series of twenty authentic canons, according to the Melchite recension, followed by the Coptic series of thirty (sometimes thirty-three) canons concerning anchorites, monks, and the clergy. W. Riedel (1968, pp. 38, 1791) asked if this was not a reworking of the Syntagma ad monachos attributed to Saint Athanasius.
As to the second book, Ibn Kabar tells us, "The Melchites and the Nestorians have translated [the second book] and the Jacobites have adopted it." It is a series of eighty-four (sometimes eighty) canons. This division would perhaps indicate that the original text was continuous.
The third book contains the "Books of the Kings," which are themselves divided into four books and also exist independently. This is a collection of the legislation enacted by the Byzantine emperors Constantine, Theodosius, and Leo. Here these canons are attributed to the Council of Nicaea. It appears that the Christians of the Orient adopted these texts in defiance of the Muslims, who referred to the Shari‘ah, or Muslim sacred law, for guidance in purely civil matters such as marriages, inheritances, and the like.
These texts provide numerous translations. The first book gives a history of the emperor Constantine and his mother and relates the story of the council, as well as the reasons for the convocation of the bishops. It includes the twenty authentic canons followed by the thirty canons called Arabic and gives the history, or prehistory, of the Council of Nicaea in a rather free Latin translation by Abraham Ecchellensis (Ibrahim al-Haqilani), a celebrated Maronite deacon. The "Thirty Canons Relative to the Monks and Clergy" are given in Latin by the same author in a paraphrase rather than a true translation. The list of heresies is given in German translation by A. Harnack (1899, pp. 14-71). The list of the bishops according to the Coptic texts is examined by, among others, F. Haase (1920, pp. 81-92). As for the eighty-four canons, they will be found in a paraphrase by Abraham Ecchellensis in J. D. Mansi (cols. 1029-1049).
The enormous mass of the documents relating, rightly or wrongly, to the first council, which played a considerable role in the East more than anywhere else, is organized in the collection of Macarius into four books. The difference between his division and that of Ibn Kabar is that Macarius' second book comprises not all the eighty-four canons but only the first thirty-two. Canons forty-eight to seventy-three, combined with the thirty concerning anchorites, monks, and clergy, form the third book, the fourth containing only the Coptic recension of the twenty official canons. The "Four Books of the Kings" have with him a place apart.
The Arabic Canons of Nicaea are, in the strict sense, the eighty-four canons adapted from the Syriac by the Melchites and borrowed by the Copts. In addition to this series of eighty-four canons in Arabic literature, the literature in the Coptic language contains a series that has not survived in Arabic translation, called Gnômès. It is credited to the Council of Nicaea and gives moral exhortations, which probably reflect the discipline in force in the fourth century in the church of Alexandria. It was published and translated into French by E. Revillout (1873, pp. 210-88; and 1875, pp. 5-77, 209-266).
Click tabs to swap between content that is broken into logical sections.

Delahoyde & Hughes
A 6th-century BCE Greek philosopher and mathematician, originally from Samos (an island off the coast of Asia Minor settled by the Greeks), and born about 570 BCE, he left home around 530 BCE to escape the tyranny of the autocrat Polycrates. He lived in southern Italy, influencing city politics until the turn of the century when the citizens revolted against his influence and forced him to settle in Metapontum instead. Followers venerated him and they formed some sort of religious order. Although he did not set down his ideas in written form, Pythagorean centers sprang up throughout the Greek mainland during the 5th century BCE, including in Thebes and Athens, so he certainly influenced Socrates and therefore Plato. Legends include an instance of a superhuman voice wishing Pythagoras good morning as he was crossing the river Casas, and his being able to appear in both Croton and Metapontum on the same day at the same hour.
Pythagoras' concepts included the mathematical order of the cosmos, and he may have been led to this assessment from the mathematical order of music (consonants of octaves, fifths, and fourths being produced by simple ratios in the lengths of the vibrating strings). We know "the square of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the sides containing the right angle." But Pythagoras had an all-inclusive vision, which also included the "music of the spheres" (the sound that no doubt had to be produced by the planets encircling earth).
Pythagoras believed in reincarnation and claimed to remember previous incarnations. [Transmigration of souls is not a Greek leaning, so one school of thought says Pythagoras travelled east beyond Egypt and came back with the notion (but they say this of Jesus too).] A later report claims he told followers that he has once been Aethalides, a son of Hermes, who allowed him one wish excluding immortality. He wished to remember what happened to him, alive and dead. One of his remembered incarnations was as Euphorbus, who was wounded by Menelaus. Afterwards, he became Hermotimus, who in a temple of Apollo identified the shield of Menelaus (dedicated to Apollo when he sailed back from Troy). His next incarnation was as Pyrrhus the Delian fisherman, and then Pythagoras.There is a famous story that he once stopped an animal from being beaten because he insisted he recognized the voice of a dead friend. (I wonder if that might not have been merely a humane device to stop the beating of an animal.) (Asimov 535)Due partly to his belief in metempsychosis, he opposed the taking of life, the eating of flesh, and association with those who benefit by the slaughter business. He supposedly coined the term "Philosophy" first as a word to signify the love and pursuit of wisdom, which helps the soul bring itself into attunement with the cosmos.
- Do you agree with the philosophy of Pythagoras?Without transmigration of souls as a foundation, Metamorphoses still works because of its notions of the earth being generous, its commentary on pollution, and in general its environmentalism which seems almost modern in essence.
- But we don't sacrifice to the gods anymore.Uh huh, well, in celebration of the Pilgrims infiltrating North America we butcher countless turkeys; and there is a trend of celebrating the birth and rebirth of our Lord and Saviour with roast pigs; and there's this sanctimony about grilling ground flesh in honor of "the boys" who died in the big war; and we certainly sacrifice millions of animals now to the "god" Science. So what we consider "religion" may have changed more than the nature of the practices (or the excuses).
- The final connection to all the previous books?Metamorphoses celebrates the joy of change, of the natural world being animated, and in the ongoing process of wondrous creation. The stories are intended to inspire respect for the wonders of nature (however based in speciesistic assumptions that stories must be about humans). In this ongoing creation and active context, we have responsibilities too -- according to Pythagoras. The world, its flora, and its fauna: all have past lives and life stories worthy of some respect.
Ferguson, Kitty. The Music of Pythagoras. NY: Walker & Co., 2008.
Orpheus: Roman Mythology

The wide variety of national origins and the USA's relatively short history has resulted in a rich blend of cultural and traditional customs. All Americans are renowned for their openness and friendliness to visitors. As a rule, dress is casual; although smart restaurants, hotels and clubs insist on suits and ties or long dresses. Smoking is becoming increasingly unpopular and is often considered offensive; in fact, it's forbidden on city transport and often in public buildings. There will usually be a notice where no smoking is requested, and most restaurants have smoking and non-smoking sections.
Most people are Protestant with significant Roman Catholic, Jewish and ethnic minorities.
Archaeological finds suggest that Florida had been inhabited for thousands of years before any European settlements. Juan Ponce de Leon, a Spanish conquistador, named Florida in honour of his discovery of the land in 1513, during Pascua Florida - a Spanish term for the Easter season.
Over the following century, both the Spanish and French established settlements with varying degrees of success. The area of Spanish Florida diminished with the development of English colonies to the north and French to the west. Great Britain gained control of Florida diplomatically in 1763 through the Peace of Paris, but Spain regained it after Britain's defeat by the American colonies and the subsequent Treaty of Versailles (1783). Finally, in 1819, Spain ceded Florida to the United States in exchange for the American renunciation of any claims on Texas. On March 3, 1845, Florida became the 27th state of the United States of America.
Until the mid-twentieth century Florida was the least populated Southern state. However, the local climate - helped by the growing availability of air conditioning - made the state a desirable location, and migration sharply increased the population. Economic prosperity led to the Florida land boom of the 1920s, which brought a brief period of intense development before the Great Depression brought it all to an end. Florida's economy didn't fully recover until World War II. But today, it's the most populous state in the South besides Texas, and the fourth most populous in the United States.
Before the American Civil War, when slavery was legal, African Americans made up nearly half of the state's population. This proportion declined over the next century, as many moved north in the Great Migration while large numbers of northern whites moved to the state. Recently, the state's percentage of black residents has begun to grow again. Today, large concentrations of black residents can be found in northern Florida (especially in Jacksonville, Gainesville and Pensacola), the Tampa Bay area, and South Florida (where their numbers have been bolstered by significant immigration from Haiti and Jamaica).
Florida's Hispanic population includes large communities of Cuban Americans in Miami and Tampa, Puerto Ricans in Tampa and Orlando, and Central American migrant workers in inland West-Central and South Florida. The Hispanic community continues to grow more affluent and mobile.
Whites of all ethnic groups are present in all areas of the state. Those of British ancestry can be found in large numbers in the coastal cities, there's a large German population in South West Florida, a sizeable Italian community in the Miami area, and white Floridians of longer-present generations in parts of inland and northern Florida. Native white Floridians, especially those who have descended from long-time Florida families, affectionately refer to themselves as "Florida Crackers."
As far as language is concerned, around 75% of Florida residents speak only English at home, while around 15% speak Spanish. Haitian Creole is the third most spoken language at around 2%.
Orlando holiday resorts
|International Drive Holidays||36 Hotels, Villas + Apartments|
|Kissimmee Holidays||21 Hotels, Villas + Apartments|
|Walt Disney World Resort Holidays||17 Hotels, Villas + Apartments|
|Lake Buena Vista Holidays||9 Hotels, Villas + Apartments|
|Disney Area Holidays||6 Hotels, Villas + Apartments|

From Sioux Falls to Rapid City, fire weather meteorologists are watching conditions closely. And until we receive widespread, heavy moisture they'll be monitoring what is known as the Keetch-Byram Drought Index or KBDI.
It measures the amount of precipitation needed to return the soil to full saturation. It uses a system rating of zero to 800, which represents the moisture amount of zero to eight inches of water. It's what is needed to reduce the drought index to zero, which is saturation.
Much of KELOLAND is at 500 or above. The KBDI of 400 to 600 is typical of late summer and early fall.
When it gets to 600 and above, that's when intense, deep burning fires can be expected with an emphasis on downwind new fires occuring.
The highest spots are in south central, north central and northeast South Dakota. Just this week, the area near Lake Andes is also considered at 800.
It's an important number to know this time of year, whether you're harvesting or off road for hunting.
© 2012 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.

- Media Center
- Library Overview
- Library User Information
- Collections Overview
- Library Catalog
- Programs & Services
- Research Resources
- Collections Online
- Rights & Reproductions
- Donations and Support
- Projects & Partnerships
- Library News & Updates
- Plan a Visit
- Support MdHS
Maryland’s Largest Civil War Exhibit Now Open
Baltimore, Maryland (April 21, 2011) -The Maryland Historical Society’s (MdHS) Museum opened Maryland’s largest and most comprehensive Civil War exhibit on April 16. The impact of the war on the people of Maryland is being told in personal terms in “Divided Voices: Maryland in the Civil War.” The largest Civil War exhibit in the museum’s 167-year history occupies over 5,000 square feet and tells the story of a tragedy in three acts: the romantic war, the real war and the long reunion. For more information on this 150th anniversary of the Civil War exhibit go to www.mdhs.org or call 410-685-3750.
The exhibit takes visitors back in time with 3-D videos that leads them back to 1861. There are also be interactive exhibits designed for children and adults as well as storyteller guides in period costumes. On Saturdays and Sundays the Maryland Historical Society Players perform short vignettes of major events that took place in Maryland. Admission - $6 adults, $5 seniors, 3-18 $4, under 3 free. Museum is free on first Thursday of each month.
The romantic war was the first year or so of the conflict, when both sides saw the war as an adventure and patriotic duty. The real war over the next three years of bloodshed left hundreds of thousands of young men dead. The long reunion focuses on the reuniting of the country, which some say is not complete to this day.
Maryland sent 60,000 men to serve in the Union Army. Over 20,000 more served in the Confederacy. The first bloodshed of the war took place in Baltimore. The human stories of these men and women are told by bringing letters to life with today’s technology, as well as the display of hundreds of rare objects, many of which have not been shown publicly since the 19th century. Museum visitors see Robert E. Lee’s camp chair, John Brown’s carbine, Abraham Lincoln memorabilia as well as compelling and heartbreaking photographs of the period.
Visitors will learn of Maryland’s major battles like Antietam and of lesser-known battles like the Battles of Monocacy and Silver Spring. They will come to understand how the soldiers suffered. More than 600,000 men died in the Civil War, compared to 400,000 American deaths in World War II. It was the deadliest war in American history.
Museum goers will discover why the first widely-used bullet made this one of history’s bloodiest wars and how this spurred advances in medical care. Triage, the ambulance corps, field hospitals and many significant surgical advances all began during the Civil War.
The war’s impact on Maryland’s citizens is revealed. Baltimore, for example, was under martial law and occupied by Union troops for the entire war. Lincoln’s suspension of the writ of habeas corpus ( people can’t be jailed without trial or a hearing) was famously used against John Merryman of Cockeysville, Maryland. Lincoln was willing to break the law to keep Maryland from joining the Confederacy and cutting the capital off from the North. The State legislature moved from Annapolis to Frederick to keep Maryland from joining the Confederacy.
Visitors also learn the important role that African Americans played in the war. Over 10,000 African Americans served in the Union Army. Harriet Tubman served as a spy for the Union Army. Black soldiers such as Christian Fleetwood of Baltimore led African American troops into battle and earned America’s highest military honor.
Women’s growing role in society during those years will be revealed. They began serving as nurses for the first time. Women on the home front mourned their dead, creating the “Vacant Chair” tradition at dinner tables in Maryland and elsewhere.
The Civil War exhibit will run for the next four years with annual updates. Visitors to the museum will also find major exhibits of famous Maryland paintings, silver, furniture, maritime history and children’s toys from the last 300 years.
The Maryland Historical Society was founded in 1844 and is the world’s largest museum and library dedicated to the history of Maryland. Occupying an entire city block in the Mount Vernon district of Baltimore, the society’s mission is to “collect, preserve, and interpret the objects and materials that reflect Maryland’s diverse cultural heritage.” The Society is home to the original manuscript of the Star Spangled Banner and publishes a quarterly titled “Maryland Historical Magazine.” More information about the Maryland Historical Society can be found online at http://www.mdhs.org/
Three Union soldiers are stationed on Federal Hill overlooking what is now the Inner Harbor of Baltimore (1862 photo). Their cannon is trained on the city as Baltimore was under martial law throughout the Civil War. Lincoln was afraid that Maryland would secede from the Union cutting Washington D.C. off from the North. The background is a contemporary photo of Baltimore from the same angle. The historic photo is part of the Maryland Historical Society's Civil War exhibit, Divided Voices: Maryland in the Civil War, the largest and most comprehensive display on the subject in the state.

Dora Bas Rivka Silver O'H
The Sideways Ark
G-d told Moshe to go among the Jews and accept donations for building the Mishkan (Tabernacle). These donations could consist of gold, silver, copper, colored wool and other fabrics, skins, wood, gems, oil and spices. G-d would instruct Moshe in building the Mishkan, where His Presence would reside.
The first vessel G-d described was the Aron (Ark), a wooden box overlaid with gold. There were rings on the corners, through which poles were placed to carry the Aron; these poles were never to be removed. (The Ark is popularly depicted with the poles running along the longer sides but, really, the poles ran along the shorter ends. See Talmud Menachos 98a-b).

LACMA May Fund The Fading Watts Towers
Due to a severe budget crisis, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art is interested in stepping into the breach as curator and conservator of the Watts Towers this summer to maintain the historic landmark.
The Towers were built by Italian immigrant construction worker Sabato Rodia in his spare time over a period of 33 years, from 1921 to 1954. He created the framework of steel, wire and concrete and ornamented the three main spires and their 14 surrounding sculptural elements with colorful bits of broken glass, pottery and seashells. His work is an example of non-traditional vernacular architecture and American Naïve art. Article LA Times.

Mercury findings raise new questions
One of a kind New data from NASA's Messenger spacecraft has surprised scientists showing the planet Mercury has some of the most unusual internal dynamics ever seen.
The findings, which will appear in the journal Science, mean the planet closest to the Sun has evolved differently compared to the other terrestrial planets in the solar system.
After its first full year in orbit around Mercury, Messenger has returned a detailed picture of the planet's northern hemisphere suggesting a deep reservoir of high-density material exists below a thin crust surface.
Using the Messenger data, Dr Maria Zuber, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and colleagues created a detailed elevation model showing the planet's northern hemisphere is far flatter than Mars or the Moon.
They also found extensive lowlands and a vast northern volcanic plain.
The researchers were also surprised to discover that the floor of several craters are tilted. For example, the 1500-kilometre wide Caloris impact crater is tilted to the extent that parts of its floor are now taller than the rim.
Unlike the Moon
"Prior to Messenger's observations, many scientists believed Mercury was much like the Moon," says Zuber.
"We thought it cooled off very early in solar system history, and has been a dead planet throughout most of its evolution."
Now Zuber and colleagues say there's compelling evidence that Mercury must have sustained intense geophysical activity for most of its history.
Messenger's also provided scientists with the first measurements of Mercury's gravity field showing the planet's crust is thicker at low latitudes and thinner toward the northern polar region.
They believe Mercury's outer shell is denser than previously thought, indicating a deep layer of iron sulfide below the surface.
The data also suggests Mercury has a huge iron rich liquid outer core and perhaps a solid inner core, together comprising about 85 per cent of the planet's radius.
By comparison Earth's core is about half our planet's radius.
The data means Mercury's mantle and crust occupy only the outer 15 percent or so of the planet's radius giving it a different internal structure compared to other terrestrial planets.
Strange and interesting world
Planetary scientist Dr Craig O'Neill from Sydney's Macquarie University says the new data shows Mercury is a far more interesting planet than previously thought.
"It seems the internal dynamics of Mercury is doing a lot more to the planet's crust than we gave it credit for," says O'Neill.
"The tilted crater floors are interesting and we don't really know what would have caused this."
According to O'Neill the discovery of what may be a liquid core, could also explain the magnetic field detected around Mercury.
"We used to think it was just residual traces of magnetism in the rocks," says O'Neill.
"But thanks to Messenger we now know there's something going on in Mercury's core."

This week I was visited by a woman inventor who created a way to reduce one seemingly small contributor to the landfill. You know those little tiny plastic spoons they give you in the ice cream shop so you can taste lots of flavors before you make a selection or that are distributed along with little samples of a new soup in the supermarket? Well they're not reused, recycled, or biodegradable.
That's why Peggy Cross developed the EcoTaster (shown left),a paperboard tasting spoon made from recycled materials that will decompose in compost in just two weeks.
For full-size portions, she also offers the EcoTensil (shown right) which is made of the same type of paperboard as a milk carton and will also biodegrade, although a little bit more slowly.
Cross also pointed out that these made-in-the-USA tools are made of less material and take up less space than other disposable utensils (see photo at left), making for a much smaller carbon footprint. Stonyfield Farms recently used the spoons for yogurt samplings at the US Open tennis championship--we hope they start popping up in supermarkets, trade shows, and sports events all over the country. Voskos Yogurt, Solgar Vitamin and Herb Company, and Schoolhouse Kitchen are other companies that are already using them.
Here at GHRI we've demonstrated our commitment to the environment with our Green Good Housekeeping Seal which helps you make wise choices for the earth, when you're out shopping.

Crew: Filipchenko, Grechko. Soyuz s/n 18 would have been the active spacecraft of the first dual-spacecraft test of the Kontakt docking system. A crew transfer using the Krechet spacesuit would presumably have taken place. Backup crew: Lazarev, Makarov.
Soyuz s/n 18 would have been the active spacecraft of the first dual-spacecraft test of the Kontakt docking system. A crew transfer using the Krechet spacesuit would presumably have taken place.
By December 1970, there were four crews in training for two pairs of Soyuz spacecraft to be launched to test the Kontakt lunar rendezvous/docking system. During the Salyut 1 mission, in June 1971, six crews were identified and assigned to specific Soyuz spacecraft serial numbers for these tests. These would have been launched in three pairs beginning in early 1972, depending on the schedule for the DOS-2 station. In the event, the death of the Soyuz 11 crew, and subsequent redesign of the Soyuz spacecraft, led to these Kontakt missions being cancelled and the whole Kontakt test series being reformulated with new crew members in early 1973. Soyuz Kontakt 1 would have been the active spacecraft of the first mission.
AKA: Soyuz s/n 18.
More... - Chronology...
First Launch: 1972 Early.
Lazarev Lazarev, Vasili Grigoryevich (1928-1990) Russian physician cosmonaut. Flew on Soyuz 12, Soyuz 18-1. Survived first manned spaceflight abort during launch. More...
Filipchenko Filipchenko, Anatoli Vassilyevich (1928-) Russian pilot cosmonaut. Flew on Soyuz 7, Soyuz 16. More...
Grechko Grechko, Georgi Mikhailovich (1931-) Russian engineer cosmonaut. Flew on Soyuz 17, Salyut 6 EO-1, Salyut 7 EP-5. More...
Makarov Makarov, Oleg Grigoryevich (1933-2003) Russian engineer cosmonaut. Flew on Soyuz 12, Soyuz 18-1, Salyut 6 EP-1, Salyut 6 EO-5. Survived first manned spaceflight abort during launch. More...
Lunar L3 The Soviet program to land a man on the moon and return him safely to earth. More...
Soyuz sn 18 Chronology
1971 June 15 -
- Soyuz Kontakt and DOS-2 crew assignments made. - .
Nation: USSR. Related Persons: Filipchenko; Grechko; Lazarev; Makarov; Vorobyov; Yazdovsky; Yakovlev; Porvatkin; Kovalyonok; Isakov; Shcheglov; Leonov; Rukavishnikov; Kolodin; Gubarev; Sevastyanov; Voronov; Klimuk; Artyukhin; Bykovsky; Alekseyev, Semyon; Gorbatko. Program: Salyut; Lunar L3. Flight: Soyuz 11; Soyuz 12 / DOS 1; Soyuz sn 18; Soyuz sn 19; Soyuz sn 20; Soyuz sn 21; Soyuz sn 22; Soyuz sn 23; DOS 2-1; DOS 2-2; DOS 2-3; DOS 2-4. Spacecraft: Soyuz Kontakt; Salyut 1. Crews are formed for six Soyuz (Kontakt?) flights. Soyuz s/n 18 - Filipchenko and Grechko; Soyuz s/n 19 - Lazarev and Makarov; Soyuz s/n 20 - Vorobyov and Yazdovsky; Soyuz s/n 21 - Yakovlelv and Porvatkin; Soyuz s/n 22 - Kovalyonok and Isakov; Soyuz s/n 23 - Shcheglov and [illegible]. Five crews are training for Salyut flights: Crew 1, Leonov, Rukavishnikov, and Kolodin; Crew 2, Gubarev, Sevastyanov, and Voronov. TsKBEM engineer cosmonauts are to be selected will round out the last three crews, but VVS members will be: Crew 3, Klimuk, Artyukhin; Crew 4, Bykovskyy, Alekseyev; Crew 5, Gorbatko. Leonov and Gubarev will have their crews fully ready for Soyuz 12 by 30 June, for a launch date between 15-20 July. Leonov is asking to go to East Germany for two to three days in the first week of July. Kamanin is fully opposed to this - he is thinkng not of his upcoming flight, but the exhibition of his paintings at the Prezdensk Gallery!
1972 Early -
- Soyuz sn 18 (cancelled) - .
Crew: Filipchenko; Grechko. Nation: USSR. Related Persons: Filipchenko; Grechko. Program: Lunar L3. Flight: Soyuz sn 18. Spacecraft: Soyuz Kontakt. Summary: Soyuz s/n 18 would have been the active spacecraft of the first dual launch to test the Kontakt lunar orbit rendezvous system. A crew transfer using the Krechet spacesuit would presumably have taken place..
Home - Browse - Contact
© / Conditions for Use

Ismaili Community: History
The Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims, generally known as the Ismailis, belong to the Shia branch of Islam. The Shia form one of the two major branches of Islam, the Sunni being the other. The Ismailis live in over 25 different countries, mainly in Central and South Asia, Africa and the Middle East, as well as in Europe, North America and Australia.
As Muslims, the Ismailis affirm the fundamental Islamic testimony of truth, the Shahada, that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) is His Messenger. They believe that Muhammad was the last and final Prophet of Allah, and that the Holy Quran, Allah's final message to mankind, was revealed through him. Muslims hold this revelation to be the culmination of the message that had been revealed through other Prophets of the Abrahamic tradition before Muhammad, including Abraham, Moses and Jesus, all of whom Muslims revere as Prophets of Allah.
In common with other Shia Muslims, the Ismailis affirm that after the Prophet's death, Hazrat Ali, the Prophet's cousin and son-in-law, became the first Imam - the spiritual leader - of the Muslim community and that this spiritual leadership (known as Imamat) continues thereafter by hereditary succession through Ali and his wife Fatima, the Prophet's daughter. Succession to Imamat, according to Shia doctrine and tradition, is by way of Nass (Designation), it being the absolute prerogative of the Imam of the Time to appoint his successor from amongst any of his male descendants.
His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan is the 49th hereditary Imam of the Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims. He was born on 13 December 1936 in Geneva, son of Prince Aly Khan and Princess Tajuddawlah Aly Khan and spent his early childhood in Nairobi, Kenya. He attended Le Rosey School in Switzerland for nine years and graduated from Harvard in 1959 with a BA (Honours) in Islamic History. He succeeded his grandfather Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah Aga Khan on 11 July 1957 at the age of 20.
Spiritual allegiance to the Imam and adherence to the Shia Imami Ismaili tariqah (persuasion) of Islam according to the guidance of the Imam of the Time, have engendered in the Ismaili Community an ethos of self-reliance, unity, and a common identity. In a number of the countries where they live, the Ismailis have evolved a well-defined institutional framework through which they have, under the leadership and guidance of the Imam, established schools, hospitals, health centres, housing societies and a variety of social and economic development institutions for the common good of all citizens regardless of their race or religion.
During the course of history, the Ismailis have, under the guidance of their Imams, made significant contributions to Islamic civilisations, the cultural, intellectual and religious life of Muslims. The University of al-Azhar and the Academy of Science, Dar al-Ilm, in Egypt and indeed the city of Cairo itself, are testimony to this contribution. Among the renowned philosophers, jurists, physicians, mathematicians, astronomers and scientists of the past who flourished under the patronage of Ismaili Imams are Qadi al-Numan, al-Kirmani, Ibn al-Haytham (al-Hazen), Nasir e-Khusraw and Nasir al-Din Tusi.

By A. M. Sullivan
CHAPTER IX. (continued)
From the Atlas and Cyclopedia of Ireland (1900)
It was to the rugged and desolate Hebrides that Columba turned his face when he accepted the terrible penance of Molaise. He bade farewell to his relatives, and, with a few monks who insisted on accompany him whithersoever he might go, launched his frail currochs from the northern shore. They landed first, or rather were carried by wind and stream, upon the little isle of Oronsay, close by Islay; and here for a moment they thought their future abode was to be. But when Columba, with the early morning, ascending the highest ground on the island, to take what he thought would be a harmless look toward the land of his heart, lo! on the dim horizon a faint blue ridge—the distant hills of Antrim! He averts his head and flies downward to the strand! Here they cannot stay, if his vow is to be kept. They betake them once more to the currochs, and steering further northward, eventually land upon Iona, thenceforth, till time shall be no more, to be famed as the sacred isle of Columba! Here landing, he ascended the loftiest of the hills upon the isle, and "gazing into the distance, found no longer any trace of Ireland upon the horizon." In Iona accordingly he resolved to make his home. The spot from whence St. Columba made this sorrowful survey is still called by the islesmen in the Gaelic tongue, Carn-cul-ri-Erinn, or the Cairn of Farewell—literally, The back turned on Ireland.
Writers without number have traced the glories of Iona. Here rose, as if by miracle, a city of churches; the isle became one vast monastery, and soon much too small for the crowds that still pressed thither. Then from the parent isle there went forth to the surrounding shores, and all over the mainland, off-shoot establishments and missionary colonies (all under the authority of Columba), until in time the Gospel light was ablaze on the hills of Albyn; and the names of St. Columba and Iona were on every tongue from Rome to the utmost limits of Europe!
"This man, whom we have seen so passionate, so irritable, so warlike and vindictive, became little by little the most gentle, the humblest, the most tender of friends and fathers. It was he, the great head of the Caledonian Church, who, kneeling before the strangers who came to Iona, or before the monks returning from their work, took off their shoes, washed their feet, and after having washed them, respectfully kissed them. But charity was still stronger than humility in that transfigured soul. No necessity, spiritual or temporal, found him indifferent. He devoted himself to the solace of all infirmities, all misery and pain, weeping often over those who did not weep for themselves.
"The work of transcription remained until his last day the occupation of his old age, as it had been the passion of his youth; it had such an attraction for him, and seemed to him so essential to a knowledge of the truth that, as we have already said, three hundred copies of the Holy Gospels, copied by his own hand, have been attributed to him."
But still Columba carried with him in his heart the great grief that made life for him a lengthened penance. "Far from having any prevision of the glory of Iona, his soul," says Montalembert, "was still swayed by a sentiment which never abandoned him—regret for his lost country. All his life he retained for Ireland the passionate tenderness of an exile, a love which displayed itself in the songs which have been preserved to us, and which date perhaps from the first moment of his exile. . . . 'Death in faultless Ireland is better than life without end in Albyn.' After this cry of despair follow strains more plaintive and submissive."
"But it was not only in these elegies, repeated and perhaps retouched by Irish bards and monks, but at each instant of his life, in season and out of season, that this love and passionate longing for his native country burst forth in words and musings; the narratives of his most trustworthy biographers are full of it. The most severe penance which he could have imagined for the guiltiest sinners who came to confess to him, was to impose upon them the same fate which he had voluntarily inflicted on himself—never to set foot again upon Irish soil! But when, instead of forbidding to sinners all access to that beloved isle, he had to smother his envy of those who hard the right and happiness to go there at their pleasure, he dared scarcely trust himself to name its name; and when speaking to his guests, or to the monks who were to return to Ireland, he would only say to them, 'you will return to the country that you love.' "
 "We are now," said Dr. Johnson, " treading that illustrious island which was once the luminary of the Caledonian regions; whence savage clans and roving barbarians derived the benefits of knowledge and the blessings of religion....Far from me and from my friends be such frigid philosophy as may conduct us indifferent and unmoved over any ground which has been dignified by wisdom, bravery, or virtue. That man is little to be envied whose patriotism would not gain force upon the plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among the ruins of Iona."—Boswell's "Tour to the Hebrides."
From a sad, comfortless childhood Giles Truelove developed into a reclusive and uncommunicative man whose sole passion was books. For so long they were the only meaning to his existence. But when fate eventually intervened to have the outside world intrude upon his life, he began to discover emotions that he never knew he had.
A story for the genuine booklover, penned by an Irish bookseller under the pseudonym of Ralph St. John Featherstonehaugh.
FREE download 23rd - 27th May
Join our mailing list to receive updates on new content on Library, our latest ebooks, and more.
You won't be inundated with emails! — we'll just keep you posted periodically — about once a monthish — on what's happening with the library.

Artificial intelligence research is ushering in a new era of sophisticated, mass-market transportation technology. While computers can already fly a passenger jet better than a trained human pilot, people are still faced with the dangerous yet tedious task of driving automobiles. Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) is the field that focuses on integrating information technology with vehicles and transportation infrastructure to make transportation safer, cheaper, and more efficient. Recent advances in ITS point to a future in which vehicles themselves handle the vast majority of the driving task. Once autonomous vehicles become popular, autonomous interactions amongst multiple vehicles will be possible. Current methods of vehicle coordination, which are all designed to work with human drivers, will be outdated. The bottleneck for roadway efficiency will no longer be the drivers, but rather the mechanism by which those drivers' actions are coordinated. While open-road driving is a well-studied and more-or-less-solved problem, urban traffic scenarios, especially intersections, are much more challenging.
We believe current methods for controlling traffic, specifically at intersections, will not be able to take advantage of the increased sensitivity and precision of autonomous vehicles as compared to human drivers. In this article, we suggest an alternative mechanism for coordinating the movement of autonomous vehicles through intersections. Drivers and intersections in this mechanism are treated as autonomous agents in a multiagent system. In this multiagent system, intersections use a new reservation-based approach built around a detailed communication protocol, which we also present. We demonstrate in simulation that our new mechanism has the potential to significantly outperform current intersection control technology -- traffic lights and stop signs. Because our mechanism can emulate a traffic light or stop sign, it subsumes the most popular current methods of intersection control. This article also presents two extensions to the mechanism. The first extension allows the system to control human-driven vehicles in addition to autonomous vehicles. The second gives priority to emergency vehicles without significant cost to civilian vehicles. The mechanism, including both extensions, is implemented and tested in simulation, and we present experimental results that strongly attest to the efficacy of this approach.

Diabetic Ketoacidosis Symptoms
The body's cells need two energy requirements to function. The blood stream delivers both oxygen and glucose to the front door of the cell. The the oxygen is invited in, but the glucose needs a key to open the door. The insulin molecule is that key. When we eat, the body senses the levels of glucose in the blood stream and secretes just the right amount of insulin from the pancreas so that cells and the body can function.
People with diabetes don't have the luxury of that auto-sensing. They need to balance the amount of glucose intake with the amount of insulin that needs to be injected. Not enough insulin and the glucose levels in the blood stream start to rise; too much insulin, and they plummet.
The consequences of hypoglycemia (hypo=low, glycemia=glucose in the blood) are easy to understand. No energy source, no function - and the first organ to go is the brain. It needs glucose to function and without it, the brain shuts down quickly. Confusion, lethargy, and coma occur quickly. It's interesting that brain cells don't need insulin to open their doors to glucose, so when people develop coma from low blood sugar, they waken almost instantaneously upon treatment. Blood sugar is one of the first things checked on scene of a comatose patient, because it's so easy to fix and very embarrassing for an EMT to miss.

Patent Models: Textile and Sewing Machines - Introduction
For much of the nineteenth century, inventors submitted a model with their patent application to the United States Patent Office. The National Museum of American History’s patent model collection began with the acquisition of 284 models from the Patent Office in June 1908, and reached more than 1,000 models by the end of that summer. In 1926, Congress decided to dispense with the stored collection of models and gave the Smithsonian Institution the opportunity to collect any models it wanted. Today, the Museum’s collection exceeds 10,000 patent models dating from 1836 to 1910.
The Museum’s Textile Collection contains over four thousand patent models. The collection includes many examples of carding machines, spinning machines, knitting machines, rope making machines, looms, baskets, carpets, fabrics, and sewing machines. Even the simple clothespin is well represented, with 41 patent models.
This sampling of patent models from the Textile Collection describes the two major groupings, textile machinery and sewing machines. In both groups, the examination of the models begins with the earliest of the inventions. In this early group of patent models, the textile machinery models date from 1837 to 1840, and the sewing machine models from 1842 to 1854.
For more information about the Museum’s patent model collection, see Patent Model Index, Guide to the Collections of the National Museum of American History.
"Patent Models: Textile and Sewing Machines - Introduction" showing 1 items.
- Spinning Wheel Patent Model
- Patent No. 710, issued April 25, 1838
- Hiram F. Wheeler of Springville, Pennsylvania
- Hiram Wheeler’s domestic wheel was for spinning wool. He titled his invention “inclined spinner,” referring to the fact that the operator would sit at the wheel as opposed to standing and walking when using the typical wool wheel. When the treadle was forced down by the operator’s foot, a cord pulled the carriage and spinning wheel head away from the spinner. A weight brought both of them back toward the spinner. This movement of the carriage was equivalent to the spinner walking forward to the spindle tip for the draw out and then back to the wheel. Wheeler specifically claimed as his invention this sliding action of the wheel head.
- Currently not on view
- model constructed
- before 1838-04-25
- patent date
- Wheeler, Hiram F.
- ID Number
- catalog number
- accession number
- patent number
- Data Source
- National Museum of American History, Kenneth E. Behring Center

Belmont Station "Quality" Physical Education
Mr. Comins and Mrs. Martin
What is "Quality" Physical Education?
A program that involves moderate/vigorous activity 90% of the time or more
Intentional fitness - Use of functional equipment
Teacher role modeling of all lessons
Core curriculum content integration
Physical fitness and nutrition integration
Our lessons for the 2012-2013 school year will reflect a physical education program that stresses physical fitness, nutrition, and motor skills. Belmont Station will continue to teach the Five for Life program. Children in grades one through five will participate at moderate to vigorous levels of physical activity for much of the time they attend physical education class. All activities will be centered around the academic content presented in the Five for Life curriculum. Intensity levels, the five components of fitness, nutrition, the muscular system, and the skeletal system are several of the units that will be taught this upcoming year. Feedback technologies such as pedometers and heart rate batons will continue to be used as well. Please take some time to check out our web page. It will be updated each month so that our students and parents can see what we will be doing. It's going to be another productive year in physical education class!

Includes bibliographical references (p. -491) and indexes.
PART ONE: FRAMEWORK Guide to This Book Qualitative Research: Why and How To Do It Qualitative and Quantitative Research Ethics of Qualitative Research PART TWO: FROM THEORY TO TEXT Making Use of the Literature in Qualitative Research Theoretical Positions Underlying Qualitative Research Epistemological Background: Construction and Understanding of Texts PART THREE: RESEARCH DESIGN The Qualitative Research Process Research Questions Entering the Field Sampling How to Design Qualitative Research: An Overview PART FOUR: VERBAL DATA Interviews Narratives Focus Groups Verbal Data: An Overview PART FIVE: OBSERVATION AND MEDIATED DATA Observation and Ethnography Visual Data: Photography, Film, and Video Using Documents as Data Qualitative Online Research: Using the Internet Observation and Mediated Data: An Overview PART SIX: FROM TEXT TO THEORY Documentation of Data Coding and Categorizing Analyzing Conversation, Discourse, and Genres Narrative and Hermeneutic Analysis Using Computers in Qualitative Analysis Text Interpretation: An Overview PART SEVEN: GROUNDING AND WRITING QUALITATIVE RESEARCH Quality Criteria in Qualitative Research The Quality of Qualitative Research: Beyond Criteria Writing Qualitative Research PART EIGHT: QUALITATIVE RESEARCH: INTEGRATION AND OUTLOOK Qualitative Research At Work I: Grounded Theory Qualitative Research At Work II: Triangulation Qualitative Research: State of the Art and the Future Glossary References Author index Subject index About the Author.
(source: Nielsen Book Data)
'The fourth edition of Uwe Flick's "Introduction to Qualitative Research" remains the most comprehensive and thorough text in qualitative research. It is student - and user-friendly, thoroughly up-to-date in terms of the latest developments in the field, imminently practical. It is the single most important introductory book on qualitative inquiry in the social sciences today' - Norman K. Denzin, University of Illinois. The new edition of Uwe Flick's bestselling textbook has been fully revised, expanded and updated. "An Introduction to Qualitative Research" guides the student step-by-step through the research process of qualitative research. This classic text covers all of the main theoretical approaches to qualitative research, and provides unmatched coverage of the full range of different qualitative methods and approaches now available to researchers. A range of new features have been added to the new edition including: new structure to better meet the needs of teaching qualitative research; a new chapter on Grounded Theory plus updated coverage on the full range of other qualitative methods; a summary section discussing the state-of-the-art in qualitative research; a glossary; and, updated cases studies, exercises and guided questions. This new edition will continue to ensure that. "An Introduction to Qualitative Research" remains an essential introductory text for all students of qualitative research. (source: Nielsen Book Data)

First of all, these phrases sound very strange to me (I should have the context they are used into, in order to have a better understanding of them).
In Spanish such phrases may be an example of that is knoun as "Complemento del Nombre". I'm not sure if such a concept exists in English grammar. In Spanish you must think of that complement as some sort of adjective that specifies the role of the main noun.
Its structure is:
[Main Noun] de [Specifier Noun]
So, with the phrase "Fiestas de árboles", you have:
- Fiestas is the main noun.
- árboles is the specifier.
then you may have these meanings (among others, depending on the context):
- Parties attended by trees (should be better expressed with: Fiestas de los árboles).
- Parties made out of trees (parties whose main element are trees).
On the other hand, "Árboles de fiestas" may have these meanings:
- Abbreviation of Árboles que están de fiestas: trees which are going or attending to a party.
- Trees used within parties (should be also expressed with: Árboles para fiestas).
As you can see, at least the meanings I can think of these phrases are very similar for both cases.

Sudoku Puzzle #11
Education World's weekly Sudoku Puzzle
feature offers a perfect tool for building students' critical thinking skills. It can be used in class, assigned for homework, or offered as a challenge or reward activity. The best part of all: as students learn to complete the puzzles they will be building confidence in their ability to tackle challenging tasks and building critical thinking skills that will carry over into all aspects of their classroom performance.
Each Suduko puzzle challenges students to use the numbers provided to help them fill in the blank squares so that each number, 1 to 9, appears in every Column, Row, and Block of the completed puzzle.
Click for a PDF [portable document format] printable page. (If you are unable to view the printable page, download the free Adobe Acrobat Reader.)
Click for the answers to this week's puzzle.
Click for Sudoku Puzzles from previous weeks.
Click for tips for teaching students to do Sudoku puzzles.
Copyright © 2006 Education World

Recently there has been a substantial increase in the attention being paid to Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) by the media, state and federal natural resource agencies, and hunters and outdoor enthusiasts. The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) developed this page to provide background information on CWD and explain what is being done to determine if the disease is in Florida, and if it is not, what we are doing to make sure it never gets here.
What is Chronic Wasting Disease?
Chronic Wasting Disease is a progressive, neurological, debilitating disease that belongs to a family of diseases known as Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs). It is believed to be caused by an abnormal protein called a prion. CWD has been diagnosed in mule deer, white-tailed deer, and Rocky Mountain elk in captive herds and in the wild. Other cervids (antlered animals) may also be susceptible.
CWD attacks the brains of infected animals, causing them to become emaciated, display abnormal behavior, and lose bodily functions. CWD is a fatal disease. Clinical signs include excessive salivation and grinding of teeth, increased drinking and urination, dramatic loss of weight and body condition, poor hair coat, staggering, and finally death. Behavioral changes, including decreased interaction with other animals, listlessness, lowering of the head, blank facial expression, and repetitive walking in set patterns also may occur.
How is CWD transmitted?
Transmission of CWD occurs by direct contact with body fluids (feces, urine, saliva) or by indirect contact (contaminated environment). The prion is persistent in the environment and premises may remain infective for years. Crowding, such as in deer farms or by artificial feeding, facilitates transmission. There is no evidence that CWD can be transmitted to livestock or humans.
Where is CWD found?
CWD has been found in captive and/or free-ranging cervids in Colorado, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming, the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta, and South Korea. In the US, the core endemic area is contiguous portions of Wyoming, Colorado, and Nebraska. The prevalence of CWD in this area is approximately <1% - 15% in mule deer and <1% in elk, although this varies greatly by location. Virginia and West Virginia are the only Southeastern states where CWD has been detected. CWD has not been found in Florida.
How is CWD diagnosed?
Currently the only practical method for diagnosing CWD is through analysis of brain stem tissue or lymph nodes from dead animals. There is no practical live-animal test. A tonsilar biopsy may be done on live animals; however, this is difficult and deer have to be held until diagnosis.
How is CWD controlled in a population?
Control is extremely difficult once CWD becomes established in a natural population. This is because of the lack of a practical live-animal test, long incubation periods, and the persistence of the prion in the environment. Also, there is no vaccine or treatment once an animal gets the disease. If detected early in free-ranging populations, i.e. when prevalence is low, then eradication may be an achievable goal. This is not currently considered possible in the core endemic area; Wisconsin, however, has initiated an aggressive eradication program in the portion of the state where CWD has been found.
What steps is FWC taking to determine if CWD is in Florida, and if it is not, what is being done to keep it from getting here?
The FWC has initiated a comprehensive monitoring program to make sure CWD is not already in Florida. We are asking the general public to keep their eye out for deer showing symptoms indicative of CWD. If you see a sickly, extremely skinny deer (see photo) report its location to the CWD hotline, toll free (866) 293-9282. If you harvest such a deer, do not handle it but call the CWD hotline. A biologist will collect the deer and take it to a lab for a necropsy. In addition, we will be collecting and testing tissue samples from hunter-killed deer during the hunting season. All CWD test results will be posted on this site as they are received. Click here for Florida CWD test results.
The number one objective in CWD management is to prevent it from spreading into new areas. One theoretical mode of disease transmission is through infected deer, elk or moose carcasses. Therefore, in an effort to minimize the risk of the disease spreading, Florida has adopted regulations affecting the transportation of hunter-harvested deer, elk and moose from CWD-infected areas.
It is illegal to bring into Florida carcasses of any species of the family Cervidae (e.g. deer, elk and moose) from 21 states and two Canadian provinces where CWD has been detected. At this time, CWD has been detected in Colorado, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming, and the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta. Visit the United States Department of Agriculture's Web site for state-to-state CWD reports.
Hunters still can bring back de-boned meat from any CWD-affected region, as well as finished taxidermy mounts, hides, skulls, antlers and teeth as long as all soft tissue has been removed. Whole, bone-in carcasses and parts are permitted to be brought back to Florida if they were harvested from non-affected CWD states.
The most likely way CWD will get to Florida is through importation of live infected animals. To prevent this, live cervids (mule deer, white-tailed deer and elk) cannot be imported into Florida unless they come from a herd certified CWD-free by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
Any illegal importations of cervids should be reported to 1-888-404-FWCC.
Public health and wildlife officials advise hunters to take the following precautions when pursuing or handling deer that may have been exposed to CWD:
- Do not shoot, handle or consume any animal that is acting abnormally or appears to be sick. Contact the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) toll free at (866) 293-9282, if you see or harvest an animal that appears sick.
- Wear latex or rubber gloves when field dressing your deer.
- Bone out the meat from your animal. Don't saw through bone, and avoid cutting through the brain or spinal cord (backbone).
- Minimize the handling of brain and spinal tissues.
- Wash hands and instruments thoroughly after field dressing is completed.
- Avoid consuming brain, spinal cord, eyes, spleen, tonsils and lymph nodes of harvested animals. (Normal field dressing coupled with boning out a carcass will remove most, if not all, of these body parts. Cutting away all fatty tissue will remove remaining lymph nodes.)
- Avoid consuming the meat from any animal that tests positive for the disease.
- If you have your deer commercially processed, request that your animal is processed individually, without meat from other animals being added to meat from your animal.
For additional information on Chronic Wasting Disease check out these sites:
USDA - Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services
USGS - National Wildlife Health Center
Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study
Florida Department of Health - Disease Control
Chronic Wasting Disease Alliance
Other FWC Resources:
Florida Monitoring Program 2002-2009
If you see a sickly, extremely skinny deer report its location to the CWD hotline, toll free (866) 293-9282.

Someone with cataracts sees the world as if they were looking through a pair of foggy glasses in the winter.
Everything looks blurry and doing normal things, like driving, becomes extremely difficult if not impossible. The description is perfectly accurate because cataracts are actually the fogging up of the eyes natural lenses.
The lens of the eye focuses light into the retina and controls the eye’s ability to focus between short and long distances. The iris and pupil are both in front of the lens.
The lens is clear and composed of both protein and water. Aging, disease and injury can cause the proteins to mass together and a small part of the lens to become clouded up. The cataract can then become larger over time and vision becomes more and more difficult.
Cataracts are not dangerous to your overall health. They can be extremely frustrating because of the loss of vision, though. There are rare circumstances when a cataract becomes white. This is called an overripe cataract, or hypermature cataract. This type of cataract affects your vision so much that it can cause other symptoms like a headache or other types of pain. Hypermature cataracts usually require surgery because they are such a nuisance.
If you notice your vision declining you should go talk with your doctor or optometrist. There are several tests they can give you to quickly determine if you have cataracts. A visual acuity test is the standard eye test where you read letters and numbers (like when you get your drivers license). A slit-lamp exam is a specialized microscope that examines your eye closely. Retinal exam is performed by putting special drops into your eye, which dilate your pupils, so the doctor can better see what is going on with your eye lens.
The most common treatment for cataracts is surgery. People tend to wait as long as possible before surgery even though it can be performed in the early stages of vision loss.
There are several herbs that can help strengthen your eye if you opt out of surgery in the early going. Bilberry is great if you are looking to make your eye capillaries stronger and restore your eyes to their once strong state. Roobios and Sutherlandia Frutescens are very helpful in allowing the body to deliver plenty of oxygen, blood and other nutrients to the eyes. This gives your eyes all they need to be able to recover and become stronger.
Vizu-All Plus is a natural remedy that may help maintain healthy eyes and circulatory health. Vizu-All Plus may also help lessen common problems associated with night vision and eye sensitivity often associated with the normal aging process.
It is a good idea to use the right type of vitamins or herbs as you advance in age. This will help ensure that you keep your vision well into your golden years.
Related Natural Product
Vizu-All Plus is a natural, safe, effective and powerful herbal formula containing carefully selected herbs to promote healthy eye functioning and to guard against eye disorders such as cataracts, macular degeneration and visual problems associated with diabetes. Use this remedy to promote healthy eye functioning; counteract cell damage caused by free radicals; strengthen blood capillaries in the eye; help the retina adapt to both dark and light; prevent macular degeneration and cataracts; prevent and treat glaucoma Formulated by a clinical psychologist, Vizu-All Plus is pharmaceutically manufactured to the highest standards.Free PDF Health Ebook...

Other Qs & As
What is pleurisy? I have been prescribed amoxycillin 500mg three times daily but cannot find any information about this condition or where I got it from.
How long will it last and will it affect me in the future?
Other times when I got a bad dose of the flu, my breathing has been strained and sore – then I get a cold like a tight band round my chest.
Could this be connected or not?
Thank you for your email. Pleurisy is simply an inflammation of the membrane that covers your lungs inside your chest.
It is usually caused by a lung infection such as pneumonia, which can easily result from a bad cold.
The antibiotic you have been prescribed is to remedy just such an infection. Pleurisy is not uncommon and its main symptom is a fairly sharp pain on breathing deeply in following on from having a cold.
It usually lasts no more than a week to 10 days once antibiotics have been started, and there is no reason why it should affect you in the future.
Some people do seem to have ‘weak’ chests in that infection tends to move downwards from the head onto the lungs fairly easily, but if you are one of these people, having antibiotics by you to take at the first sign of any chestiness is a good idea and preventative.
Finally, I would only recommend that you ask your GP to test you for asthma as mild undiagnosed asthma can sometimes be a predisposing factor for pleurisy and also for the feeling of having a tight band around the chest when exercising, suffering from a cold or even breathing cold air.
Incidentally, I see that you are taking an anti-inflammatory agent, ibuprofen, for pain in joints as well as cimetidine to prevent inflammation of the lining of the stomach which anti-inflammatory medication can in itself cause.
To answer your other question, you should have some investigations for these joint pains to rule out any form of arthritis, and you should not be having repeat prescriptions without these investigations or having your medication reviewed.
The NetDoctor Medical Team

Australian Bureau of Statistics
2901.0 - Census Dictionary, 2001
Previous ISSUE Released at 11:30 AM (CANBERRA TIME) 24/04/2001
|Page tools: Print Page RSS Search this Product|
This variable identifies holders of Australian citizenship.
Citizenship data are used to obtain information on the tendency of different migrant groups to take out citizenship and to measure the size of groups eligible to vote. The data are useful cross-classified with birthplace, year of arrival in Australia and age data.
This page last updated 27 July 2006
Unless otherwise noted, content on this website is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 Australia Licence together with any terms, conditions and exclusions as set out in the website Copyright notice. For permission to do anything beyond the scope of this licence and copyright terms contact us.

War: The Jacobite Rebellion of 1745
Date: 21st September 1745 (Old Style) (2nd October 1745 New Style). The dates in this page are given in the Old Style. To translate to the New Style (current dating system) add 11 days.
“The Highland Attack”
Place: South East of Edinburgh in Scotland
Combatants: The Highland Army of Prince Charles and the Royal Troops of King George II
Generals: Prince Charles, Lord George Murray and Sir John Cope
Size of the armies: Royal Army: 2,300 men and 6 guns. Highlanders: 2,500 men.
Winner: Prince Charles’ Army
“A contemporary print showing Sir John Cope arriving at Berwick to announce his defeat at Prestonpans”
British Regiments: This battle is not a battle honour for British Regiments. The regiments present at the battle were: Gardiner’s (13th) and Hamilton’s (14th) Dragoons, Guise’s (6th), Lee’s (44th), Murray’s (46th) and Lascelles (47th) Foot
On 25th July 1745 Prince Charles landed near Moidart in the Highlands of Scotland with seven companions. He raised his standard at Glenfinnan and assembled an army from the clans that supported his bid for the throne. This army marched into Edinburgh on 17th September 1745. The two royal dragoons regiments fled at the highland approach in the infamous “Colterbrigg canter”.
General Sir John Cope, the commander of the small royal force in Scotland, had marched to Inverness with his four regiments of foot. Cope brought his troops south to Dunbar by sea and met up with the dragoons. None of his troops, dragoons or foot, were experienced or even adequately trained. Cope’s artillery can only be described as a “scratch” force comprising invalids and seamen under headed by one aged gunner. Cope marched North along the coast road towards Edinburgh.
The cavalry found the rebel army to be inland and to the south, causing Cope to form his army against the sea behind a marsh. During the night of 20th September 1745 the rebels made use of a path through the marsh to come up on the left flank of the royal army.
Cope reformed his line to the left with the foot in the centre, the guns and mortars on their right and dragoon regiments on each end of the line. The highland army launched a charge at which the gunners fled leaving two officers to fire the six guns and six mortars.
The Battle of Prestonpans
On being threatened the dragoon regiments also fled and the foot began to give way. Finally under the impact of the highland attack the whole royal army, other than small groups of men under officers such as Lieutenant Colonel Peter Halkett, fled the field. Only the dragoons were able to get away in any numbers. All the foot bar some 170 were killed, wounded or captured. The injuries inflicted by the highlanders using broad swords and bill hooks are reported to have been horrific.
Casualties: The royal casualties are said to have been: around 300 killed, 400 to 500 wounded and 1,400 to 1,500 captured. Only 170 of the foot got away.
The highlanders probably lost less than 30 killed and 70 wounded.
Following the battle most of Scotland was in Prince Charles’ hands bar Edinburgh Castle held by General Guest and Stirling Castle held by the stalwart General Blakeney.
Regimental anecdotes and traditions:

paramagnetism n (Physics) the phenomenon exhibited by substances that have a relative permeability slightly greater than unity and a positive susceptibility. The effect is due to the alignment of unpaired spins of electrons in atoms of the material Compare →
electron paramagnetic resonance
n (Physics) another name for →
electron spin resonance (Abbrev.)
English Collins Dictionary - English Definition & Thesaurus
Add your entry in the Collaborative Dictionary.
- Create your own vocabulary list
- Contribute to the Collaborative Dictionary
- Improve and share your linguistic knowledge
"Collins English Dictionary 5th Edition first published in 2000 © HarperCollins Publishers 1979, 1986, 1991, 1994, 1998, 2000 and Collins A-Z Thesaurus 1st edition first published in 1995 © HarperCollins Publishers 1995"

This interactive resource gives students practice in identifying and working with the parts of speech to improve reading and writing skills. The CD is divided into six sections, each focusing on a different part of speech: nouns/pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions, and prepositions. Each section:
- Defines the part of speech and its usage
- Gives examples to illustrate the definition
- Provides a range of interactive exercises to develop and consolidate understanding
- Offers additional printable activity sheets to extend the learning.
Ideal for interactive whiteboards, or as individual activities on a computer, this engaging CD makes learning the parts of speech fun and challenging for the entire class.
PC: Windows XP and up
Mac: OS X (10.1) and up
Resolution: 800 x 600 or higher

A garden path needs to take you where you're going, but it can do so much more if properly designed.
A path should enhance the experience of your garden, says Darcy Daniels of Bloomtown Garden Design and Nursery. The route of the path, the materials used to make it, the plantings along its sides and its scale all combine to send a message about the experience you want to have in your garden.
A straight path, for example, allows people to move more quickly and might be fitting for the connection between the house and the everyday dining area. You'll also want to cover this area with smooth materials so you don't trip while balancing plates of food.
On the other hand, a path with sinuous curves and a somewhat uneven surface will cause people to move more slowly and appreciate the journey. If there's no room for curves, Daniels suggests using screens or a trellis to break up the space; you can "green" them with climbing plants.
Repeat plants or colors along the path to lure the eye forward and create continuity. For example, says Daniels, place a beautiful grass on one side of the path, then a bit farther down the path, an identical grass on the opposite side, and so on.
Placing a taller plant -- say a hydrangea -- at the inside of a curve will help obscure the view and provide a bit of discovery as you walk along.
Many designers recommend that paths be at least 3 feet wide, but Daniels doesn't abide by such rules. Instead, she recommends that you keep your path in scale with the garden and your plantings.
Now that your head is full of these general concepts, Daniels suggests that you stand back and look at the space:
• How will the trees develop over time?
• Consider the existing hardscape, buildings and plants that you are working with.
You also need to consider function:
• The path has to get you to such places as the back gate and the compost pile, for example, so it has to be practical for the purpose.
Now pull out all of your garden hoses and start defining your path:
• Outline the path's route and leave it in place for a few days.
• Walk the path as you use the garden -- take the trash out, go to your favorite sitting area, take the wheelbarrow for a spin.
• You might even want to put empty pots or other objects along the path where you intend to place plants.
Again, think about the experience:
• Is this section going to have lush plantings and a jungle-like effect?
• What does that mean for the path?
• Adjust the hoses until you're comfortable with the route and width of the path.
NEXT WEEK'S BLOG: We'll start the real work of building a path yourself. In the meantime, if you've got some design tips to share, please post a comment here.
-- Kay Balmer; email@example.com

U.S. Power Plant Carbon Emissions Zoom in 2007
WASHINGTON, DC, March 18, 2008 (ENS) – The biggest single year increase in greenhouse gas emissions from U.S. power plants in nine years occurred in 2007, finds a new analysis by the nonprofit, nonpartisan Environmental Integrity Project. The finding of a 2.9 percent rise in carbon dioxide emissions over 2006 is based on an analysis of data from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Now the largest factor in the U.S. contribution to climate change, the electric power industry’s emissions of carbon dioxide, CO2, have risen 5.9 percent since 2002 and 11.7 percent since 1997, the analysis shows.
Texas tops the list of the 10 states with the biggest one-year increases in CO2 emissions, with Georgia, Arizona, California, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Iowa, Illinois, Virginia and North Carolina close behind.
The top three states – Texas, Georgia and Arizona – had the greatest increases in CO2 emissions on a one, five and 10 year basis.
TXU’s coal-fired Martin Lake power
plant in east Texas (Photo
Director of the Environmental Integrity Project Eric Schaeffer said, “The current debate over global warming policy tends to focus on long-term goals, like how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 80 percent over the next 50 years. But while we debate, CO2 emissions from power plants keep rising, making an already dire situation worse.”
“Because CO2 has an atmospheric lifetime of between 50 and 200 years, today’s emissions could cause global warming for up to two centuries to come,” he warned.
Data from 2006 show that the 10 states with the least efficient power production relative to resulting greenhouse gas emissions were North Dakota, Wyoming, Kentucky, Indiana, Utah, West Virginia, New Mexico, Colorado, Missouri, and Iowa.
The report explains why national environmental groups are fighting to stop the construction of new conventional coal-fired power plants, which they say would make a bad situation worse.
“For example” the report points out, “the eight planned coal-fired plants that TXU withdrew in the face of determined opposition in Texas would have added an estimated 64 million tons of CO2 to the atmosphere, increasing emissions from power plants in that state by 24 percent.”
Some of the rise in CO2 emissions comes from existing coal fired power plants, the analysis found, either because these plants are operating at increasingly higher capacities, or because these aging plants require more heat to generate electricity. “For example, all of the top 10 highest emitting plants in the nation, either held steady or increased CO2 output from 2006 to 2007.”
Robert W Scherer Power Plant is a coal-fired
plant just north of Macon, Georgia.
It emits more carbon dioxide than
any other point in the United States.
(Photo credit unknown)
Georgia Power’s Scherer power plant near Macon, Georgia is the highest emitting plant in the nation. It pumped out 27.2 million tons of CO2 in 2007, up roughly two million tons from the year before.
In view of these facts, the Environmental Integrity Project recommends that the nation’s oldest and dirtiest power plants should be retired, and replaced with cleaner sources of energy. That will require accelerating the development of wind power and other renewable sources of energy.
Another good solution is cutting greenhouse gases quickly by reducing the demand for electricity, the authors advise. Smarter building codes, and funding low-cost conservation efforts, such as weatherization of low-income homes, purchase and installation of more efficient home and business appliances will reduce demand and yield greenhouse gas benefits.
Texas tops every state measurement in the report from the most carbon dioxide measured in total tons to the largest increases in CO2 emissions over the last five years between 2002 and 2007.
Ken Kramer, director of the Lone Star chapter of the Sierra Club based in Austin, Texas, says his state not only has more emissions than any other state – it has solutions to offer, such as a recent boom in wind power installations.
“The bad news is that Texas is #1 in carbon emissions among the 50 states, and our emissions have grown in recent years,” Kramer said. “The good news is that Texas has the potential to play a major role in addressing global warming if we embrace smart energy solutions such as energy efficiency and renewable energy, solutions which pose tremendous economic as well as environmental benefits.”
In Des Moines, Mark Kresowik, Iowa organizer of the Sierra Club’s National Coal Campaign, said, “Energy efficiency and renewable energy are powering a renaissance in rural Iowa and creating thousands of new manufacturing jobs for our state. By rejecting coal plants and reducing pollution through energy efficiency and renewable energy our states will prosper and attract new businesses and young workers for the future.”
The consumption of electricity accounted for more than 2.3 billion tons of CO2 in 2006, or more than 39.5 percent of total emissions from human sources, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. Coal-fired power plants alone released more than 1.9 billion tons, or nearly one third of the U.S. total.
The Department of Energy projects that carbon dioxide emissions from power generation will increase 19 percent between 2007 and 2030, due to new or expanded coal plants.
An additional 4,115 megawatts of new coal-fired generating capacity was added between 2000 and 2007, with another 5,000 megawatts expected by 2012.

Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women
The first Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women was held on May 9, 1837. Approximately 200 women gathered in New York City to discuss their role in the American abolition movement. Mary S. Parker was the President of the gathering. Other prominent women went on to be vocal members of the Women's Suffrage Movement, including Lucretia Mott, the Grimké sisters, and Lydia Maria Child. The attendees included women of color, the wives and daughters of slaveholders, and women of low economic status. The convention was a monumental step, both for the women's rights movement, and the abolition movement as a whole. Despite the event's significance, it receives very little historical attention.

Humans are intimately connected with the physical environment, even though we have only been present for a fraction of the vast history of the Earth. We strive to understand how the Earth has evolved since its formation over 4 billion years ago and what types of processes have fostered these changes. Our knowledge of the Earth is critical, not only for piecing together its history, but also to aid in the understanding of issues relevant to our present-day lives, such as: availability of natural resources, pollution, climate change, and natural hazards.
During this course, we will perform a general survey of the physical Earth. We will examine the minerals and rocks of which the solid Earth is composed, the processes that generate Earth's landforms, natural hazards associated with geologic processes, geologic time, and surface processes (e.g., glaciers, streams, groundwater).
Final Exam (May 17: 10:30-12:30)
The final exam will be on materials presented during the final quarter of the course (lectures and materials in chapters 16, 15, 18, 19, 12). The exam will be comprehensive and will include material from the entire course. To get the most recent copies of the study guides click at left.
The field trip to Great Falls (MD) took place on Saturday April 22. About 100 students attended on a morning that set a record for rainfall at Dulles Airport (over 3 inches of rain). The field trip was teh only opportunity for extra credit in the course. To see some photos from previous trips, click here.

The commerce of the ancient world was gathered into the warehouses of Tyre. "Tyrian merchants were the first who ventured to navigate the Mediterranean waters; and they founded their colonies on the coasts and neighbouring islands of the Aegean Sea, in Greece, on the northern coast of Africa, at Carthage and other places, in Sicily and Corsica, in Spain at Tartessus, and even beyond the pillars of Hercules at Gadeira (Cádiz)".
In the time of King David (c. 1000 BC), a friendly alliance was entered into between the Kingdoms of Israel and Tyre, which was ruled by Hiram I.
The city of Tyre was particularly known for the production of a rare and extraordinarily expensive sort of purple dye, produced from the murex shellfish, known as Tyrian purple. This color was, in many cultures of ancient times, reserved for the use of royalty, or at least nobility.
It was often attacked by Egypt, besieged by Shalmaneser V, who was assisted by the Phoenicians of the mainland, for five years, and by Nebuchadnezzar (586–573 BC) for thirteen years, without success, although a compromise peace was made in which Tyre paid tribute to the Babylonians. It later fell under the power of the Persians.
In 332 BC, the city was conquered by Alexander the Great, after a siege of seven months in which he built the causeway from the mainland to the island, but it continued to maintain much of its commercial importance until the Christian era. The presence of the causeway affected water currents nearby, causing sediment to build up, making the connection permanent.
In 315 BC, Alexander's former general Antigonus began his own siege of Tyre, taking the city a year later.
In 126 BC, Tyre regained its independence (from the Seleucids) and was allowed to keep much of its independence when the area became a Roman province in 64 BC.

Researchers report some success in using a gene therapy technique to treat one form of congenital blindness. Two teams of scientists have used modified viruses injected into the eye to partially restore vision to people suffering from Leber congenital amaurosis, or LCA, a congenital illness that results in the degradation of the retina. People with LCA slowly lose all vision, and typically are completely blind by their 20s or 30s. The modified virus used in the therapy carries a replacement gene to the retina, allowing it to produce a missing protein responsible for the disease. In this segment, Ira talks with one of the authors of one report on the research, which was published this week in two studies in the New England Journal of Medicine.
Produced by Annette Heist, Senior Producer

Answer the question referring to each photograph above the question.
To find the answer, pass the cursor over the photo to see the "title" of the photo.
1. Identify the number of chomatids in this cell during this stage of mitosis
2. Identify the structure indicated by the arrow:
B) Zona Occludens
C) Junctional complex
D) Mitotic Cell
E) Terminal web
3. Identify the stage of cell division in this photograph.
A) Prophase of mitosis
B) Anaphase I of meiosis
C) Metaphase II of meiosis
D) Anaphase of mitosis
4. In this section through the testes, what is the C amount of DNA in the nucleus of the cell noted by the arrow?
5) In this section through the testes, what is the stage of cell division of the cell noted by the arrow:
A) Anaphase of Meiosis
B) Metaphase of Mitosis
C) Prophase of Mitosis
D) Metaphase of Meiosis
E) Prophase of Meiosis
6) Identify the process shown by the arrowhead
A) Gap junction formation
C) Desmosome formation
D) Spindle apparatus formation
E) Formation of the nuclear membrane
7. Identify the structures noted by the horizontal arrows:
A) Nuclear pore complex
C) Gap junctions
D) Zonula occludens
8. Identify the structures supporting and moving the chromosomes.
A) Actin filaments
D) Intermediate filaments

SINCE evidence of the existence of the belief that the soul lives on is so indubitable, the question arises--what is its condition? In what state does the discarnate spirit find itself after final separation from the body? And first, as to what we may be allowed to call, for want of a better term, its physical condition.
We have already noted that soul is conceived as having both form and substance, the latter, so to speak, greatly rarefied. Moreover, it has been brought to our attention that the most common idea concerning form is that the soul is a replica of the body it inhabited. Consistency in primitive thinking is not to be assumed, as we have seen, nor are logical processes among primitives quite the same as ours. Yet when a disembodied soul took up its post-mortem residence in a serpent, for example, we may not suppose that that soul was still regarded as human in shape. But so far as the author has discovered, no decisive evidence exists on this point. The probabilities favor greatly the supposition that in such cases transformation of the soul shape was supposed to have taken place. Evidence of the common idea, retention by the soul of its human shape, has been before us. We have noted that some tribes mutilate the body of the dead, thinking that by so doing they inflict like wounds upon the soul and thus impose incapacity for harm upon the ghost, the double of the body. The Omahas slit the soles of a murdered man's feet that his spirit may be unable to return and cause damage to the people. Mangaeans prefer death in battle--men are then in their full strength; disease weakens them, and souls have the nature of the body at death. Barongo believe that souls are young or old, according to the age at death, and so do the Indians of Gran Chaco. Naga tribes of Manipur think that ghosts bear whatever tattoo marks, mutilations, or other blemishes or embellishments occurred on the body. Some people carry this idea so far as to prefer
[1. Fletcher and La Flesche, 27th Report, etc., p. 215.]
death before decay of natural powers sets in, and so commit suicide or are buried alive, that the soul may continue to exist in full vigor.
Having form and substance, the soul has certain physical needs. It hungers, thirsts, feels cold and heat. The degrees of grossness of these wants vary greatly. Sometimes the hunger, thirst, and wants and passions may be appeased by the mere spirit or ghost of food, drink, etc.; and the ghosts are served by the spirits or (as our theosophical friends might be imagined as saying) the astral bodies of dishes, implements, or weapons which are destroyed (i.e., killed) that their spirits may accompany the ghost into the spirit land. Indeed, this is by all odds the most prevalent conception. Sometimes it is the more evanescent or the more vital elements, such as the blood, which are used by the ghost, as in the celebrated case of Tiresias in the Odyssey. The cases already cited of food, drink, weapons, utensils, and the like possessing souls and being offered or placed with the dead, oftentimes being broken or mutilated so as to "kill"
[2. Cases are cited in Frazer's Dying God, pp. 9-14.
3 Book XI.]
them, furnish direct testimony to the supposed needs of the ghost. The hunger felt by the disembodied soul is vividly expressed by most African tribes, whose belief is that ghosts can and do eat even human bodies A Ghosts also suffer from cold, hence New Guineans, and others, make fires at the graves, and even build huts, so that when the ghosts come up from the body they may find comfort.'
Ghosts have voices, too, but thin and shadowy like themselves. They chirp like crickets or utter their words in whistling tones. So the wizards by ventriloquistic art impose upon the credulous, and by wheezing utterance produce the effect of communications from a shadowy being or from the ground. Note the indications of shamanistic practice in the Prophet Isaiah (8:19- 29:4).
What we may regard as the disposition of the ghost is by most peoples held to be fixed by the character of the person while on earth.
[4. Talbot, In the Shadow of the Bush, pp. 224-225, 232-233, 238, etc.; ERE, vi. 65 ff. The testimony is being exhaustively collected in Frazer, Belief in Immortality--see the Index, under "Food."
5. Brown, Melanesians and Polynesians, pp. 442 ff.; Neuhass, Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. S18; Frazer, Belief in Immortality, i. 150-152.]
Was he cruel, warlike, passionate, generous, revengeful in the body, so will he be as a discarnate ghost. So, for instance, the New Guineans hold. Only account must be taken of a very common notion, that the ghost is endowed with increased power. One might find many reasons for this common idea. The general fearsomeness of the unknown and invisible, the fad that the ghost has joined the terrible host of free spirits, its very remoteness, combine to add the idea of power. That which is distant in space or time gains enchantment and enlargement from the imagination, which is the faculty most employed in this sphere. Australians credit to their ancestors deeds to themselves impossible, though they are themselves their ancestors reincarnate. The greed and liking for possessions which existed on earth are attributed in some parts to the spirit, and among the Bakongo, for instance, this desire is satisfied by placing all the deceased's wealth about the grave. The soul's assumed mobility,
[6. Neuhass, Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. 142 ff.
7. Roscoe, Baganda, pp. 282 ff.
8. Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 489 ff
9. Weeks, Primitive Bakongo, p. 278.]
such as was displayed in its power to leave the body during life and to make investigations at even a considerable distance, is not lost but rather enhanced. It has become a free agent, no longer bound by the body's necessities and limitations of locomotion, at liberty to roam unfettered, to use in the wide universe its powers--those that remain or are acquired in its new condition. If it in earthly life could leave the body temporarily and like the lightning speed hither and thither, now, disfleshed, its mobility has gained by the change.
Especially is it believed that spirits acquire a larger knowledge. Not only do they gain a completer survey of the past and the present, but a knowledge of the future becomes theirs. According as their dispositions prompt, they become helpers of their survivors or hostilely active against them.
Particularly interesting in this connection is the relationship of the ghost and other beings to warning and prediction. Among the powers of the soul is that of return and manifestation to survivors. Melanesian, Andaman, and African ghosts, for instance, reappear to and converse with their people and become a medium of information. Particularly through dreams do they mediate--a performance recorded in antiquity and attested by present day belief over a large area. Indeed, it is through the dream that approach to human comprehension is most easily made by divine, superhuman, or discarnate powers, the spirit in this condition being loosed from fleshly trammels. The human spirit in sleep is regarded as not bound by quite the same inflexible laws to the bodily limitations. The employment of the dream as a means of information or warning at once occurs to the reader--Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Nebucbadrezzar; clasctical cases will be found in Pindar, Olympiacs, XIII, 105 and Pausanias, X, xxxiii, II. It will be remembered that in an earlier section the importance of the dream as an index to animistic thought was dwelt upon at some length. One specimen of developed classical and philosophical thought on this has been summarized from Jamblichus.
[10. Seligmann, Melanesians, pp. 190 ff.; Klosts, In the Andamans, p. 296; Weeks, Congo Cannibals, pp. 264-265.
11. Herodotus, IV, 172; Pomponius Mela, I. viii. 8; Mauss, Origines des pouvoirs magiques, p. 15; Haddon, Anthropological Essays, p. 179.]
"There is nothing unworthy of belief in what you have been told concerning sleep and the meaning of dreams. I will explain it thus. The soul has a twofold life, a lower and a higher. In sleep the soul is released from the constraint of the body, and enters as one emancipated on its divine life of intelligence. Then as the noble faculty which beholds the objects that truly are, the objects in the world of intelligence, stirs within and awakens to its power, who can be surprised that the mind, which contains within itself the principles of all that happens, should in this, the state of liberation, discern the future in those antecedent principles which will make that future what it is to be? The nobler part of the soul is thus united by abstraction to higher natures, and becomes a participant in the wisdom and foreknowledge of the gods. Recorded examples of this are numerous and well authenticated; instances too occur every day. Numbers of sick by sleeping had their cure revealed to them in dreams. Would not Alexander's army have perished but for a dream in which Dionysius pointed out the means of safety? Was not the siege of Aphritis raised through a dream sent by Jupiter Ammon to Lysander? 'The night time of the body is the daytime of the soul.'"
The student of anthropology will at once recognize here the advanced justification for beliefs which go back very far for their origins. But even in the advanced stage of thought represented by Jamblichus there are present elements that are duplicable today in the most primitive regions.
Several doors open here to alluring bypaths--to inspiration, prediction, oracles, on the one side, these presuming a favoring: disposition on the part of the ghost; and, on the other, to necromancy and the "black art" or black magic, if the ghost or his control be evil. Melanesians and Africans say that the soul may return to seize and inspire the unconscious shaman or prophet to pregnant utterance. We have said "unconscious"--for it seems practically established that, in the earlier stages of culture, prediction and the delivery of the oracle took place only when the medium was in ecstasy. Vergil's description of the
[12. Theurgia or the Egyptian Mysteries, Part III, chap. vii.
13. Codrington, Melanesians, pp. 218 ff.; Roscue, Baganda, p. 113.]
raging sybil will recur to the classical student. Plato says that "inspired and true divination is not attained to by anyone in his full senses, but only when the power of thought is fettered by sleep or disease, or some paroxysm of frenzy." It is well known that the American Indians regarded the simple or mentally incompetent as peculiarly endowed and in closer touch with the supernatural than those possessed of all their mental powers. In the Old Testament there is an unconscious testimony to the veracity of many parts of the narrative, guaranteed by psychological conclusions, in the fact that the earlier phases of prophecy and prediction are described as involving the ecstatic state or a condition of unconsciousness. Such are the use of the dream, the case of Balaam, the prophets among whom Saul found himself, this form of affection being communicable or "catching"--compare the "dancing mania" of the middle ages-and Elisha, for whom music was in at least one case a prerequisite to the delivery of the oracle--the "hand of the Lord " (2 Kings 3:15) being the Old Testament expression for the modern psychological term
[14. Æneid, V1, 45 ff., 77ff.
15. Timæus, 71.]
"ecstasy" adopted from the Greek. So among perhaps most primitive peoples, like the Melanesians and Africans referred to above, warnings from the supernatural and even knowledge of other matters, as of charms, are supposed to be received under such conditions.
Ghosts do not figure merely as indicators of coming events or as guardians against evil fortune. Their larger capacity for action may make them powerful intercessors with still higher supernatural beings or spirits, through shamans who control them or know them intimately. Or their own success in their earthly vocation makes them interested in survivors who follow their trade. In Africa the spirit of a dead hunter is powerful to help in the chase, and is propitiated to that end. In Melanesia the help of ghosts in securing the right kind of weather, in performing feats of healing, in success with the fishing net or line, and in agriculture is obtained by sacrifices
[16. So the Australians: Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 435-437. On the facts at large of Carpenter, Comparative Religion, pp. 181, 182.
17. Carruthers, Unknown Mongolia, i. 243.
18. Weeks, Primitive Bakongo, pp. 181-183.]
and offerings. Indeed, from the inhabitants of Ghosttown may come some of the good gifts, agricultural, for instance, which make life worth living. The spirits of the dead may keep a watchful eye upon survivors, preventing or punishing infractions of tribal customs that involve offence to themselves, and warning against repetition by inflicting sickness or failure in various enterprises. Foundation sacrifice had the purpose of procuring for the structure the protection of the spirits of the dead.
On the other hand, ghosts may be among the spirits whose malevolence needs to be guarded against. In fact, among the post mortem transformations may be that into ill disposed spirits. Usually, when this is conceived to be the case, the cause is found in some misfortune in life or death. Among the Ibo, for instance, a childless woman, a wifeless or moneyless man, or a suicide may as ghosts attempt to increase the population
[19. Codrington, Melanesians, pp. 132. ff.: Lambert, Murs et superstitions, pp. 24, 26, 218, 224 ff., 293 ff.; Turner, Samoa, pp. 345 ff.
20. Talbot, In the Shadow of the Bush, pp. 238-239.
21. Seligmann, Melanesians, pp. 192, 310.
22, B. D. Eerdmans, in Expositor, Nov. 1913, p. 197.]
of the underworld by attacks upon those left on earth. Similarly in New Guinea those who die in childbirth, suicides, and those who have lost their heads become maleficent. The Omahas hold that ghosts of the murdered return and inflict punishment by disease, or by causing the wind to blow from hunter to game and so to spoil his sport. Among Congo cannibals the soul seen in dreams is a wandering human spirit aiming at evil in its travels, and the witch doctor may be hired to kill it. The nostrils of the dead are plugged immediately after death to keep the spirit in the body as long as possible. If the ghost is for any reason unwelcome in the nether world and is driven out, it becomes malicious and aims at mischief, either inflicting positive ills by sending storms and like disasters or preventing success in various pursuits. In some cases ghosts are normally neutral, and their disposition and consequent actions depend upon the treatment they receive from
[23. Thomas, Anthropological Report, p. 312
24. Frazer, Belief in Immortality, i. 212.
25. Fletcher and La Flesche, 27th Report, p. 212.
26. Weeks, Congo Cannibals, p. 263-264, 269.]
the living. So that the well-being of survivors depends on propitiation by gifts and ceremonies or on manifestations of abiding affection. The duties of classic Greeks and Romans to their dead--careful and honorable burial, celebration by games at the funeral or on anniversaries--recur at once to the mind: and in these and other matters these peoples handed down in memory at least and often in ritual the doings and beliefs of far away ancestors. Close parallels to classic customs have been observed among African, Melanesian, and Polynesian peoples, where not only is the funeral offering placed on the ground, but dramatic performances in honor of the dead take place. Among some races, such as British New Guineans and the Mafulu, ghosts are always malevolent.
Among the exercises of the enlarged powers
[28. Williamson, South Sea Savage, pp. 65, 68, 74, 75, 76, 81 ff.; Roscoe, Baganda, pp. 116, 278, 286.
29. Taplin, Narrinyeri, p. 19; Curt, Australian Race, i. 87; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 461, 463, 473; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 507, and Native Tribes, p. 511.
30. Talbot, In the Shadow of The Bush, p. 18; Brown, Melanesians and Polynesians, pp. 214 ff.; Milligan, Fetish Folk, pp. 233-236.
31. Williamson, South Sea Savage, p. 281 and Mafulu Mountain People, pp. 243 ff., 266 ff., 297 ff.; JAI, xxviii (1899), 216 ff.]
attributed to ghosts by quite diverse peoples is one which, as we shall see later, they possess in common with non-human spirits. This is the infliction of disease in an access of malignancy. Such a belief is held by American Indians, South Sea islanders, Hindus, New Guineans, and many others. They may inflict lockjaw by a blow, cause death, induce phthisis, and bring pestilence. Shamans and medicine men may use them to secure revenge or haunt the living; and this again calls up the need for exorcism. This gives rise to various devices and taboos, aiming at propitiating or deceiving the ghosts, such as change of names assigned to things belonging to the dead, or dropping out of the language words which contained the name borne in life, this going so far in some cases as to involve the destruction of huts, plantations, trees, and other possessions." It is quite in keeping with the
[32. Folk-lore, ii. 420 ff., 431; Kloss, In the Andamans, p. 305; Declé, Three years in Savage Africa, pp. 236, 344.
33. Talbot, In the Shadow of The Bush, p. 230; Weeks, Congo Cannibals, p. 266; Roscoe, Baganda, p. 100; Williamson, South Sea Savage, pp. 81 ff.; Crooke, Tribes and Caste, iii. 436.
34. Williamson, South Sea Savage, pp. 81 ff.; Roscoe, Baganda, p. 126.
35. Seligmann, Melanesians, pp. 631 ff.; Cambridge Anthropological Expedition, v. 250.]
whole conception of things that ghosts should be especially dangerous at night.
From all this, to anticipate slightly what is yet to come, fear of discarnate spirits may lead to a cult, a worship, which is apotropaic, deprecatory, or propitiatory in character. On the other hand, the sense of favors received or to come gives the rationale of a cultus which embodies more of gratitude and pleasure than of fear. With both these varieties of mental qualities attributed to ghosts, shared by them in common with non-human powers, it seems to require somewhat of ingenuity and a miscalculation or misappreciation of native human traits to force one to derive all worship from fear. Timor fecit deos is now hardly tenable in its original sense, in view of abundance of ascertained fads. Most of the animals, especially those domesticated, display amiable traits, including gratitude. We can hardly hold, therefore, that man, whether the product of evolution or of special creation, developed one of his noblest exercises, that of worship, from a sense of fear alone.
[36. Neuhass, Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. 64, 147.
37. Chalmers and Gill, Work and Adventure, pp. 84 ff.]

WEDNESDAY, July 4 (HealthDay News) -- For safety's sake, Americans should avoid using fireworks of any kind this Independence Day, experts say.
Prevent Blindness America urges consumers to attend only authorized public fireworks displays conducted by licensed operators. Individuals should not buy, use or store fireworks, including sparklers, the nonprofit organization added.
Although sparklers are sometimes considered to be safe, they were responsible for 17 percent of the injuries, including 36 percent of those sustained by children under 5 years of age, according to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). Injuries from sparklers and other novelties also made up two out of five emergency room injuries, the CPSC found.
Overall, an estimated 6,200 people went to the emergency room between June 17 and July 17, 2011, for injuries they sustained while using fireworks, according to the CPSC. Their 2011 Fireworks Annual Report noted that children younger than 15 accounted for 26 percent of those injuries.
Prevent Blindness America announced it supports bans on the importation, sale and use of all fireworks and sparklers by non-licensed operators, such as bans established in Delaware, Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York.
Last year alone, there were also more than 1,100 reported eye injuries, according to the CPSC report. To help Americans avoid the emergency room this July 4th, Prevent Blindness America offered the following safety tips:
If there are specks in the eye:
- Do not rub the eye.
- Allow tears to wash out the particles or use an eye wash.
- Lift the upper eyelid outward and down over the lower lid.
- If the speck doesn't wash out, see a doctor or visit the emergency room.
If the eye or eyelid is cut or punctured:
- Do not rinse the eye with water.
- Do not try to remove any object stuck in the eye.
- Cover the eye with a stiff shield, such as the bottom of a paper cup, without applying any pressure.
- Visit a doctor or an emergency room immediately.
"The 4th of July should be a time when we come together to honor our country by celebrating our great nation safely and responsibly," Hugh Parry, president and CEO of Prevent Blindness America, said in an organization news release. "We hope all Americans have a wonderful holiday with their loved ones, not in the emergency room."
The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about eye injuries.
SOURCES: Prevent Blindness America, news release, June 15, 2012; June 2012, 2011 Fireworks Annual Report, U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
Copyright © 2013
HealthDay. All rights reserved.
HealthDayNews articles are derived from
various sources and do not reflect federal policy. healthfinder.gov
does not endorse opinions, products, or services that
may appear in news stories. For more information on
health topics in the news, visit
Health News on healthfinder.gov.

Original URL: http://www.theregister.co.uk/2006/08/21/mars_geysers/
Martian pole freckled with geysers
Unlike anything on Earth
Every spring, the southern polar cap on Mars almost fizzes with carbon dioxide, as the surface is broken by hundreds of geysers throwing sand and dust hundreds of feet into the Martian "air".
The discovery was announced in the journal Nature by researchers at the Arizona State University, based on data from the Thermal Emission Imaging System on the Mars Odyssey orbiter.
Images sent back by the probe showed that as the sun began to warm the pole, the polar cap began to break out in dark spots. Over the days and weeks that followed, these spots formed fan-like markings, and spidery patterns. As the sun rose higher in the Martian sky, the spots and fans became more numerous.
"Originally, scientists thought the spots were patches of warm, bare ground exposed as the ice disappeared," said lead scientist Phil Christensen. "But observations made with THEMIS on NASA's Mars Odyssey orbiter told us the spots were nearly as cold as the carbon dioxide ice, which is at minus 198 degrees Fahrenheit."
The team concluded that the dark spots were in fact geysers, and the fans that appeared were caused by the debris from the eruptions.
Christensen said: "If you were there, you'd be standing on a slab of carbon-dioxide ice. Looking down, you would see dark ground below the three foot thick ice layer.
"The ice slab you're standing on is levitated above the ground by the pressure of gas at the base of the ice."
He explains that as the sunlight hits the region in the spring, it warms the dark ground enough that the ice touching the ground is vaporised. The gas builds up under the ice until it is highly pressurised and finally breaks through the surface layer.
As the gas escapes, it carries the smaller, finer particles of the soil along with it, forming grooves under the ice. This "spider" effect indicates a spot where a geyser is established, and will form again the following year. ®

The United Nations Convention on Narcotic Drugs readmitted Bolivia into its fold on Friday, universally recognizing the right of Bolivians to chew the coca leaf. This gives President Evo Morales one of his most important victories thus far in his global efforts to decriminalize the coca leaf.
Bolivia had voluntary withdrawn from the UN group a year ago because it classified the coca leaf as an "illicit drug." On Friday, however, a majority of the convention's members voted to allow Bolivia back into the committee and also approved a statute which says that chewing the coca leaf is legal within Bolivia's borders.
It's a largely symbolic victory, as this UN commission lacks the power to regulate coca leaf consumption in Bolivia in the first place. But the UN declaration has been welcomed by the Bolivian government, which is planning to invite the country's coca growers to massive coca-chewing events in the cities of La Paz and Cochabamba next Monday.
The coca leaf is the base material for cocaine. But for centuries indigenous people in the Andean mountains have chewed this leaf in its natural form to gain energy and decrease hunger. Some groups in the region also consider the coca leaf to be a sacred plant, and use it regularly for social and religious rituals.
Evo Morales, who is himself a former coca grower, has championed the decriminalization of the leaf since he came into office in 2006, chewing coca in international forums, praising its nutritional qualities, and even asking Sean Penn to be his global ambassador for the coca leaf.
But the UN's decision to tolerate coca leaf chewing in Bolivia was not well taken by U.S. diplomats, who claim that most of Bolivia's coca crops are being used for cocaine production, and not for traditional chewing.
"We oppose Bolivia's reservation and continue to believe it will lead to a greater supply of cocaine," a senior U.S. State Department official, told the AP.
"While we recognize Bolivia's capacity and willingness to undertake some successful counternarcotics activities, especially in terms of coca eradication, we estimate that much of the coca legally grown in Bolivia is sold to drug traffickers, leading to the conclusion that social control of coca (allowing some legal growing) is not achieving the desired results," the official said in a statement.
Only a handful of UN member states voted against the readmission of Bolivia into the antinarcotics group. These included big cocaine consumers like the United States, Russia and the United Kingdom, but also Mexico, a key U.S. ally and the main transit point for most cocaine headed to the United States.
Most member states did not object to Bolivia's readmission into the antinarcotics group or to the new statute which says that chewing, and growing the coca leaf, is fine within Bolivia. The non-objectors included Colombia and Peru which are the world's two biggest cocaine producers and also have very large crops of the coca leaf. U.S. diplomats may want to chew on that dilemma.

Most of you probably don't remember. I don't, besides that I was in residency.
I bet you have no idea how close you came to dying (it was 2 minutes). Or, if you didn't die, having your life dramatically altered.
A Black Brant is a type of goose. It's also the name of a Canadian rocket routinely used for atmospheric experiments. It's launched with a bunch of instruments (depending on what's being studied) and the instruments are monitored during the flight. They then parachute back to Earth and are recovered for further data.
Black Brants are commonly used by Canada, the U.S., and several other countries for research. And so it was on this day in 1995.
A team of U.S. and Norwegian scientists launched a Black Brant from northwest Norway to study the Aurora Borealis. It contained standard scientific instruments.
But things - almost - went horribly wrong.
Routine notification of scientific and test launches is customary, and this one was no exception. 30 countries were told, including Russia. But due to layers of bureaucracy, the notice wasn't passed along their military chain. After all, the cold war had been over for 4 years.
As the rocket climbed, it was picked up by Russian radar early warning systems. It was on a trajectory that matched a predicted Trident missile launch from U.S. nuclear submarines in the Arctic circle. As it flew it also crossed an air corridor between American ballistic missile silos in North Dakota and Moscow, which resulted in Russian satellites tracking it.
The Russians read it as an American first strike. Both sides had practiced war games where a single high-altitude nuclear explosion from a submarine would be used to blind radar and satellites from the real attack, while the electromagnetic pulse would paralyze their defenses.
The Russian military went to full alert. Their ballistic missile submarines in the Arctic were all ordered to prepare for immediate launch. Silo crews on land were notified. Their targets would be the major cities of North America and western Europe. They knew the American/NATO forces would respond in kind.
The Black Brant used in this case was a 4-stage rocket. As it separated the radar pattern matched that of a ballistic missile with multiple re-entry warheads coming down, further convincing the Russians that an attack was underway.
The nuclear briefcase, with its launching codes, was brought to Russian President Boris Yeltsin. Like the Americans, the Russians use a mandatory 10 minute launch window (the time needed for a submarine-launched missile to reach either country). Yeltsin activated his nuclear keys to launch a counterattack- but waited for final verification.
At 8 minutes into the alert the rocket's course became clearer, and the Russians realized it was not incoming. With 2 minutes left before the mandatory nuclear launch time, Yeltsin deactivated the briefcase and ordered all nuclear forces off alert. The incident wasn't reported at the time.
The Black Brant rocket completed it's planned flight, landing near Spitsbergen and recovered. The scientists involved had no idea what had happened.
Did that story scare you? Then think about this: It's a single incident.
On November 9, 1979 the U.S. military was testing a radar training tape of what an incoming missile strike would look like. Unfortunately, while being tested, the tape was accidentally broadcast on screens at the American nuclear missile headquarters (NORAD).
The long range nuclear bombers in Alaska were ordered to take off to bomb Russia, while the command tried to verify the attack with other radar systems and satellites (which didn't show anything unusual). It took 6 minutes before an anonymous officer discovered the error, and the bombers were recalled.
We've all heard of Yeltsin, but have you ever heard of Stanislav Petrov? He's a retired Soviet military officer, now living in Fryazino, Russia.
In September, 1983 U.S.-Soviet relations were likely at their worst point since the Cuban Missile Crisis. To top it off, the Russians had just installed a new early-warning system.
On September 26, 1983, Petrov was the shift officer in command of the Soviet early-warning radar defenses. The system twice reported an incoming nuclear strike from North America, once with a single missile, a second time with 4.
Petrov, in a remarkably gutsy move, overrode the computer both times. He declared it an error and didn't pass the information to his superiors. His reasoning was based entirely on his gut instinct that the new system couldn't be trusted. As it turned out, he was right.
Petrov himself couldn't launch a strike. But both sides were on such a hair trigger at the time that if he'd passed the information farther up the line, most historians agree that his superiors would have assumed the worst and ordered a retaliatory attack.
You want more? During the Cuban Missile Crisis Vasili Arkhipov was First Officer on a submarine stationed in the Caribbean. His submerged boat was surrounded by American destroyers, who were trying to identify it.
The captain thought war between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had started, and wanted to launch a nuclear torpedo. To do so required a unanimous opinion of the boat's 3 top officers. The other 2 wanted to launch, and Arkhipov refused. He argued so forcefully against doing so that the captain decided to surface, identify himself, and check with Moscow. The movie "Crimson Tide" was based on his story.
In only one incident was it actually a world leader who averted disaster. In the rest (and there are many others, read here, or over here) it was a few people (even one), considerably lower in the chain.
On this day in 1995 it was only 2 minutes. Just 120 seconds. Less time than it took you to read this.
Life on the edge is precarious.

New Scientist has an article on the contenders for the Google Lunar X Prize. If you haven’t heard of this, it is a contest sponsored by Google to see who can land a rover on the Moon and accomplish a set of pre-assigned tasks. Do this and your team gets a great deal of recognition and $20 million.
The Google Lunar X Prize site details what the rovers need to accomplish: “The Google Lunar X PRIZE is a $30 million international competition to safely land a robot on the surface of the Moon, travel 500 meters over the lunar surface, and send images and data back to the Earth. Teams must be at least 90% privately funded and must be registered to compete by December 31, 2010. The first team to land on the Moon and complete the mission objectives will be awarded $20 million; the full first prize is available until December 31, 2012. After that date, the first prize will drop to $15 million. The second team to do so will be awarded $5 million. Another $5 million will awarded in bonus prizes. The final deadline for winning the prize is December 31, 2014.”
So, on the New Scientist site there photos of some of the more interesting and unique entries. They cover the range of hoppers, wheeled rovers, and, in one case, a sphere-shaped robot reminiscent of a hamster ball. You can see this planned lunar bot in the photo below. Click on the photo to go to the page in the New Scientist article about this creation by Team Frednet, one of the Google X Prize entrants. And look at the video on You Tube of the PicoRover, as it is called. This innovative approach to a lunar rover is very intriguing because it weighs only 500 grams. It certainly won’t need a Saturn 5 to get it to the Moon. And besides, if this design doesn't make it to the Moon, it certainly has a future as a cat toy.
Image: Team Frednet/Joshua Tristancho
More than a dozen teams are racing to claim a $30 million prize for landing a robot rover on the moon – see the most advanced prototypes so far…
Hamster balls and lunar hoppers: meet the X Prize teams
Wed, 12 Aug 2009 14:50:14 GMT

King cobra is the longest venomous snake in the world. Although its venom is not much powerful like Black mamba or other snakes. But his large size make him more deadly. This huge snake can grow up to (19ft) and 20 kg in weight which is a lot for venomous snake. In ancient times peoples worshiped king cobra and some peoples are still doing so.
King Cobra mostly lives in forested areas. This huge snake can be found in Southeast Asia and some parts of India. It normally eats other small snake that’s why its genus name is Ophiophagus , which means “snake- eater”. It can also eat pythons which is size able snakes. Its color is pale olive, tan, yellow olive color or something like this.
This huge snake mostly hunt at day time and very little at night time. It hunts with their long fangs which may be growing up to 0.5 inches which make this snake more deadly. It swallows its prey and his toxins help him in digestion of prey. King Cobra venom is also very dangerous. The bite taken from king cobra can lead you to death. Its mortality rate of a bite is 75%.
Defense Against Enemy
The great predator of King cobra is mongoose, which is quite resistance to neurotoxins. King cobra will try to fight with its hood flatten this help him in closed mouth strikes. If all fails, he will generally try to flee. But it is also hard for mongoose to defeat such a long snake.
Due to king cobra long size and deadly venom make him perfect predator. Although his venom is not much powerful like black mamba or Russell viper. But it is five times faster reactive venom then black mamba. With every bite king cobra inject 6 mil of venom to prey with the help of its fangs. Which is enough for killing elephant in three hours. Venom is produced in salivary glands. When this huge snake injects his venom to a prey his fastest venom paralysis it in two minutes, thus the prey go in comma due to respiratory system failure and prey died.
The female King cobra lay about 20 to 50 eggs but before laying eggs she make a nest or mound with leaf litter to lay eggs in it. She guards her eggs and prevents any big animal to come near it. When eggs hatch a new king cobras arise from it and the life cycle of king cobra remains continuous.
- King cobra is the world longest venomous snake.
- King Cobra average life span is 20 years.
- King Cobra fastest venom allows him to kill elephant in three hours.
- King Cobra is used by snake charmers for dancing and for fun.
- King Cobra can smell blood from far away.
- King Cobra is one of the snakes who create nest or mound.
- The natural predator of king cobra is mongoose which is small mammal.
- Ancient peoples worshiped king cobras some are still doing so.

On April 30, 1803, the United States government made one of the greatest land transactions of all time when it purchased from the French Republic for $15 million dollars, a piece of real estate extending from the Gulf of Mexico north to Canada, and from the Mississippi River Basin west to the Rocky Mountains. Called the Louisiana Purchase, this transaction added 830,000 square miles of uncharted wilderness to the territory of the United States.
The Louisiana Purchase opened the west for settlement by Europeans and Americans and had grave implications for American Indians, who would soon find their ancestral homelands taken from them. It allowed for the extension of slavery, brought an end to French and Spanish domination in Arkansas and allowed a diversity of settlers to develop and perpetuate their own cultures in the six distinct geographic regions of the state.
Play the games below or download the lesson plans and activity sheets to learn more about the Louisiana Purchase.
Download these lesson plans and activity sheets for use in your classroom. All documents are in PDF Format.
Play the Games
Click on the following images to play the game! You'll need Shockwave Flash to play.
©2013 Department of Arkansas Heritage. All Rights Reserved Aristotle Web Design ®

Nappies and the environment
Both reusable and disposable nappies have some environmental impact stemming from the production, cleaning and disposal of the both nappy products.
- Many cloth nappies are made from cotton, which is a crop that uses large amounts of pesticides and water in its production. Two other choices are hemp and bamboo which are slowly becoming more popular choices.
- The soaking, rinsing and washing of cloth nappies uses water and energy in the heating of the water. This process also releases detergents into the environment.
You can educe the environmental impact of cloth nappies by:
- Choosing to use biodegradable, phosphate-free detergents
- Using a cold water cycle and then using solar power (on the washing line) to dry the nappies
- Only wash your nappies when you have a full load, thereby avoiding wasting water
- Choosing not to use a fabric softener
- Buying affront-loading washing machine which uses less water than a top-loader
- Considerably add to the world's landfill each year
- use chemicals in their manufacture and disposal
- can cause fecal pollution on disposal.
- 1. Best pregnancy books and DVDs
- 2. Bathing your toddler
- 3. Your diet and healthy teeth and gums
- 4. Best baby car seat guide
- 5. Toy safety
- 6. Water safety
- 7. First aid and emergencies
- 8. Your baby and immunisation
- 9. Baby cold and cough
- 10. Your baby and hot weather
- 11. Teething
- 12. Personal fitness for mums
- 13. 10 benefits of exercise during pregnancy

The OED “is widely regarded as the accepted authority on the English language. It is an unsurpassed guide to the meaning, history, and pronunciation of 600,000 words— past and present—from across the English-speaking world. As a historical dictionary, the OED is very different from those of current English, in which the focus is on present-day meanings. You’ll still find these in the OED, but you’ll also find the history of individual words, and of the language—traced through 3 million quotations, from classic literature and specialist periodicals to films scripts and cookery books.” For more information about this resource, visit their site.
To access this database, please visit the Databases A-Z page or visit the English Literatures LibGuide. Contact Sue Samson, firstname.lastname@example.org, with questions or for more information on how this database can help you with your research or teaching.

During this week's close encounter with Earth, astronomers tracked the aircraft-carrier-sized asteroid 2005 YU55 with radar instruments, infrared cameras, visible-light telescopes — and an ultraviolet-sensitive space telescope as well.
This video shows the view from NASA's Swift satellite, which trained its Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope on the space rock as it zoomed away from Earth at 24,300 mph on Wednesday. Swift is best-known for its observations of high-energy outbursts and cosmic explosions, but it turns out that the spacecraft has been involved in 10 asteroid-observing sessions as well.
Swift's scientists had the satellite watch a couple of patches of sky that YU55 was predicted to pass through, and during the second observing opportunity, the telescope got a good fix on the asteroid.
"We observed the asteroid with Swift's Ultraviolet/Optical and X-ray telescopes but, as expected, we saw it only in the UV," Dennis Bodewits, a Swift team member at the University of Maryland in College Park, said in today's video advisory from NASA.
During the 27-minute long exposure, Swift detected short-term variations in brightness caused by the asteroid's rotation.
"The result is a movie of 2005 YU55 at ultraviolet wavelengths unobtainable from ground-based telescopes," NASA reported today. "For planetary scientists, this movie is a treasure trove of data that will help them better understand how this asteroid is put together, information that may help make predictions of its motion more secure for centuries to come."
More about the asteroid encounter:
- Parting shots from the asteroid
- Passing asteroid puts on a show
- Your guide to the asteroid encounter
- How to save our planet from a killer asteroid
- Could the asteroid destroy the moon? (No)
- Why radar's the best for tracking near-Earth objects
- Interactive: Close encounters of the asteroid kind
Connect with the Cosmic Log community by "liking" the log's Facebook page, following @b0yle on Twitter or following the Cosmic Log Google+ page. You can also check out "The Case for Pluto," my book about the controversial dwarf planet and the search for new worlds.

Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) researchers have developed a new type of miniature endoscope that produces three-dimensional, high-definition images, which may greatly expand the application of minimally invasive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. In the October 19 issue of Nature, the team from the Wellman Center for Photomedicine at MGH describes their prototype device and a demonstration of its use in a mouse model.
"This new ultraminiature endoscope is the first to allow three-dimensional imaging of areas inside the body," says Guillermo Tearney, MD, PhD, of the MGH Wellman Center, the report's senior author. "Its ability to go places that other imaging tools cannot reach opens new possibilities for medical diagnosis and eventually treatment."
Standard miniature endoscopic devices – which give physicians access to hard-to-reach internal organs and structures – utilize bundles of optical fibers to supply light to and transmit images from the areas of interest. Larger endoscopes that use image sensors to produce high-quality, two-dimensional images can be a centimeter or more in diameter. Existing miniature endoscopes using smaller fiber bundles may be more flexible but have difficulty producing high-quality images.
The new device developed at MGH-Wellman uses a technology called spectrally encoded endoscopy (SEE). Multicolored light from a single optical fiber – introduced through a probe about the size of a human hair – is broken into its component colors and projected onto tissue, with each color illuminating a different part of the tissue surface. The light reflected back is recorded, and the intensity of the various colors decoded by a spectrometer, which analyzes the wavelengths of light. Another device called an interferometer, which calculates structural information based on the interaction between two waves of light, provides the data required to create three-dimensional images.
To demonstrate the device's application in a live animal, the researchers used the system to image metastatic ovarian tumors on the abdominal wall of a mouse. The SEE probe was passed into the abdominal cavity through a fine-gauge needle. The resulting three-dimensional image showed several raised areas of tumor nodules, the presence of which was confirmed by histologic analysis of the tissue.
"The most important feature of this new endoscope is the ability to obtain three-dimensional images, something we don't believe is offered by any commercially available miniature endoscope system," says Dvir Yelin, PhD, first author of the Nature paper. "While the image resolution we achieved in this demonstration is similar to existing small-diameter endoscopes, with further optimization of the optics it is possible to obtain images with 10 times the number of pixels provided by other miniature endoscopes."
"This new technology will offer physicians and surgeons the capability to bring many more procedures into outpatient settings, reduce anesthesia requirements and minimize tissue damage," Tearney adds. "The device's size and flexibility should allow safer navigation through such delicate structures as the salivary ducts, the fallopian tubes and the pancreatic duct. Fetal and pediatric procedures may also benefit from this tool. Eventually, SEE could give rise to new procedures that permit diagnosis and microsurgery in previously inaccessible areas of the body."
Tearney is an associate professor of Pathology at Harvard Medical School. He and his colleagues are working on adapting the SEE device for human studies in the near future. Additional co-authors of the Nature report are Imran Rizvi, Matthew White, MD, Jason Motz, PhD, Tayyaba Hasan, PhD, and Brett Bouma, PhD – all of the Wellman Center. The research was supported by grants from the Center for the Integration of Medicine and Innovative Technology, the National Science Foundation and the Whitaker Foundation.
Massachusetts General Hospital, established in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the United States, with an annual research budget of nearly $500 million and major research centers in AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, human genetics, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, transplantation biology and photomedicine. MGH and Brigham and Women's Hospital are founding members of Partners HealthCare System, a Boston-based integrated health care delivery system.
Last reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 21 Feb 2009
Published on PsychCentral.com. All rights reserved.

The loss of biodiversity affects us in many ways. For some of us, its loss is felt in the same way that we regret the destruction of a great work of art- it may not affect us directly, but the indirect impact is strong. For others, its loss is felt in changes in lifestyles and livelihoods- the measurable costs are high. Striking the right balance between the conservation/sustainable use and the loss of biodiversity requires accounting for all the impacts of its destruction. Weighing the loss against any potential benefits will ensure that the social, as well as economic, well-being of every one are at the best levels possible. Market based economic systems have the potential to ensure that such a balancing occurs, but require that all the impacts of its loss, or use, have been fully internalised into market transactions. This book shows how public policy in the form of market creation can be used to internalise the loss of biodiversity. It promotes the use of markets to ensure that our collective preferences for conversation and sustainable use are reflected in economic outcomes.
Executive Summary available.
How to obtain this publication
Readers can access the full version of Handbook of Market Creation for Biodiversity: Issues in Implementation choosing from the following options:
- Subscribers and readers at subscribing institutions can access the online edition via SourceOECD, our online library.
- Non-subscribers can purchase the PDF e-book and/or paper copy via our Online Bookshop.
- The report is available to journalists from the OECD Media Relations Division (Media Relations Division)
Executive Summary Handbook of Market Creation for Biodiversity: Issues in Implementation

Serious illness or the death of a child is a tragedy that touches all of our hearts. Over this past week four seriously ill children have been hospitalized in Oregon after drinking unpasteurized milk contaminated with E. coli O157, and although the milk in question is no longer being distributed, additional cases may yet occur. The lives of these children currently hang in the balance.
These tragedies are made even more distressing when one considers that those who gave this milk to these children undoubtedly believed they were doing what was best for them. As a parent, my heart goes out to those adults.
Unpasteurized, or "raw," milk, like many unprocessed food products, may sound healthier, but it is not. Hundreds of years of experience have demonstrated that raw milk can carry many kinds of harmful bacteria that can make you very sick or kill you, and that's why pasteurization was invented in the 19th century. While it is possible to get food-borne illnesses from many different foods, raw milk is one of the riskiest of all, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Pasteurization is a simple but very effective process. It involves heating up milk for a brief period. No chemicals are added, and pasteurization can be done on organic or regular milk. This simple heat treatment is enough to kill a host of bad germs that can get into the milk from the cow's skin, udder or feces, such as salmonella, listeria, yersinia, campylobacter, mycobacterium tuberculosis and staphylococcus aureus, in addition to E. coli. While there are occasional outbreaks from pasteurized dairy products, the rate of outbreaks from unpasteurized products, per unit consumed, is about 150 times greater than from pasteurized products. So pasteurization works.
While there is great value in eating locally sourced foods and strengthening the connections between consumers and farmers, those strategies are not enough to prevent contamination of milk with dangerous bacteria. Nor is it a matter of preventing lax procedures used by farmers; it would be impossible for even the most conscientious farmer to prevent contamination, and that is why pasteurization is required for commercially distributed milk. The milk implicated in this outbreak came from a "herd-share," and so was legally distributed to 48 members, even though it was not pasteurized.
In the wake of this outbreak, I had occasion to review some clippings from 1922 in The Oregonian documenting 13 deaths and many illnesses from an outbreak caused by a different type of bacteria transmitted by unpasteurized milk from the Pleasant View Dairy. But we don't have to go back to the 1920s to find these outbreaks. In the past two decades we have had at least six outbreaks linked to raw milk in Oregon alone, and many others nationwide.
Milk is good for most people. It is packed with vitamins, calcium and protein. But history has taught us over and over again that milk needs to pasteurized to be safe. These latest events have taught us that painful lesson yet again.
Mel Kohn is director of the Oregon Public Health Division of the Oregon Health Authority.

Hundreds of years ago, settlers who came to Fort Worth were greeted by rolling prairies for as far as the eye could see. Today, those welcoming fields have been replaced by growing cities and towns, but Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT) remembers this heritage and culture with the annual celebration of Prairie Day.
BRIT's Prairie Day offers family-friendly education about the beauty and importance of the North Texas landscape through hands-on events and activities that kids will love. Kids will be encouraged to get a little dirty as they help to make seed balls, a Prairie Day tradition. Using a Native American technique, visitors will combine seeds, humus, and red clay into tiny packets of life that will be tossed into the fields surrounding BRIT to populate the area with native plants. Imagine the fun of returning to the BRIT next spring to see the plants you helped to grow!
Other activities throughout the day will combine fun family games with opportunities to learn about nature, including face painting, balloon twisting, and a variety of games provided by the Log Cabin Village. In addition, live music and cowboy poets will be on hand to entertain the crowd.
Don't miss these other great activities:
- Beekeeping demonstrations
- Soap and candle making
- Children’s coloring contest
- Basket Weaving
- Solar Cooking Demonstrations
- Meet two special guest prairie dogs
The 3rd annual Prairie Day event will be held on Saturday, May 18th from 10 am to 2 pm at BRIT Headquarters 1700 University Drive.

No flood, no money. What a trade!
When asked about his future, Nguyen Van Nghe, a fisherman in Dong Thap Province answered: “No flood, no money. What a trade!” He was referring to the fact that over the last 10 years the construction of high dykes in Dong Thap and the Long Xuyen Quadrangle has blocked the annual replenishment of freshwater, nutrients, and sediment on which fish depend. In turn, this has destroyed the wild fisheries on which the landless, including Nghe, who make up 20% of the Mekong Delta’s population, depend. Wild fish production has declined by 40% over the last 10 years and species that were once used as fertilizer now sell for VND180,000/kg. The predatory snakehead, which once occupied the top of the aquatic food chain, has disappeared. The high dykes have also greatly reduced the annual flushing. This has resulted in the accumulation of pathogens and toxins in the surface water and growing public health problems.
High dykes were built to allow a third, or autumn-winter, rice crop to be grown because of the high prices this off-season crop can fetch on the international market. In 2011, 560,000 hectares of autumn-winter rice were planted, up from 520,000 hectares in 2010. But because of the loss of sediment, rice productivity can only be maintained through the heavy use of fertilizer. Nguyen Huu Thien, a wetland specialist based in Can Tho, questions whether the third rice crop is profitable once you take into account the increased use of fertilizer and pesticide, the cost of dyke maintenance, the loss of wild fish, and, inevitably, the cost of dyke failure: when dykes failed in 2011, 50 people were killed and tens of millions of dollars of houses, roads, and other infrastructure was destroyed. The intensification of rice production has also resulted in the virtual extinction of the traditional long-stem floating rice varieties, which in Brazil sell for $3,500/ton, almost ten times the price of autumn-winter rice.
Dr. Ngo Van Be of the Dong Thap Muoi Institute of Research and Development says that the floods that used to be “mild” are now “fierce” and unpredictable. In hydrological terms, what the high dykes have done is to separate the Mekong River from its 1.5 million-hectare floodplain. According to Dr. Le Anh Tuan of Can Tho University, these dykes have narrowed the floodplain during the peak October-November flood from 150 kilometers to a few tens of kilometers. This has accelerated the water flow and displaced flooding to residential areas downstream. Reduction of the flooded area has also reduced groundwater recharge, reduced river base flows, and increased dry season saline intrusion, which increases the cost of drinking water supplies. The violent floods of 2011 call into question the value of the third rice crop and instead argue for a more natural hydrology that provides multiple benefits, including greater resilience to climate change, which is likely to result in more intense rainfalls and flash flooding.
To learn more about these issues, watch this 30-minute file produced by the Center for Water Resources Conservation and Development (WARECOD) and VTC16.

Both the Crusades in the late eleventh century and the harsh persecution of Jews by the Bohemian king Vratislav II led to the migration of Jews from Bohemia, Germany and Austria to Hungary, where they found refuge; some of them settled in Slovakia. Under a "Jewish law" enacted by the Hungarian king Kalman, Jews were permitted to live only in cathedral towns and on bishops estates. In 1241 the Mongols (also known as Tartars) invaded Hungary, wreaking havoc and destruction. Jewish merchants made a major contribution to rebuilding the economy. A letter from King Bela IV refers to Jews in the cities of Pressburg (Bratislava), Senica, Trnava, Pezinok, Nitra, and Trencin. In 1251 the King granted the Jews a "privilege", a document promising them protection against attacks by Christians, a permanent legal status and other benefits. At the time, most Jews made their living in finance, a minority worked in commerce and the importing of goods, and others held positions in public administration or were involved in the minting of coins, to the displeasure of the Pope and Church leaders.
From the thirteenth century on the Jews were wards of the king and paid taxes to the royal treasury. They lived primarily in the cities, on separate Jewish streets allotted to them by the authorities in order to segregate them from the Christians. In some towns there was an organized community life and Jewish public institutions. Nitra, a major administrative and economic center in the Middle Ages, had a longstanding Jewish community that is considered one of the oldest in Slovakia. A document from the year 1113 mentions Mons Judaeorum in Nitra, where there was a Jewish cemetery. In the thirteenth century Jews also lived in the nearby suburb of Parovce, which was known as Castrum Judaeorum, i.e., "fortified Jewish settlement". Jewish sources also mention the Jewish community in Nitra; for example, in his book Or Zarua, written in the late thirteenth century, a leading halakhic authority, Rabbi Isaac ben Moses of Vienna, refers to a question asked by the community regarding marriage laws. At about the same time, Jewish refugees from Bohemia and Germany founded a community in Pressburg. In the fourteenth century the Pressburg community numbered close to 800 people and seems to have been the largest in the kingdom. In the late fourteenth century the spiritual leader of Trnava was Rabbi Isaac Tyrnau (the German name of Trnava), known as the leading Torah sage in Hungary and the author of Sefer Ha-minhagim, which describes the religious practices of the Jews of Hungary and the neighboring countries.
As the Christian population turned increasingly to religious extremism and social ferment in the fifteenth century, the Jews' situation grew worse. Anti-Jewish riots broke out in several places. In 1491 the authorities in Trnava spread a blood libel against the Jews, and twelve men and four women were burned at the stake on August 22 of that year. After the Turks defeated the Hungarians in 1526, the Jews were expelled from Pressburg, Trnava, and several other localities. In 1529 a blood libel was lodged against the Jews of Pezinok. Thirty members of the community were burned at the stake and the rest of the Jews fled the city. Mistreatment of Jews occurred in other communities as well. By the end of the sixteenth century the old communities of Slovakia had disintegrated, their members scattering in all directions. As a result of the severe persecution, the continuity of the community life in Slovakia was severely disturbed.
The immigration of Jews, beginning in the mid-seventeenth century and intensifying during the eighteenth century, gave rise to the Jewish communities of Slovakia that existed until the Holocaust. Some members of the Hungarian aristocracy realized the advantages that might be gained from the Jews economic activity and, unlike the townspeople, made efforts to encourage Jews to settle on their estates. The Jewish immigrants came mainly from the neighboring countries of Moravia, Poland and Austria. Jewish refugees settled in Nitra County in 1649 and later in the counties of Pressburg and Trencin. New edicts in Moravia and hardships in Poland spurred migration to Slovakia, and the area of Jewish settlement expanded northward and eastward. Most inhabitants of the regions in which new communities were established were Slovakian subsistence farmers, serfs of Hungarian feudal lords. The socioeconomic conditions created an interdependency between the two sectors of the population, especially in economic affairs. A census from 1746 shows that almost half the Jewish heads of household in Slovakia were natives of Moravia and Bohemia, 10 percent of Poland, 5 percent of Austria, and 35 percent of various locations in Slovakia or elsewhere in Hungary. By the middle of the eighteenth century there were several fairly large Jewish communities in Slovakia, some with populations in the hundreds. As Jews resettled Slovakia, an interesting encounter occurred between Jewish ethnicities and cultures. The Jews in the west were chiefly of the Ashkenazi type, who tended to be more educated and more open to influences of the surrounding culture and society. The Jews in eastern Slovakia, in contrast, followed Hasidic customs, spoke Yiddish, and resembled the Jews of Poland and Galicia in their way of life and dress. The two cultures were slow to blend, completing the process only in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The Jews' living conditions deteriorated drastically during the reign of Empress Maria Theresa (1740-l780). The regime promulgated various edicts and even threatened to expel the Jews from the empire. In 1749 the Jews were subjected to a special "tolerance tax" (taxa tolerantialis), a heavy burden for the immigrant families. However, their situation improved when Emperor Joseph II (l780-l790) instituted changes and innovations in the governance of the empire. In 1783 he issued an Edict of Tolerance (Sistematica Gentis Iudaicae Regulatio) for the Jews of Hungary, which referred mainly to place of residence, occupation, and educational matters. The Jews were granted permission to work in almost any occupation and to live in most parts of the empire, except in and around mining towns. Following the Edict of Tolerance, the areas of Jewish settlement expanded and new communities were founded. Jews became financially well off and in some places flourished spiritually and culturally. The Jewish community of Hungary also grew rapidly during this time, attaining a population of 83,000, about a half of them in Slovakia and the nearby Burgenland (Austria). Throughout most of the eighteenth century Jews lived in a relatively small area covering a few counties in the west and east. Large portions of central and northern Slovakia, defined as mining areas, were still off limits to Jewish settlement.
In the early nineteenth century the Jewish population of Slovakia grew quite vigorously. In the 1820s the region contained about one hundred organized communities, mostly in small towns and rural villages. The increase in the Jewish population and the gradual improvement in their economic condition were accompanied by a thriving religious life and the emergence of the first Torah centers. At that time there were seven relatively large yeshivas in Slovakia, headed by well-known rabbis and scholars. The most important of them was the Pressburg yeshiva, headed by Rabbi Moses Sofer (Schreiber), known as the Hatam Sofer, who was considered the leading halakhic authority of his day. In the midst of a liberalization wave in 1840, the Hungarian parliament passed several important legislative amendments pertaining to the Jews, mainly concerning places of residence and economic matters. Many Slovakian Jews moved to other parts of the empire around that time, and the old, traditional Jewish communities began to decline in number. New communities were founded in central and northern Slovakia, and the map of Jewish settlement in Slovakia attained geographic contiguity.
The "Spring of Nations" and the Hungarian uprising against Austrian rule (1848-1849) were not beneficial to the Jews. In March 1848 riots broke out in Pressburg (Bratislava) and nearby localities and spread to other regions. In many Jewish communities, especially in western Slovakia, houses were plundered and community institutions were destroyed; in some places there were casualties. Several localities were abandoned for some time.
In the second half of the nineteenth century, after the situation had stabilized, there were about 115 major Jewish communities in Slovakia with recognized rabbinical offices and 200 smaller communities with their own public institutions, chiefly in villages. Several dozen yeshivas, with thousands of students, became important Torah centers. Slovakian Jews played a significant economic role as mediators between the agricultural sector and the growing cities and were involved in trade in agricultural produce. They included merchants, tenant farmers and estate managers, but many worked in petty commerce as artisans or peddlers occupations that Jews in the Oberland had practiced for generations.
Whereas manifestations of socioeconomically motivated anti-Semitism that had erupted in the early nineteenth century declined when the revolution of 1848-1849 was suppressed, nationally based anti-Semitism increased over time. The Slovakian intelligentsia, which advocated a Slovakian national revival, regarded the Jews as tools of the hated Hungarian regime and, therefore, one of the causes of the plight of the Slovakian people. After Hungarian Jewry attained equal rights in 1867, anti-Semitic activity increased in Slovakia. Church representatives were actively involved in stirring up hatred of the Jews. In July 1882 some two hundred priests gathered in Topolcany to discuss the "Jewish question". The upshot of their deliberations was to urge the Hungarian parliament to revoke or limit the equal rights that it had granted to Jews in 1867.
From the beginning of the eighteenth century the empire had been undergoing a modernization process that was paralleled by similar changes in Hungarian Jewry. The ideas of the Enlightenment that seeped into Hungary during those years influenced many Hungarian Jews to cast aside their traditions and seek their future in European culture. Hungarian liberals encouraged Jews to abandon their traditional lifestyle and adopt the customs of enlightened Hungarian society. Attempts to amend or reform religious rules were met with vigorous opposition from both the religious leadership in Slovakia and a large portion of the Jewish population, which was characterized by a conservative way of life and a strong affinity for religion and tradition. The opposition to the reform trends was led, from the very beginning, by Rabbi Moshe Sofer of Pressburg. As a result of his vehement stance Pressburg became the center of the struggle against the Haskala (Jewish Enlightenment) movement and religious reforms. In the mid-nineteenth century the Kulturkampf within Hungarian Jewry intensified; and in 1865 dozens of Orthodox rabbis gathered in Michalovce, Slovakia. They adopted stringent resolutions including a boycott of synagogues that had instituted changes, and a strict injunction against sermons in German and Hungarian, secular education, and the study of foreign languages. The resolutions were given the force of a halakhic ruling, thereby further deepening the fissure among Hungarian Jewry and precluding all attempts to heal the rift. At the initiative of the authorities, representatives of Hungarian Jewry were invited to Budapest in December 1868 to promote the emancipation and to establish a countrywide umbrella organization for all Jewish communities in the country. The Liberal Jews welcomed the initiative, but the Orthodox regarded it with great suspicion. They feared that such an organization, supported by the authorities and the Liberal Jews, would diminish the communities' independence and undermine the status of the rabbi as supreme religious authority and sole arbiter. After all attempts at compromise failed, the Orthodox delegates walked out of the congress. The conflict between the camps reached its peak, causing a rupture between the communities and a deep polarization of Hungarian Jewry. As a result, two separate organizations of communities were established one for the Orthodox and one for the Liberals (Neologs). Some communities did not join either organization and retained their previous status; these communities were known as status quo ante. The Jews of Slovakia were more united in their affinity for religion than those in the rest of Hungary. Two-thirds of the communities, especially the old, traditional ones in the small towns and villages, joined the Orthodox organization. In parallel, most new communities, primarily in central Slovakia, joined the Neologs. In several locations two communities formed, one Orthodox and one Neolog, and they vied for control of community institutions and assets that had previously belonged to the joint administration.
On the eve of World War I the Jewish population of Slovakia numbered 140,000. Collectively they were quite diverse, comprising several religious factions whose members differed in their way of life, affinity for religion, origins, and cultural backgrounds. They spoke four different languages among themselves and with the Christians, belonged to various socioeconomic classes, and were divided among national groups. Most Slovakian Jews originated in villages and small towns and had traits characteristic of post-rural society.
After World War I social agitation grew in Slovakia. Economic hardship
increased following the return and demobilization of soldiers, and the
frustration was soon vented in several weeks of violent acts against Jews. The
burglary and looting of homes and businesses affected Jews of all classes, poor
and rich alike.
The new government adopted the Habsburg monarchies legislation regarding the Jews: namely, in the Czech province the Austrian laws remained in effect, whereas in Slovakia the Hungarian laws remained but with slight modifications. Attempts to establish a countrywide organization of communities representing all Jews in Czechoslovakia were foiled by the Orthodox leadership in Slovakia, which feared that this would undermine its hegemony among the religious Jews. Meanwhile, a new source of friction further exacerbated the tense relations between the factions. Under the Czechoslovakian constitution members of the Jewish religion could declare that they belonged to the Jewish nation. The Orthodox were vehemently opposed to defining Judaism as a national entity. To them Jewry was solely a religious community and would remain so until the Jews were redeemed from exile. Nevertheless, Jewish nationalism, represented by the Zionist movement, managed to establish itself and make inroads even among traditional Jews. Many Zionists, especially the young, came from Orthodox families; they joined Jewish national and Zionist organizations despite the opposition of the Orthodox religious leadership.
After Czechoslovakia was established the organizations of Jewish communities formed their institutions. The Organization of Autonomous Orthodox Congregations in Slovakia (OAOCS) included 170 of 228 congregations and about 75 percent of Slovakian Jews. Over time it became one of the most authoritative, powerful and influential Jewish organizations in Czechoslovakia. Meanwhile, Agudath Israel, which had close ties to the OAOCS, complemented it by carrying out a wide range of activities in dozens of branches. Agudath Israel focused primarily on individual life and on education consistent with Orthodoxy. The ties between the two organizations, strong to begin with, became even stronger when Rabbi Samuel David Ungar, one of the leaders of the OAOCS, was named president of Agudath Israel in Czechoslovakia. Agudath Israel and its youth movements engaged in ramified social and welfare activities and educational initiatives, including preschools, a Beth Yaakov school system for girls, and camps for children and teenagers. At the end of World War I there were twenty-nine Neolog communities in Slovakia. Cut off from their center in Hungary, they encountered complex organizational problems that threatened their survival. In 1925 the Neologs decided to form a joint organization with the fifty-five Status Quo Ante communities, which since 1928 had been known as Jeshurun.
In 1920 there were seventy-seven Jewish primary schools in Slovakia and two high schools. Forty-six of the schools were Orthodox; the rest were liberal. Noteworthy, only 45 percent of Jewish children attended Jewish schools; the majority attended public schools. Due to the growing percentage of students in schools that taught in Slovakian, the language spoken by the young Jews changed. Instead of German and Hungarian, the main languages used by Slovakian Jews in the past, the young people adopted Slovakian as their vernacular. Alongside the formal educational system, an extensive system of Torah education institutions functioned in Slovakia, including boys' schools (cheder and Talmud Torah), Beth Yaacov seminaries for religious girls, and more than thirty yeshivas that were accredited as religious educational institutions. In 1930 the Pressburg (Bratislava) yeshiva and three other yeshivas were accredited by the Czechoslovakian Ministry of Education as institutions of higher education.
Vibrant Zionist activity was enjoyed in inter-war Slovakia and new branches of the movement were established in dozens of cities and towns. In addition to the Zionist Organization, there was a Jewish National Party (Zidovska Strana) that focused on domestic Jewish policy and representation of the Jews national, religious, economic, and social interests vis-a-vis the authorities. The party did well in elections for town councils and county and regional assemblies. Although the Orthodox establishment doggedly fought Zionism and the Jewish National Party, the Zionists penetrated even the Orthodox communities. In the mid-1930s about 20 percent of Slovakian Jews purchased the Zionist "Shekel", thereby becoming formal members of the Zionist Movement.
Zionist youth movements predated World War I. In 1919-1920, after the wartime turmoil in Slovakia had waned, Zionist youth groups reorganized and opened clubs in all the major cities and some small towns. In 1924, representatives of Zionist youth groups met in Nitra and together founded He-haluts. Religious teenagers established Mizrachi Youth. Organizational and social activity in the Zionist youth movements reached its peak in the 1930s, with tens of thousands of young members from all strata of Jewish society. Hundreds of them emigrated to Palestine after undergoing training for this purpose in Slovakia. The Maccabi sports association launched social and cultural activity with Zionist national leanings. Thousands of youngsters and adults, Orthodox and Liberal alike, were active in clubs throughout Slovakia.
During the period of the Republic of Czechoslovakia, Slovakian Jewry did not undergo any major demographic changes. In the 1930s about 140,000 Jews lived in 2,337 localities. Some 55 percent of them lived in villages and small towns with populations of less than 5,000; 18 percent lived in the two largest cities (Bratislava and Kosice), and only 25 percent lived in cities of l0,000-25,000 residents. The socioeconomic status of Slovakian Jews also remained constant during this period: 72 percent of Jewish breadwinners were self-employed, 15 percent were wage earners, and 13 percent were practitioners of liberal professions, white-collar workers, and brokers.
In the second half of the 1930s, as political tensions mounted in
Czechoslovakia, anti-Semitic sentiments increased among large segments of the
Slovakian people. The nationalist parties that agitated for Slovakian national
autonomy, especially the Slovak Peoples Party, held strong anti-Semitic
positions and incited against the Jews. On October 6, 1938, after the Munich
agreement in late September had forced Czechoslovakia to cede territory to the
Third Reich, the Slovak Peoples Party declared extensive autonomy in Slovakia
and instituted a one-party totalitarian regime. On November 2 large portions of
southern Slovakia home to more than 45,000 Jews were annexed to
Hungary. The Slovakian government blamed the Jews regarding their supposed
support of the annexation and started removing thousands of Jewish families who
held foreign citizenship to the Hungarian and Polish borders. Few of the
deportees were permitted to return to their homes.
While the deportations were in progress, an underground cell known as the Working Group, headed by Rabbi Michael Dov Weissmandel and Gisi Fleischmann, formed within the Center of Jews in an attempt to stanch the deportations and aid the deportees. The Working Groups success in halting the deportations from Slovakia encouraged its members to intensify their efforts to save all of European Jewry by negotiating with the Nazis. The resulting initiative, devised by Rabbi Weissmandel, was known as the Europa Plan. In April 1944 two Slovakian Jews, Alfred Wetzler and Walter Rosenberg (Rudolf Vrba), escaped from Auschwitz. The Working Group took detailed testimony from them about the nature of the Auschwitz camp and the extermination methods used there. A sketch of the extermination facilities, based on the description given by the two men, was attached to their testimony. The Auschwitz Protocols, as the document was known, were sent from Slovakia to the free world, where they reached Jewish organizations. The Working Groups purpose in releasing the Protocols was to sound an alarm and marshal worldwide public opinion in favor of extensive rescue activities and bombing of the railroads leading to Auschwitz and the extermination facilities themselves.
Jews joined the first resistance groups that organized in Slovakia in 1942. Most of them were active in the Communist and Czechoslovakian underground movements. A Jewish underground group was also formed in the Novaky labor camp in 1942. These groups tried to prevent a resumption of the deportations and started preparing for active resistance. On August 29, 1944, an armed uprising broke out in Slovakia in an attempt to overthrow the pro-Nazi regime and reestablish the Republic of Czechoslovakia. As the partisan attacks intensified, the German army invaded Slovakia. The Jewish group from the Novaky camp was assigned to halt the advance of the SS troops along one of their main attack routes. The German invasion of Slovakia augured ill for the last remaining Jews. Many tried to reach the rebel-controlled area in the hope of surviving, and thousands of destitute Jewish refugees gathered in the rebels main stronghold, Banska Bystrica. Parachutists sent by the Yishuv (the pre-Israel Jewish community in Palestine), headed by Haviva Reik, mobilized to help them. Although the uprising was quelled two months after it began, rebel units, including Jews, fled to the mountains, where they continued to engage the enemy until the liberation. About 1,600 Jews fought in various partisan units; approximately 170 of them were killed.
After the uprising was suppressed, the Germans took over the authority for Jewish affairs. SS officer Alois Brunner, one of Eichmanns assistants, went to Slovakia to deport all Jews irrespective of their status or their "certificates of exemption". Those Jews who were captured by the Nazis and their Slovakian accomplices were taken to the Sered camp. The deportation of the remaining Jews in Slovakia resumed on September 30, 1944. From then until March 31, 1945, some 12,000 Jews were deported from Slovakia; only half survived. Another 2,500 Jews were murdered on Slovakian soil during this period. Additional victims among Slovakian Jews were those who had fled to Hungary and were deported from there to the extermination camps.
The Jews in the territories annexed to Hungary in 1938-1939 met the same fate
as those in the rest of Hungary. After the annexation of these territories,
Hungarians began to persecute the Jews and accused them of supporting
Czechoslovakia. Of the 10,600 business owners only 4,500 were permitted to keep
their establishments going. Beginning in 1940, close to 7,500 men from southern
Slovakia were taken to work in labor battalions; few survived. Several thousand
Jews lacking Hungarian citizenship were deported in 1941 to the occupied part
of Ukraine, where most of them were murdered. After the Germans occupied
Hungary (March 19, 1944), new anti-Jewish edicts were promulgated.
Ghettoization of the Jews began in the second half of April 1944. The first
transports from the territories annexed to Hungary left for Auschwitz in the
second half of May 1944; the rest of the deportations occurred in June of that
year. Of some 45,000 Jews who lived in those territories, 10,000 survived.
About 100,000 Slovakian Jews 73 percent of their number in 1938
perished during World War II.
JewishGen, Inc. makes no representations regarding the accuracy of
the translation. The reader may wish to refer to the original material
JewishGen is not responsible for inaccuracies or omissions in the original work and cannot rewrite or edit the text to correct inaccuracies and/or omissions.
Our mission is to produce a translation of the original work and we cannot verify the accuracy of statements or alter facts cited.
Pinkas Hakehilot, Slovakia Yizkor Book Project JewishGen Home Page
Copyright © 1999-2013 by JewishGen, Inc.
Updated 23 Dec 2006 by LA

Welfare state in capitalism
Since the eruption of the sub-prime mortgage crises of 2007 to 2009, there have been hot debates on how the current “greedy capitalism” must change into sustainable capitalism.
The “Occupy Wall Street” protests were against the far-reaching negative consequences of neo-liberal capitalism.
In the wake of the global financial meltdown, the notion of Capitalism 4.0 has suddenly made headlines and the Davos Forum early this year also addressed how to make capitalism sustainable.
To what extent is this debate and the search for a new version of capitalism relevant to Korea?
Unlike advanced Western capitalist states with more than 300 years of history, Korea’s modern development of capitalism occurred in the past half century but is regarded as the representative economy of East Asian miracle performers.
Korea formally adopted capitalism in the post-liberation era after 1945 by formulating a constitution containing a market economy as its basic tenet to promote economic freedom and encourage creativity.
As a corollary of this fundamental principle, the Korean constitution dictates that the government can regulate and adjust economic matters to supplement market economic principles to achieve social justice and economic democracy.
Empirical analysis suggests that the Korean economy has achieved both growth and equity.
Ironically, at the outset of Korea’s modern economic development, the Korean War (1950-1953) allowed everyone in Korea to be on equal footing.
Furthermore, Korea, with the birth of a new democratic government, carried out two institutional reforms: land reform based on owner-cultivator principles and a compulsory education system for school-age children to be enrolled at a primary school, at the very least.
In the past half century, Korea’s rapid economic growth has evolved around the creation of chaebol (large conglomerates), administered credit allocation with easy monetary policies from banks to priority sectors and export-oriented outward-looking policies to concentrate economic power highly in favor of them.
However, in the post-1997/98 Asian financial crisis era, and with the recent global crisis, Korea’s compressed growth model has resulted in worsening income polarization and jobless growth.
Korea now faces serious challenges on its way to introducing a welfare state paradigm. As part of the campaigns for the general elections concluded last week, left-wing opposition parties introduced a series of free programs involving everything from school lunches, school tuition, universal welfare and college tuition reduction to tax hikes for the rich and a chaebol tax.
The conservative government party also put forward its own welfare policy platforms largely based on selective and prudential principles.
What type of welfare state Korea should design is likely to be a key issue in the December presidential election.
Korea should consider a welfare state as a distinct combination of democracy, welfare and capitalism, as implemented with different degrees of emphasis by Germany, all the Nordic countries, the Netherlands, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.
Given Korea’s transition to a matured advanced economy and ongoing income polarization, the country must address how to balance growth dynamism and equity.
Above all, the government should do its best to construct a social safety net for those in need.
Without due consideration of fiscal sustainability, we should avoid the popular approach to embrace “something for nothing.”
Korea may also consider privately channeled welfare measures within corporate social responsibility mandates as given in the United Nation’s new norm for shared growth.
In this regard, Korea’s large conglomerates need to be proactive in nurturing human capital for a high-tech society.
Indeed, highly skilled manpower is the core element to ensuring a sustainable endogenous growth model.
Koreans should keep in mind that the provision of welfare should not discourage the incentive to work. We should not let our next generation bear the burden of financing excessive welfare expenditure for the present generation.
We should be aware of the fact that capitalism is not a static set of institutions but an evolutionary system that reinvents and reinvigorates itself through challenges and crisis. The present case of Greece’s demise makes this clear.

If you take your ears for granted, listen up: hearing loss is the third most common health problem in the U.S. It's also on the rise. Compared to a 1971 federal survey that estimated 13.2 million Americans had hearing loss, up to 36 million Americans now report lost hearing. When hearing goes, it may affect quality of life and relationships.
In this article, WebMD looks at the causes, symptoms, and treatment of hearing loss. If you have lost some of your hearing, you'll find strategies to keep lines of communication open with friends and family. If your hearing is still intact, this article could help you keep it that way for years to come.
The following suggestions will help you care for hearing aids:
Keep hearing aids away from heat and moisture.
Replace dead batteries immediately.
Clean hearing aids as instructed.
Do not use hairspray or other hair care products while wearing hearing aids.
Turn off hearing aids when they are not in use.
Keep replacement batteries and small aids away from children and pets.
Certain conditions, including age, illness, and genetics, may contribute to hearing loss. Over several generations, modern life has added a host of ear-damaging elements to the list, including some medications and plenty of sources of loud, continuous noise.
Advanced age is the most common cause of hearing loss. One out of three people aged 65-74 has some level of hearing loss. After age 75, that ratio goes up to one out of every two people.
Researchers don't fully understand why hearing decreases with age. It could be that lifetime exposure to noise and other damaging factors slowly wear down the ears' delicate mechanics. Genes also play a role.
Noise wears down hearing if it's loud or continuous. In some workplaces, ears are exposed to dangerous noise levels every day. To understand the impact of noise, consider this: 44% of carpenters and 48% of plumbers report some hearing loss. Other noisy lines of work include the military, mining, manufacturing, agriculture, and transportation.
Even musicians, who literally create music for our ears, are at risk for noise-induced hearing loss. Some now wear special earplugs to protect their ears when they perform. The earplugs allow them to hear music without harming their ears' inner workings.
Certain medications can impair hearing and/or balance. More than 200 medications and chemicals have a track record of triggering hearing and/or balance side effects in addition to their disease-fighting capabilities. These include some antibiotics and chemotherapy drugs, aspirin, loop diuretics, a drug used to treat malaria, and several drugs for erectile dysfunction.
Sudden hearing loss, the rapid loss of 30 decibels or more of hearing ability, can happen over several hours or days. (A normal conversation is 60 decibels.) In nine out of 10 cases, sudden hearing loss affects only one ear. Though there are about 4,000 new cases of sudden hearing loss a year, the cause can only be found in 10% to 15% of cases.
Certain illnesses, such as heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes, put ears at risk by interfering with the ears' blood supply. Otosclerosis is a bone disease of the middle ear and Ménière's disease affects the inner ear. Both can cause hearing loss.
Trauma, especially that which involves a skull fracture or punctured eardrum, puts ears at serious risk for hearing loss.
Infection or ear wax can block ear canals and reduce hearing.

- Consul (abbrev. cos.; Latin plural consules) was the highest elected office of the Roman Republic and an appointive office under the Empire. The title was also used in other city states and also revived in modern states, notably in the First French Republic. — “Consul - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia”,
- Roman Consuls - names and dates of the consuls of Rome during the Roman Republic. — “Consuls of Rome”,
- Below is a list of the consuls of the Roman Republic from its foundation until the battle of Actium in 31 B.C. There were normally two consuls elected for each year. If during that year a consul resigned from office or died, a "suffect" (replacement) consul was elected in his place. — “Consuls of the Roman Republic”, ualberta.ca
- Welcome to the Website of the Federation of European Associations of Honorary Consuls - F.U.E.C.H ! Ses objectifs – précisés a l'article 2 de nos statuts – sont de promouvoir l'harmonisation des droits, tâches et devoirs des Consuls Honoraires en Europe. — “Index”,
- Consuls definition, an official appointed by the government of one country to look after its commercial interests and the welfare of its citizens in another cou See more. — “Consuls | Define Consuls at ”,
- Consuls 1st Century AD. List of Consuls. The following list of Consuls, beginning with the foundation of the Republic in 509 BC, is taking largely from the list of Varro compiled in the 1st century BC. Prior to 300 BC, the list has some known. — “List of Consuls”,
- During the time of ancient Rome as a Republic, the consuls were the highest civil and military magistrates, serving as the heads The Napoleonic Roman Republic (15 February 1798 – 23 June 1800) was headed by multiple consuls:. — “Consul - Reference”,
- Roman Magistrates: Consuls, Tribunes, Praetors, Censors and Aediles Consuls. After the last king Tarquin the Proud was expelled the rule of Rome was awarded to two elected Consuls and a pyramid of more or less. — “Roman Magistrates: Consuls, Tribunes, Praetors, Censors and”,
- Consul: Roman magistrate, comparable with a prime minister or a president. The consuls were the chairmen of the Senate, which served as a board of advisers. — “Consul”,
- Under the Republic, two (2) elected consuls shared the head of government. Consuls were members of the Senate, who had been elected to serve for a one year term in the position of Consul, the highest position in government under the Republic. — “Ancient Rome for Kids - Government under the Republic - the”,
- During the Roman Republic, the consuls were the highest civil and military magistrates, serving as the heads of government for the Republic. New consuls were elected every year. There were two consuls and they ruled together. However, after. — “Consuls”,
- Genius - the dynamic portal engine and content management system. — “CONSUL-ONLINE - Web Links”,
- Definition of Consuls in the Legal Dictionary - by Free online English dictionary and encyclopedia. What is Consuls? Meaning of Consuls as a legal term. What does Consuls mean in law?. — “Consuls legal definition of Consuls. Consuls synonyms by the”, legal-
- The Consuls were the chief executives of the Republic. In them were vested broad powers to arbitrate, legislate adjudicate, and govern. They were the chief military officers, they represented Rome in foreign matters, and they led the Senate. — “Consuls”,
- Home / Foreign Policy / The 4th Conference of the Hungarian Honorary Consuls / The Institution of Honorary Consuls - The Hungarian Honorary Consular Corps / Honorary Consuls - Short History. The short history of honorary consular representations. — “Honorary Consuls - Short History”, mfa.gov.hu
- Multiple words are searched together as one phrase. Example : world health organization for 1-5 characters, '**' for open-ended truncation, '?' to replace a single character. — “CONSULS | Catalog of the CSU Libraries & The CT State Library”,
- consul n. ( Abbr. Con. or Cons. ) An official appointed by a government to reside in a foreign country and represent his or her government's. — “consul: West's Encyclopedia of American Law (Full Article”,
- Under the Republic the minimum age of election to consul for patricians was 40 years of age, for plebeians 42. Two consuls were elected each year, they served together with veto power over each other's actions, and the year of their service was known by their names. — “Consul - Wikinfo”,
- Under the Republic, the minimum age of election to consul for patricians was 40 years of age, for plebeians 42. Two consuls were elected each year, serving together with veto power over each other's actions. Consuls executed both religious and military duties; the reading of. — “Consul - Definition”,
- Consuls & diplomats in Australia from the German-speaking countries. — “Consuls & diplomats in Australia from the German-speaking”, .au
- The Consuls will be responsible for publishing the first Roman newsletter after entering office. No Consul may be removed from office before the end of his/her term. — “Roman Consuls”,
related images for consuls
- PTJ13 220609 CONSULS jpg
- photo02 600 jpg time=1240696876
- Représentants des collectivités locales De g à d B Casaurang CG 30 J P Boré Région D J Valade Ville Consuls généraux De g à d Espagne Italie Allemagne
- quai consuls big img 2 jpg
- Saint Antonin Noble Val Tarn et Garonne Maison des Consuls which housed a court of justice ferocious mutual beard pullers on a capital The best of all from the ruined Abbey of La Sauve Majeure Gironde and now in the Cloisters
- Les Consuls
- PTJ11 220609 CONSULS jpg
- The Maison des Consuls Mirepoix proposes you its 8 rooms Secured online booking La Maison des Consuls is situated in a beautiful and widely visited medieval square in the heart of Mirepoix
- consuls jpg
- agrandir le plan masse
- with no separate chassis and MacPherson front struts were used for the first time on a British car It had a live axle with leaf springs at the rear hydraulic drum brakes front rear The Consul had a 1508cc 4 cylinder engine which developed 48bhp mated to a 3 speed column change gearbox with synchromesh only on second and top gear The handbrake was operated by a pull
- poisson jpg
- Nous allons voir la cathédrale Saint Maurice qui possède la nef la plus large de France Sa flèche de pierre est très belle mais nous apprécions aussi les très nombreuses gargouilles
- consuls jpg
- PTJ10 220609 CONSULS jpg
- photo06 600 jpg time=1240696876
- Une délégation conduite par S E l ambassadeur Richard Zady a pris part aux travaux de la première Conférence des Consuls Honoraires de la Cote d Ivoire du 17 au 22 septembre Palais des
- http i108 photobucket com albums n b dscf0008 jpg http i108 photobucket com albums n ob consuls jpg http i108 photobucket com albums n e2b0735c b jpg
- Tiberi jpg
- Deseas contactar con esta empresa
- JPEG 111 7 kb
- Klik voor meer foto s Consuls zijn vrijwilligers die inzetbaar zijn voor allerlei verschillende taken op de werkterreinen van de ANWB Zij spelen al sinds de oprichting van de ANWB een
- Gubbio le palais des consuls
- Ajoutez cette photo à votre Facebook
- Girsa Consuls Apt 3 172140446 large JPG
- 700 garde des consuls 1775 jpg
- Consuls From the Capitoline Hill Museum
- cohen jpg
- photo07 600 jpg time=1240696876
- XIIème siècle le péché et le châtiment du péché La rédemption n est pas représentée la justice n étant pas concernée par ce concept Sur la gauche de l image on peut voir Adam et Ève vus en gros plan sur la page précédente symbolisant l acte de pécher
- > Voir tous les programmes
- Mr Howard James Pym Honorary Consul Of Latvia attended the 4th meeting of Honorary Consuls in Riga on the 3rd and 4th of July Latvias Consuls of the World Mr Howard J Pym Honorary Consul of Latvia Pictured above 1st from right 2nd row together with His Excellency Ivars Godmanis Prime Minister of Latvia pictured
- la royauté Le Conseil d État eut une activité très importante sous le Consulat et le Ier Empire 1799 1814 C est à lui que l on dut notamment la préparation des codes napoléoniens
- Ajoutez cette photo à votre Facebook
- The Boys
- St Front La cathédrale St Front Centre ville 640x480 640x480 640x480
- moustachus étant punis par les aigles symboles du pouvoir divin d autres pécheresses leurs tresses postiches faits avec les cheveux de religieuses et d indigentes saisies par les becs des aigles aux
- Other capitals show a sinful woman in the clutches of a monster though in the context of the Maison des Consuls it might be Justice triumphing over Injustice a pair of mutual beard pullers symbol of strife
- Ajoutez cette photo à votre Facebook
related videos for consuls
- Lake tahoe with the consuls lake tahoe, with the consuls!! me falling!!! Funny
- University of Pangasinan: Consuls of Goodwill Faculties/CI's Dance Presentation bonggah! lots of yells! watch it! wink!
- British Ambassador & consuls chat to Phuket press Comments by new British Ambassador, Asif Ahmad, on first visit to Phuket; recorded at Millenium Hotel, Patong, on Sunday 27 February 2011 Video starts with his comments on free trade area in ASEAN; then new requirement for UK visa residency applicants who are spouses of British citizens having to pass an English language test before entry is given; then on safety issues for tourists, jet skis and tuk tuks, to be raised with the Phuket Governor in a meeting today; the quarterly meeting of Hon Consuls with Governor; declining comment on Thai PM's possible dual nationality status; Thai visa rules on foreign resident's applications; help for Thai police who lack English skills; (after about 15 mins) British Hon Consul Martin Carpenter joins in with comments on tourist & normal police assistance; his contact details not currently being on Embassy website; any upgrading to consulate level & requests for visa applications in Phuket; police help in accidents; (after 20 mins) Ambassador said Consular staff would soon visit Phuket for temporary services 'surgery' (after 21 mins) British Consul Micheal Han*** comments on UK staff being cut back and replaced by local staff; decision on whether to upgrade to a consulate here; (after 23 mins) Hon Consul on the number of British residents, prisoners, and tourists in Phuket & region; assistance in other southern provinces (after 27 mins) Ambassador on Locate system for British residents to register on but increasing use of social media ...
- Massey - Shout (Little Ceasar and the Consuls)
- two pro street consuls at classic ford
- MFA met Hon Consuls in Phuket pt 1 of 2 (raw video footage of beginning of meeting) International diplomatic representatives in the Andaman region met with senior officials from Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Phuket authorities to lay out clear channels of communication, strengthen relations and enhance mission efficiency It was a busy day on Monday for Consul-Generals and Honorary Consuls representing at least 18 foreign countries as they attended two important meetings in Phuket, both gearing towards improving communication channels among themselves and the Thai authorities. In the morning about 17 Consul-Generals and Honorary Consuls, who are mostly covering Phuket, Phang-Nga and Krabi, had a friendly session with officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Protocol Department at the Adamas Resort and Spa on Nai Yang beach. The session was chaired by the Chief of Protocol Department, Mr. Bansarn Bunnag. German Ambassador to Thailand, HE Dr. Hanns Heinrich Schumacher was also present. The meeting discussed clear channels of communication, both in normal times, but with contingency plans in case of emergencies, following international practice. The meeting was shown what's called a 'Phuket Model' design with concise channel of contacts and communication in the wake of any needs to handle stressful situations. The Thai Chief of Protocol told the international representatives that the ministry designated the Chief of the Passport Office in Phuket, Thanawat Sirikul, as the first contact person in the Andaman ...
- CONSULS AND YOU.mov Elihu Burrit Library instructional video about Consuls.
- Amadou Ballaké et Les 5 Consuls - Ligda remba. 45 rpm disc : Amadou Ballaké et Les 5 Consuls - A la mémoire du regretté Demba / Ligda remba. Amadou Balaké was born in 1944 in Ouahigouya, in the northern-east of Burkina Faso. After the death of his father, he relocated with his mother in the capital of the country, Ouagadougou, where he began to meet several local musicians. Shortly after he went to Mali to work as a chauffeur apprentice, and only returned to Ouagadougou six years later. He worked some time in construction, and then became a taximan. After the loss of his vehicle, he went to Mali and was engaged as a professional musician in the Grand Hotel orchestra. In 1963 he left Mali to play in the Tropicana orchestra in Abidjan, capital of the Ivory Coast, but only six months later he went to Guinea. Leader of the Bafinf Jazz band, he participated there in many musical competitions, and regularly played for president Sékou Touré meetings across the country. He returned to Burkina at the end of the 60's, and became very popular in the country thanks to his work with the Harmonie Voltaïque band. Convided by the Nigerian producer Aboudou Lassissi, he went back to Abidjan at the beginning of the 70's .
- Balitang America: Opera Consuls Don Tagala meets up with French Consul Members who are trained by Filipinas to take the stage.
- Interview with Bryan Mejia model and the consuls of new york ... Bryan Mejia MODEL INTERVIEW WITH CONSULS SHARING OF NEW YORK AND SOME COMMUNITIES New Yorker,Bryan Mejia MODEL INTERVIEW WITH CONSULS SHARING OF NEW YORK AND SOME NEW COMMUNICATORS YORKEL speech on the launch of his book''ME DETUVE EN EL TIEMPO''
- MFA met Hon Consuls in Phuket pt 2 of 2 (raw video footage of beginning of meeting) International diplomatic representatives in the Andaman region met with senior officials from Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Phuket authorities to lay out clear channels of communication, strengthen relations and enhance mission efficiency It was a busy day on Monday for Consul-Generals and Honorary Consuls representing at least 18 foreign countries as they attended two important meetings in Phuket, both gearing towards improving communication channels among themselves and the Thai authorities. In the morning about 17 Consul-Generals and Honorary Consuls, who are mostly covering Phuket, Phang-Nga and Krabi, had a friendly session with officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Protocol Department at the Adamas Resort and Spa on Nai Yang beach. The session was chaired by the Chief of Protocol Department, Mr. Bansarn Bunnag. German Ambassador to Thailand, HE Dr. Hanns Heinrich Schumacher was also present. The meeting discussed clear channels of communication, both in normal times, but with contingency plans in case of emergencies, following international practice. The meeting was shown what's called a 'Phuket Model' design with concise channel of contacts and communication in the wake of any needs to handle stressful situations. The Thai Chief of Protocol told the international representatives that the ministry designated the Chief of the Passport Office in Phuket, Thanawat Sirikul, as the first contact person in the Andaman ...
- Consuls General iftar Dinner,August 2010
- Little Caesar & the Consuls - (My Girl) Sloopy One of many versions of this song (originally by the Vibrations), this was a #1 hit in Canada in July of 1965. It peaked at #50 in the US. This version is slower and more emotional than the McCoys more pop oriented version (retitled Hang on Sloopy) which went to #1 in the US later that same year.
- (Part 1 of 2)Call by the Delegates of the 5th Ambassadors/Consuls General and Tourism Directors Rizal Hall, Malacanang Palace July 11, 2009
- Jump Jeremiah - Mike Ford & the Consuls British group formed in the 1950s - my handsome and talented nephew, Geoffrey, was part of the group.
- Consuls - Runaway Doo Wop
- The evolution of gaming consuls Most of the popular consuls and their prices at retail. Final multimedia project. You'll notice i left out the Wii and computer systems. sorry i was time limited when i made this.
- university of pangasinan-phinma consuls of goodwill-muriel's talent single ladies
- Massey Hall - Hey Baby, Lets Hang On (Little Ceasar and the Consuls)
- Consuls Meeting Following the success of the honorary consuls' meetings in Phuket, the Thai Ministry of Foreign Affairs has announced that a nationwide gathering of al honorary consuls will be held at the ministry in Bangkok next month.
- The Dancing Consuls Philippine Independence Day Party June 15, 2008, Osaka Japan. Can you find Consul General Garcia?
- 24 February 2010 The Society of Foreign Consuls in NY NYSE Euronext Opening Bell. The Society of Foreign Consuls in New York rang The Opening Bell.
- 4th Ambassadors'/Consuls' General and Tourism Directors' Tou at the Philippine Consulate
- SBC Seychelles: Closure of the Honorary Consuls Conference 22-10-09
- HSE 200 Med Relay - 2010 HS State Meet - Consuls Molly Milborn and Kate Henry's Last HS Swim.
- CLANS YOUTUBE SUBSCRIBE FOR 10TH LOBBY AL CONSULS SUBSCRIBE
- 5th Ambassadors Consuls General and Tourism Directors Tour of the Philippines Join us as we embark on another unforgettable trip to the Philippines: The 5th Ambassadors, Consuls General, and Tourism Directors Tour (ACGTDT) of the Philippines. The one-of-a-kind tour takes place on July 9-17, 2009. For only $1399, inclusive of round trip international airfare, to and from Manila and San Francisco, Los Angeles, or Las Vegas, 3-night hotel accommodations at the Dusit Hotel in Makati with daily breakfast, Dinners with cultural shows and entertainment, city tour of Manila, choice of day tour to famous out of town destinations, business opportunities activities, a visit and lunch at Malacanang Palace with tour of the museum, and a photo opportunity with Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Log on to www.experiencphilippines.ph for more details.
- French Military March Marche Garde Consuls
- Massey Hall - Hang on Sloopy (Little Ceasar and the Consuls)
- Former Consuls SMK Sacred Heart '09 / '10 This video is about former consuls at SMK Sacred Heart Sibu( '09 / '10). This video is ONLY for those who knows about it.
- university of pangasinan-phinma consuls of goodwill-edcell's talent beautiful in my eyes
- Penang set up Council of Foreign Consuls Komtar, June 1st 2010 - Penang has set up the Council of Foreign Consuls which consist of 19 foreign Hon. Consul, Consul-General and other representatives. At the same time, CM Lim Guan Eng also introduced Khoo Kay Peng and Liew Chin Tong as two of several members who will represent Penang in Kuala Lumpur to promote Penang with all the diplomatic offices.
- Green Man - Mike Ford & the Consuls 1960s British group. Lead guitar played by the talented Geoff Rich.
- Consul Li, Qing and Consul Zhang, Yan At Davis NewStar Chinese School Chinese New Year Celebration 2010 Video by Xu, Feng
- Sri Lankan Consuls urged to counter ill informed charges 19/01/2009 President Rajapakse has called on Sri Lankas Consuls abroad to inform the world of the achievements made towards restoring democracy and freedom in the North. They should do so and counter the ill informed charges being made about the plight of the innocent Tamil people there..
- Los consuls
- Governor met Hon Consuls in Phuket (raw video footage of beginning of meeting) International diplomatic representatives in the Andaman region met with Phuket authorities to lay out clear channels of communication, strengthen relations and enhance mission efficiency (story continued from 2 videos of morning meeting) In the afternoon, the group had a meeting with the Phuket authorities, chaired by Phuket Governor Wichai Praisa-Ngob at the Provincial Hall. The Chief of Protocol Department, MFA, his deputy and German Ambassador to Thailand were again present. The governor told the foreign envoys that he will make sure that his Thai officials are efficient and friendly to welcome tourists and visitors starting from the airport, emphasizing safety as a main priority for visitors and residents. Apart from establishing concise channels of communication to facilitate work efficiency, the focal issue in the afternoon centred around cases concerning foreigners in Phuket and how people involved are treated. The Provincial Police Commander Pikad Thantipong reported the number of cases concerned with foreign nationals. It was agreed earlier that the ambassadors, consuls or representatives be notified in writing when such cases occurred. Pol. Major General Pikad however admitted that there may be delays in some cases. He pointed out the comparative figure of fatal cases for foreigners in Phuket, stating that in 2008 there was 61 cases, in 2009 there was 28 cases and this year up to August there was 52 fatal cases. In ...
- Little Ceasar & The Consuls - You've Really Got A Hold On Me Oldies
- National Security Interview: Pro Consuls Frank Sesno talks with Dana Priest and Admirals James Loy and Charles Abbot about the national security issues facing the next administration.
- (Part 2 of 2)Call by the Delegates of the 5th Ambassadors/Consuls General and Tourism Directors Rizal Hall, Malacanang Palace July 11, 2009
twitter about consuls
Blogs & Forum
blogs and forums about consuls
“Archived from groups: rec.games.miniatures.warhammer (More info?) Howdy, with the release of 4th, I've divorced the Angels of Vengeance I had from the DA codex, and turned them into Black Consul”
— Black Consuls, force review request - Games-General,
“Gideon's Blog. Girl On The Right. Glaivester. Gringo Malo's Blog. HBD Books. Hibernia Girl Press Society. Internet128. Issues & Views - The Blog. Jerry Pournelle. Joanne Jacobs. John Derbyshire. John Ray”
— : Blog Articles " Mexican Consuls Increase Budget,
“ Rome, Historic Battles, History Blog, World History. The senate, considering that the great difficulty and danger, viz. The Consuls. The Roman consuls, in time of war, took command of the armies. The name of the consul upon whom it devolved to carry”
— History Blog " Roman consuls,
“TRAINING WORKSHOP AND UPDATES FOR CONSULS OF ECUADOR IN THE UNITED STATES updates are directed towards the Consuls of Ecuador in the United”
— Embajada de Ecuador - Washington, DC " Blog Archive,
“Dallas Fort Worth Architecture, Urban Development, City Issues, City Planning, Public Policy, Public Affairs, Urban Photos, Skyscrapers, High Rises, Towers, Buildings, Discussion Forum with Chat”
— Dallas Fort Worth Urban Forum - Dallas Protocol to host,
“Re: Update on your consuls. hadji hadji@- New provinces II "Antonio Grilo" amg@- Re: The Plebeian cults of Ceres, Liber and Libera. jmath669642reng@-) Alexander I.C.P.M.. Claudia Aprica Re: Update on your consuls. SFP55@- Re: Praefecti/Hispania”
— Forum Romanum,
“Website design and marketing firm, serving Orange County, Los Angeles County, blog posts about SEO, search engine optimization, social media optimization, SMO, blogs, audio and video podcasts, mobi sites, google, and social networks”
— How much does a website cost?: Facebook and Internet Explorer 8,
“Groups: Accreditation Editors, Railway Construction, Regional Consuls, The GrapeVine, Turner & Townsend Groups: Brazil, IT Engineering Projects, Regional Consuls. Hello, I think that besides the forum, we need an agenda. We should”
— This Regional Consul Forum | The world-wide leader in planning,
“this blog. Email. a friend. Contact. Us. Navigate. Site Map. Tuesday 2nd November 2010. Posts Tarn in the beautiful Hotel des Consuls, right in the centre of the”
— Hotel Des Consuls | Gordon Frickers' Blog,
“New Phuket governor meets honorary consuls on first day at work Gov Tri Augaradacha pays his respects at the statue of King Rama V in front of Phu”
— New Phuket Governor Meets Honorary Consuls On First Day At,
similar for consuls
- state library
- csu libraries
- ct state
- search tips
- boolean operators
- the connecticut
- state university libraries
- connecticut state university
- the box
- press enter
- submit button
- indian food
- together as one
- world health organization
- roman consuls
- roman republican
- head of state
- list of roman consuls
- free encyclopedia
- the roman republic
- city states
- ancient rome
- chief magistrates
- first consul
- roman consul
- consul suffectus
- the roman
- suffect consul
- foreign country
- american law
- britannica concise encyclopedia
- titus flavius vespasi***
- titus flavius domiti***
- tiberius claudius nero
- military officers
- military command
- legal term
- classical literature
- unanswered questions
- roman magistrate
- the roman empire
- highest office

An EV’s speed controller is the equivalent of the carburetor or fuel-injection system in an ICE vehicle. To control the vehicle’s speed, the controller takes the energy from the battery pack and feeds it to the motor in a regulated manner. Modern controllers do this by pulse-width modulation, taking the full voltage from the battery pack and feeding it to the motor in thousands of tiny on–off pulses per second. The longer the duration, or “width” of the “on” pulses, the more electricity the motor receives and the faster the vehicle moves. Because the pulses are so tiny, the process feels completely smooth to the driver.
EVs can have AC motors or DC motors, and each needs its own kind of controller. In EVs with AC motors, an AC controller must first convert the DC from the batteries into AC before feeding it to the motor.
How does the controller know how much energy to give the motor? The potbox tells it. This linear potentiometer is a sensor that produces a resistance output proportional to its displacement or position. It responds to the driver’s foot pressure on the throttle pedal and sends a corresponding signal to the controller. The throttle pedal in an EV works just as it does in an ICE vehicle—the more you depress it, the faster you go.
The motor is the brawn of the EV, converting electrical energy from the batteries into mechanical energy to propel the vehicle. Instead of invisible electrons flowing through wires, we now have rotating components.
It’s the relationship between electricity and magnetism that enables the motor to do work. Passing electricity through a wire creates a magnetic field around the wire. By winding wire in a motor and running electricity through it, magnetic poles that repel each other are created, causing the shaft of the motor to spin.
If the EV has regenerative braking, the motor can also act as a generator. When the vehicle is coasting or braking, the momentum of the car drives the motor—rather than the motor driving the car. The magnetic fields induce current in the wires, the flip side of the process described above. The electricity flows backward through the controller (which rectifies it from AC back into DC) and into the battery pack. This process also creates drag on the motor—the “braking” part of regenerative braking, which is very similar to what happens in an ICE car when you lift your foot off the throttle in a low gear. Though it’s an intrinsic part of AC drive systems, regenerative braking is more rare in DC systems, where a special controller and extra wiring are required to allow the motor to serve as a generator.
The energy output from the spinning shaft of the motor now needs to reach the drive wheels. On a very small EV, the motor might drive the wheels directly, but with full-size vehicles, at least one level of gear reduction is necessary to reduce the revolutions per minute (rpm) of the motor to a usable speed at the wheels. A “direct-drive” vehicle will have a single gear reduction, which might be a gearbox or a belt-and-pulley arrangement. No shifting is necessary. This is common with AC motors that have upper limits of 8,000 to 13,000 rpm. DC motors with limits of about 5,000 to 6,000 rpm usually use the same kind of multiple-gear manual transmissions found in ICE cars. In EVs with manual transmissions, the clutch is usually retained and works the same as in an ICE vehicle.

Towards the end of the XIXth century, the Eaton’s and Simpson’s department stores in Toronto and, slightly later, that of Dupuis Frères in Montreal, published magnificent catalogues which were distributed practically everywhere in Quebec and elsewhere in Canada. Some stores went so far as to publish a special Christmas catalogue.
This new way of shopping, by mail-order, turned consumers’ habits upside down. From now on they could buy their gifts in advance without having to wait for the frantic rush in the last days before Christmas. This new sales promotion tool also reached a completely different clientele in rural areas. Dupuis Frères (the only Montreal department store managed by French Canadians) used this sales method to make massive inroads in retail sales, betting quite rightly on the loyalty of Quebec Francophones.
Canadian Heritage Information Network
Mission de la recherche et de la technologie, Direction des Musées de France, Musée de la civilisation, Provincial Museum of Alberta, Musée national des arts et traditions populaires, Département de l'organisation des systèmes d'information,

|Catechism of the Catholic Church|
IntraText - Text
IN THE AGE OF THE CHURCH
2623 On the day of Pentecost, the Spirit of the Promise was poured out on the disciples, gathered "together in one place."92 While awaiting the Spirit, "all these with one accord devoted themselves to prayer."93 The Spirit who teaches the Church and recalls for her everything that Jesus said94 was also to form her in the life of prayer.
2624 In the first community of Jerusalem, believers "devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and the prayers."95 This sequence is characteristic of the Church's prayer: founded on the apostolic faith; authenticated by charity; nourished in the Eucharist.
2625 In the first place these are prayers that the faithful hear and read in the Scriptures, but also that they make their own - especially those of the Psalms, in view of their fulfillment in Christ.96 The Holy Spirit, who thus keeps the memory of Christ alive in his Church at prayer, also leads her toward the fullness of truth and inspires new formulations expressing the unfathomable mystery of Christ at work in his Church's life, sacraments, and mission. These formulations are developed in the great liturgical and spiritual traditions. the forms of prayer revealed in the apostolic and canonical Scriptures remain normative for Christian prayer.

The study was carried out by researcher Rosa Binimelis of the UAB Institute of Environmental Science and Technology. Binimelis is working on the European project ALARM (Assessing Large Scale Risks for Biodiversity with Tested Methods) and analyses the application of the concept of coexistence between Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and conventional organic agriculture in the European Union. The results of the research have been published in the Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics (April 2008).
Since GM cultivation was introduced in
Thus the concept of coexistence, after applying technical measures, should make it possible to operate freely in the market while reducing the political conflicts linked to GMOs. The European Commission is planning this year to evaluate how the policy of coexistence has been implemented in the past ten years.

- Reading Rockets: Classroom Strategies (MUST SEE includes teacher examples)
The classroom strategy section is designed to share with teachers what research suggests are the most effective ways to build fluency, vocabulary, comprehension, and writing skills. Not ESL specific, see Colorin Colorado for ESL bilingual, but helpful strategies. Well organized, includes teacher examples. You can submit your own.
in Literacy > Reading Strategies
- 6+1 Trait® Spanish Writing
Scoring Guides 6+1 Trait® Spanish Writing- Rúbricas para la evaluación The 6+1 Trait Spanish Writing model is not a direct translation of the 6+1 Trait (English) Writing Model. While some aspects and traits of English and Spanish correspond, not all do. This model is intended for native Spanish speakers who are not fluent in English, yet need to learn the basic principles of writing without the additional challenge of being forced to use an unfamiliar language. Read examples of real student papers that have been assessed with the 6+1 Trait scoring guides.
in Bilingual Resourses > Bilingual Literacy
- Brent Loken Student Videos
Brent Loken's website with student videos from his classes. Links to related articles and blogs that support creative, student-centered, project-based learning.
in Student Projects
- FlamingText.com Examples
in Technology by 3 users
examples from all users

March 1996 – The United Kingdom's Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, the main government agency responsible for licensing U.K. embryo research, issues its first license for human embryonic stem cell research to the University of Edinburgh's Institute for Stem Cell Research.
February 1997 – Ian Wilmut and other scientists from Scotland's Roslin Institute announce the creation of the sheep Dolly, the world's first successful clone of an adult mammal.
March 1997 – Don P. Wolf and a team of researchers at the federally-funded Oregon National Primate Research Center announce that they have produced rhesus monkeys from cloned embryos, the first successful use of cloning-related technology in primates.
March 1997 – Citing the technology used to create Dolly as raising "profound ethical issues," President Clinton prohibits the allocation of federal funds for human cloning.
June 1997 – The Group of Eight, consisting of the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia and the United Kingdom, adopts a resolution agreeing on "the need for appropriate domestic measures and close international cooperation to prohibit the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer to create a child."
November 1997 – UNESCO adopts the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights. Article 11 specifically prohibits the reproductive cloning of human beings.
January 1998 – Physicist Richard Seed announces he has formed a team to attempt human cloning before the advent of legislation banning the technology.
January 1998 – The Council of Europe amends its Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine to prohibit reproductive and therapeutic cloning of human beings. To date, the revised convention has been ratified and implemented by 14 countries.
January 1998 – The U.S. Food and Drug Administration claims authority to regulate, and pre-approve, experiments involving human cloning in the United States.
June 1998 – Michigan becomes the first state to enact a law prohibiting human cloning.
November 1998 – Two separate teams of scientists, one led by James A. Thomson of the University of Wisconsin and Joseph Itskovitz-Eldor of Israel's Rambam Medical Center, the other by John D. Gearhart of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, announce that they have successfully isolated human embryonic stem cells for the first time.
November and December 1998 – In claims greeted with skepticism, researchers at Advanced Cell Technology in Massachusetts and Kyunghee University Hospital in South Korea separately announce the successful creation of the first cloned human embryos. Neither organization has ever provided proof to verify their claims.
November 2000 – Japan becomes the first Asian country to pass comprehensive legislation outlawing human reproductive cloning.
January 2001 – Italian fertility specialist Severino Antinori and U.S. scientist Panayiotis Zavos provoke world-wide condemnation following the announcement of their goal to be the first scientists to clone a human being.
January 2001 – Gerald P. Schatten and a team of researchers at the federally-funded Oregon National Primate Research Center create a rhesus monkey named "ANDi," the world's first genetically altered primate.
July 2001 – The U.S. House of Representatives passes the Human Cloning Prohibition Act to outlaw both reproductive and therapeutic cloning, but the bill dies in the Senate, the closest any national ban has yet come to enactment in America.
August 2001 – President Bush restricts federally funded human embryonic stem cell research to existing stem cell lines. The announcement receives criticism both from pro-life advocates opposed to any use of human embryos and from health and research advocates who claim that it will severely limit the development of treatments for various diseases including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and juvenile diabetes.
November 2001 – Scientists at Massachusetts-based Advanced Cell Technology announce that they have successfully created human embryos using the process of somatic cell nuclear transfer.
December 2001 – Britain passes the Human Reproductive Cloning Act, outlawing reproductive cloning.
December 2001 – The United Nations General Assembly passes a resolution creating a committee to address the issues of reproductive and therapeutic cloning.
March 2002 – An article published in the Wall Street Journal details various advances in human cloning research being carried out in China. Chinese scientists, led by Lu Guangxiu of Xiangya Medical College, have been successfully cloning human embryos for two years while Sheng Huizen of Shanghai No. 2 Medical University has created embryonic stem cells from human-animal hybrids.
September 2002 – California becomes the first state to approve a law legalizing therapeutic cloning.
October 2003 – Both Costa Rica and Belgium introduce competing resolutions addressing cloning in a United Nations committee. The Costa Rican resolution, backed by the United States and 43 other countries, calls for an international treaty banning all cloning while the resolution sponsored by Belgium and 13 other countries seeks a treaty that would allow for the possibility of cloning for research. In December, the General Assembly moved to address the issue in its Autumn 2004 session.
December 2003 – Clonaid, the biotechnology company founded by the leader of the Raelian religious movement, announces the birth of its first successful clone, a girl, Eve, but provides no proof to substantiate its claims.
January 2004 – China and South Korea each adopt regulations that would ban reproductive cloning but would permit human embryo cloning for research.
February 2004 – Veterinary professor Hwang Woo-suk of Seoul National University in South Korea and a team of researchers announce that they have succeeded in cloning human embryos and extracting stem cells from them.
May 2004 – Singapore unveils a draft law that would allow embryo cloning for research but would ban attempts at reproductive cloning, providing a maximum possible penalty of five years imprisonment and a fine of S$100,000.
May 2004 – The world's first embryonic stem cell bank opens in Britain. The government's Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority also announces that a developer of one of the bank's stem cell lines, the Newcastle Fertility Centre at Life, has filed the first-ever application for permission to conduct therapeutic cloning research. The HFEA has yet to issue a license for therapeutic cloning.
Alexander Cohen put together this timeline.

17 entries found for ball. The first 10 are listed below.
To select an entry, click on it.
Main Entry: 1ball
Etymology: Middle English bal "ball" 1 a: something round or roundish <a ball of twine> b: a usually round object used in a game or sport c: a usually round shot for a firearm d: the rounded bulge at the base of the thumb; also: the rounded wide part of the bottom of the human foot between the toes and arch 2: a game or sport (as baseball) played with a ball <play ball> 3: a pitched baseball that fails to pass through the strike zone and is not struck at by the batter

The riveting stories of two former slaves
Recently surfaced manuscripts recount the rigors of both slavery and freedom.
"Slave narratives, some of the most powerful records of our past, are extremely rare," David Blight tells us on the first page of A Slave No More. Only 55 post-Civil War narratives exist and of these, Blight notes, "a mere handful" are first-person accounts by slaves who ran away and freed themselves.Skip to next paragraph
Subscribe Today to the Monitor
So it is remarkable indeed that two such accounts should now surface – and almost at the same moment. Both had been handed down over the years by family and friends and both finally landed in the lap of Blight, who is director of Yale University's Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition.
Even for Blight, with his expertise in the field, these manuscripts were a revelation. Reading them, he says, "I have come to understand emancipation as never before."
"A Slave No More" contains both the unedited manuscripts and analysis by Blight, which gives the manuscripts context and offers additional information about the lives of the narrators, John Washington and Wallace Turnage.
As far as is known, Washington and Turnage never met. They have much in common – yet there is also much that divides them. Washington was an urban slave, living in Fredericksburg, Va. He was 24 on the day in April 1862, when he slipped across Union Army lines and won his freedom. Turnage was a field hand on an Alabama cotton plantation. Four times he attempted escape and finally, on his fifth try in 1864, he succeeded in reaching the Union Army in Mobile Bay. Both men had white fathers, although Turnage knew his while Washington did not.
Both men went on to live for many years as free men. Washington settled in Washington, D.C., and became a house painter, enjoying a reasonably comfortable life. Turnage had a more hardscrabble existence in New York City, where he worked as a watchman, waiter, and other occupations.
Their narratives are powerful and poignant and help to fill in the cracks of history in voices too rarely heard.
Washington describes the day the Union Army marched toward the Rappahannock River. Every white person in Fredericksburg, he says, was in the streets, attempting to flee, while all the black people were "out on the house top looking over the River at the Yankees for their glistening bayonets could Easily be seen."
Inside, Washington writes, "I could not begin to Express my new born hopes, for I felt already like I was certain of My freedom Now." When he crossed the river and met the Union soldiers, one asked him where his master was. In the Rebel Navy, he replied.
"Well you don't belong to anybody then," the soldiers told him, explaining that two days earlier the District of Columbia had freed its slaves. "I did not know what to say for I was dumb with joy and could only thank God and laugh."
Both men's narratives depict the ugliness of slavery, but Turnage's experience was far harsher than Washington's. Washington recalls, as a small boy, waiting all day for the commands of an elderly white woman, even as he could see other children playing outdoors.
But Turnage was whipped and beaten in the fields. He was also, for a time, forced to work in an auction house, where he saw his fellow slaves flogged, chained, cataloged, and sold. Yet he begins his account: "I do not mean to speak disparagingly of those who sold me, nor of those who bought me. Though I seen a hard time, it had an attendency to make a man of me."
While nothing can match the power of the men's own words, Blight's commentary does much to round out the portrait of the slave and former-slave experience. He tells of the "contraband colonies" that for many former slaves were the first stop after escape. He notes the eagerness of even the best-treated slaves to find their freedom, quoting a Georgia slave owner who confessed, "Those we loved best, and who loved us best – as we thought, were the first to leave us."
He also describes the netherworld of urban blight through which many former slaves – Turnage included – struggled to make their way after emancipation.
Washington offers a heartbreaking account of being separated from his mother as a boy. The night before, she came to his bed. "Her tears mingled with mine amid kisses and heart felt sorrow ... I would rather die" than leave her.
Both Turnage and Washington did eventually reunite with their mothers. Of Turnage's mother, Blight writes, "her story, like her son's so ordinary and yet so extraordinary, makes us wish we could know her even better."
Readers will agree – and yet will also be powerfully grateful for the fascinating bits and pieces that they are given here.

Start Your Visit WithHistorical Timelines
General Interest Maps
Al Capone was born in Brooklyn, New York, on January 17, 1899, to Neapolitan immigrants Gabriel and Teresa Caponi. Originally named Alphonse Caponi, his name was Americanized to "Al Capone."
In 1904, at the age of five, young Alphonse started his school career at Public School 7 in Brooklyn. School was tough for Capone. The teachers were not tolerant of immigrant children and often used physical force as a means of discipline. Capone always had a problem with authority, and by the time he entered sixth grade, his grades began to drop drastically. At 14, Capone started a fist fight with a teacher, was expelled, and never returned to school again.
Shortly after he was expelled, his father moved the family to 21 Garfield Place, in the neighborhood that would influence the direction of Capone's life and ultimately, his future. Capone joined two local street gangs, the Brooklyn Rippers and the Forty Thieves Juniors. Among the members were Johnny Torrio and Lucky Luciano.
As a young man, Capone held many odd jobs, from a candy store clerk to a bowling alley pinboy. Capone entered organized crime when he went to work for gangster Frankie Yale, at his club the Harvard Inn. It was here that Capone received his nickname, “Scarface,” after being attacked by a man for insulting his sister. It also was here that Capone was arrested for the first time.
While attending a dance in 1918, Capone met Mary “Mae” Coughlin. On December 4, 1918, she gave birth to their son, Albert “Sonny” Francis. Shortly after, they were married and Capone moved his family to Chicago.
Once in Chicago, Capone went to work for Johnny Torrio, an influential lieutenant in the Colosimo Mob. Soon after, the leader, Big Jim Colosimo, was murdered and Johnny Torrio took over with Capone at his side. By 1922 Capone had become a full partner with Torrio in his gambling houses, saloons, and brothels.
In 1925, after being seriously wounded, Torrio retired and Capone became boss. By then, rival gang members considered Capone ruthless, and posed little threat to his plans for taking over the Chicago “racketeering rights.” Any rival gang posing a threat to his plans was either destroyed, or diminished greatly in size, leaving full reign to Capone.
Between 1925 and 1930, Capone controlled the majority of Chicago's vice industry, including speakeasies, bookie joints, brothels, horse and race tracks, gambling houses and distilleries. His reported income was estimated to be $100 million a year. Along with all his illegal holdings, Capone also held a large interest in Chicago's largest cleaning and dyeing plant chain.
Although Capone was responsible for several murders, he always had an alibi and was usually out of town when the killings occurred. The most notorious killing was committed on February 14, 1929, which became known as “The St. Valentine's Day Massacre.” Capone ordered four of his men, dressed in police uniforms, to enter a garage on North Clark street. This was the headquarters of George “Bugs” Moran's bootleg operations and North Side Gang. When the Moran gang dropped their guns and put their hands against the wall, Capone's men gunned them down. Six Moran gang members and an innocent friend were shot. Moran, who was the intended target, was across the street at the time.
Although Capone both ordered and committed murders himself, he also had another side. Shortly after the stock market crash of 1929, he opened soup kitchens and arranged for local merchants to give away food and clothing to needy people, at his own expense.
Due to gangland's traditional refusal to press charges, Capone was neither charged nor tried for many of his crimes. In 1926 he was arrested for murdering three people, spent the night in jail and then was released due to lack of evidence. Capone's first jail sentence was in May 1929, but he was charged only for carrying a gun. By 1930, Capone topped Chicago's list of the 28 worst criminals and designated as “Public Enemy Number One.”
In 1931, after years of criminal activity, Capone was indicted on twenty-three counts of income tax evasion. Judge James H. Wilkerson found him guilty on five of the twenty-three counts and sentenced him to 10 years in federal prison and fines in the amount of $50,000. He also was sentenced to one year in county jail for an earlier contempt-of-court charge.
In May 1932, Capone was sent to Atlanta State Prison, where he quickly established himself as a kingpin within the prison and began taking control. In order to stop his influence, he was transferred to Alcatraz to finish out his sentence. Alcatraz was cut off from the rest of the world, and with no other gang members residing there, Capone soon found there was nothing over which to gain control. Capone tried to earn time off for good behavior by becoming the model prisoner.
During his stay at Alcatraz, Capone began to show signs of syphilitic dementia and spent the balance of his felony sentence in the hospital. On January 6, 1939, he was transferred to Terminal Island to carry out his misdemeanor sentence. On November 16, 1939, Capone was released from prison.
After a short stay in the hospital, Capone returned to his home in Palm Island, Florida, to spend the rest of his life in peace and quiet. Due to his dementia, his mind was rapidly deteriorating and he was no longer strong enough to run the outfit. On January 21, 1947, Capone suffered an apoplectic stroke and was hospitalized. On January 24, pneumonia set in and Capone died the next day.
Capone was buried in Mount Olivet Cemetery between the graves of his father and brother until March 1950, when the remains of all three were moved to Mount Carmel Cemetery on the far West Side of Chicago.
---- Selected Quotes ----
Quotes by Al Capone.
You can get much farther with a kind word and a gun than you can with a kind word alone.
I make my money by supplying a public demand. If I break the law, my customers, who number hundreds of the best people in Chicago, are as guilty as I am. Everybody calls me a racketeer. I call myself a businessman.
Comment in 1925
- - - Books You May Like Include: ----
Cicero Revisited by Douglas Deuchler.
Strategically located seven miles west of Chicago’s Loop, multifaceted Cicero is one of the oldest and largest municipalities in Illinois. In the late...
Only Yesterday by Frederick L. Allen.
Prohibition. Al Capone. The President Harding scandals. The revolution of manners and morals, Black Tuesday. These are only an inkling of the events a...
Get Capone: The Secret Plot That Captured America's Most Wanted Gangster by Jonathan Eig.
Based on newly released government documents and wiretaps, Get Capone tells the story how the nation's most-wanted criminal was really caught. This bo...

Small businesses are starting smaller and staying smaller. That’s the conclusion of a study released by entrepreneurship advocate Kauffman Foundation.
“Starting Smaller; Staying Smaller: America’s Slow Leak in Job Creation” said its analysis of government data shows that since the middle of the last decade and perhaps longer, the growth path and survival rate of new businesses means they are generating fewer new jobs.
The businesses that started in 2009, for example, are on course to create 1 million fewer jobs in the next decade than historical averages would predict, the study says.
The trend started long before the Great Recession and is likely to continue into the future, the study says.
That trend signals an important shift for the U.S. economy, which needs to create a minimum of 125,000 new jobs a month merely to keep up with adult population growth.
The Kauffman research distinguishes between numbers of businesses and numbers of businesses that have employees.
Citing data from the U.S. Census Bureau, the study found that the number of new employer businesses has fallen 27% since 2006. The total number of startups (employer businesses and self-employed) has increased since the recession, according to the Kauffman Index of Entrepreneurial Activity. But “firms that support only the self-employed owner do not scale to generate the new jobs needed to support overall economic growth.”
The Bureau of Labor Statistics says startups created about 4.65 million new jobs annually from 1997 to 2000 compared to 2.5 million in 2010, the study notes. The Census sets the drop off from 7 million jobs in 2006 to 4.5 million in 2009.
Part of the decline is that about 27% fewer businesses with employees are being started, the study says.
A second significant factor is that new small-business survival has declined. Before the recession, 45% to 50% of new businesses survived five years, the study says. Now fewer than 45% of businesses started in 2004 were still in business in 2009.
And a third factor is that new businesses are hiring fewer employees than in the past. In the 1990s, new establishments opened with an average of 7.5 jobs. By 2010, the number of jobs at the average startup was 4.9 jobs, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics.
And those businesses that survive never accelerate their hiring to make up for their smaller initial staffs, the study says. So over their lifetimes, these businesses created fewer jobs.
The study does not address why businesses are making do with fewer workers. Are they using technology instead of human labor? Are they doing work that requires fewer employees? Do minimum wage laws and health insurance mandates affect staffing levels?
The study concludes:
“In many cases, companies or individuals that once would have been hired as employees of a business now are performing the work on a temporary basis as contractors through other professional service organizations or under their own self-employment contracts. … No matter how laudable their individual efforts, these sole proprietors… are not likely ever to be major employers.
“The clear challenge for the U.S. economy instead is to start more employer businesses, ensure that they are starting larger, and nurture their growth.”
The study doesn’t suggest how.
Click here to read the entire report.
Want the latest on small business? Text OCRSMALLBIZ to 56654 to get free news alerts for small businesses.
Other business stories…

How to grow a reader
Tips for turning a fledgling reader into a voracious one.
By Peg Tyre
Once your child has figured out how to decode words and can actually read in a sustained way, then a chunk of his schooling should be focused on helping him squeeze meaning and richness out of the experience. You may remember the whole-language ideas about exposing kids to print through fiction, poetry, newspapers, and drama? It is the wrong way to teach kids to read. But getting kids excited about the written word is a great way to turn fledgling readers into voracious readers.
And here's where all parents should step up to the plate. You've been reading to your child, great. Don't stop. Books on tape in the car work, too. But now that she is a reader, surround her with print. Get a newspaper delivered. Get her a library card and make the library a regular stop, like the grocery store and the dry cleaner. And get over your view of what "proper" book reading looks like — fiction, nonfiction, comic books, how-tos, mysteries, sports biographies, magazines about current events, fast cars, sleek airplanes, or video gaming. Open the door wide. Find ways to bring what she is reading into the conversation. Ask questions like: What kind of book is it? What is the setting? What happens? What do you like/not like about the way the author writes?
Word by word
Similar but more formal versions of this should be happening at school, but parents can reinforce this learning at home. Watch for it. If your child is reading and sampling a wide enough variety of material, he will be encountering a lot of words in print that he doesn't know. He should be able to sound out unfamiliar words. First, encourage him to figure out the meaning of unfamiliar words from their context, for example, what could propulsion mean based on the words that came before and after it? Then, see if he can tease out the meaning of the word by finding its root. For instance, the word propel is hidden in propulsion and gives a strong hint for the meaning of the word.
Teachers help students build comprehension through the systemic study of words. Yes, weekly vocabulary words. Kids who study words — by this I mean systematically learning their meanings — have larger vocabularies but are also better readers. It's not too effective for the teacher to hand out a list of ten words and have kids look them up and then take a test. They need to hear the words, see them, speak them, and write them that week and in the weeks that follow.
Word lists alone, though, aren't enough. Kids encounter an average of three thousand new words a year — more than eight a day. Unless the entire school day is going to be given over to word study (and no one thinks this is a good idea), teachers must instruct children on how to shave off chunks of an unfamiliar word and tease out its meaning by studying suffixes, prefixes, and the meaning of common root words.
Comprehension, fluency, and stamina should be growing steadily stronger as your child moves through school. Schools need to ensure that happens. So do parents. Do your part.

Seeing wildlife when on a camp out can be a real highlight of your adventure. These sightings can be a real treat but can also be dangerous. Attacks by mountain lions on humans have happened but are rare. Knowing what to do when you’re caught in this situation is very important.
Mountain lions are also known as pumas, panthers, or cougars. Another name for them is catamount. These creatures are shy and isolated so they are seldom seen. If you happen to come upon one of these cougars, think smart. Cluster together with your hiking companions, representing yourself as a big, noisy group. If you’re hiking alone, extend your arms or pack up as high as you can so you look bigger. Wave your trekking poles and shout. Never run or bend down as this will make you look like prey. Call children to come next to you.
These cats roam anywhere from central Canada down to Patagonia. They can be anywhere from sea level up to the high alpine areas. They can survive from swamps to forests to timberline.
The female will fiercely protect its young. Don’t even approach that darling, little kitten. Back away slowly if you happen to come upon an adult or baby. If the cat continues to follow you, throw sticks or rocks while backing away.
A camper’s fear of mountain lions is unjustified. They’re not going to come and get you in your tent while you sleep. These animals are rarely seen, but you may be able to catch a fleeting glimpse of one. Even though sightings are rare, be sure to use caution at all times. These cats’ stealth and adaptability allow them to survive well in a wide environment.
They’ve been known to jump 20 feet in one leap. The puma creeps up on its prey until it’s close enough to leap upon it. Their diet consists of deer, rabbits, turkeys, and grouse. Juvenile cats are trying to establish their territory while the mother cats will protect their young.
My own personal sightings have occurred in areas with an abundance of young rabbits. My sightings have been in the morning hours or at dusk. When my wife and I were in the High Uintahs, we witnessed a Canadian Lynx. It was in an area where lots of naïve, young cottontail rabbits abound.

A new anti-bullying program combats an ever increasing issue among Utah schoolchildren: bullied because of body-size issues, either being overweight or underweight, a University of Utah study released Sunday concluded.
Maya Miyairi, a College of Health doctorate-candidate student, said that a survey found a 7 percent decrease in reports of students being bullied after the new, eight-week anti-bullying program.
Miyairi said that now is more important than ever for kids to understand body-image and racial issues related to bullying, citing a recent suicide by a Taylorsville teen.
Family members said David Phan, who shot himself in front of peers two months ago, could not deal with the bullying and the burden of being a gay Asian student in a school they believe did not support him.
Miyairi created the new anti-bullying program specifically to address these issues.
"It's important for [students] to understand the media messages and how our society views men and women," Miyairi said Sunday. "Those students were not too young to be educated aboutÂ treating everyone equally regardless of appearance, color of skin, or body size."
The new program met with applause from other counseling professionals. Miyairi conducted the new program at the beginning of the school year at Albion Middle School in Sandy.
"Middle school is such a difficult time for most students and weight-body image concerns make this time even more challenging," said Albion counselor Cathy Nelson in an email. "This program's goals were to address weight-related bullying and to empower students with the confidence that they are beautiful just the way they are. This is a message that all students need, and need often."
At the beginning of the program, 41 percent of students reported experiencing bullying, while 34 percent did so after the two-month program.
Moises Prospero, a Utah research consultant on criminal and social justice issues with a doctorate in social work, said many students take their messages about the body from the media.
"People don't remember how many factors are related to body images and the role models being pushed upon our children," said Prospero, who was a mentor of Miyairi. "The social norm has been females anorexic looking and males extremely muscular, but now we're seeing some of the men being extremely thin."
"The message is it's your fault if you're overweight or underweight because we're an individualistic culture," Prospero said. "But we've taken away PE, there are preservatives in food, and we have these extreme views of what is the look of health â¦ rather than the mental health of the individual. Maya's intervention is trying to address those issues."
Miyairi, who is finishing up her research for a doctorate in health promotion and education, said her program highlights the gap between what children know about bullying and how they actually behave in school around peers.
"We're educating the kids that this is not acceptable and to become leaders for others," Miyairi said. "We want to teach empathy as a core value. We tell the students: Next year, new students will come here and copy what you do now."
Miyairi, who came to Utah from her native Japan, said a significant component of her program includes healthy communication skills.
"We role-play," she said. "The students are shy at first but then they get into it. They learn how to express their emotions in healthy ways."
Albion Middle School does not have more of a bullying issue than other schools, Miyairi said, but school officials were open to her conducting her research an openness that is not always easy to find.
Albion Middle School has other anti-bullying programs: anti-bullying lessons, Internet safety/cyber-bullying lessons, and anti-bullying video clips delivered through home-room classes. Â
"We are so fortunate to be able to partner with Maya and the University of Utah to provide this intervention program for our students," Nelson said. "With only two counselors for 900 students, it's wonderful to take advantage of as many resources as possible to address the needs of our students."
Before pursuing her doctorate, Miyairi worked for four years at Avalon Hills in Logan, where she helped treat those with eating disorders.
"I'm hoping more school districts and researchers can work together," said Miyairi, who will get her doctorate sometime this summer. "My next plan is to expand this project to educateÂ parents, teachers and school administrators. If we create a nonjudgmental environment in the community, I believe bullying incidents will be reduced."Â
People in need of help with bullying or other issues can call 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or the Utah CrisisLine 1-801-587-3000.
New anti-bullying program
As part of her University of Utah doctorate thesis, Maya Miyairi created a two-month anti-bullying program designed to address issues not often found in such programs: ideal-body image, body esteem and racial issues, among others.
Her study at a Utah middle school measured students' perceptions on teasing as well as bullying experiences, which decreased by 7 percent after the program. The new anti-bullying program had the following schedule.
Week 1: Introduction and ground rules.
Week 2: Helping students claiming their strengths.
Week 3: Core values such as empathy.
Week 4: How the media manipulates ideal-body images.
Week 5: Media literacy and how it stigmatizes weight.
Week 6 & 7: Role playing to foster healthy communication.
Week 8: Students finishing by creating bullying-awareness posters.

Stretching from Céadaoin an Spiaire to Máirt Chásca, there are enough special days surrounding Easter to give a specific Irish name for each day of the week. Since there are already several forms for each day, aside from Easter usage, let’s look at them grouped together in a chart. That will enable us to focus on changes like initial mutation (séimhiú, urú), h-prefixation, and endings (an tuiseal ginideach)
Even for ordinary purposes, each day has at least two forms, one for the day as a subject or concept (like “An Luan,” Monday, lit. “the” Monday) and one used to say when something is happening (like “Dé Luain,” lit. “on the day of” Monday).
This chart has four columns, the first one giving forms that would rarely occur on their own. For these, I have followed the linguistic practice of putting a réiltín in front of them. It’s not that these forms are completely hypothetical (as we might find in historical linguistic reconstruction), it’s just that they would almost always be part of a two-word phrase, sometimes an even longer phrase. From this “root,” we get the subject form (An Luan), and, by following genitive case rules, we get the preposition form (Dé Luain). Hmmm, you might ask, why genitive case (possessive) rules when using a preposition phrase? It’s because “Dé,” when preceding a day of the week, functions as a preposition but is really a noun. This “Dé” comes from the word “dia” (note lower-case), which is an alternate word for “day” in Irish, now somewhat archaic, or, we could say, fossilized. This process is much like what happens with “cois” in the phrase “cois na tine,” where “cois” (from “cos,” foot, leg) is really a noun but functions like a preposition, resulting in the meaning “by the fire” (lit. “at the foot of the fire”).
Some of the words in the chart will also be changed if they’re in a prepositional phrase starting with “ar an,” as in “ar an gCéadaoin” (lit. on “the” Wednesday). Ulster Irish will have lenition in these cases (Chéadaoin).
Unlike “lá,” which seems to be unique in the Indo-European panorama of languages (except for Scottish Gaelic “latha” and Manx “laa”), the word “dia”/”dé” is a cognate to other European words for “day,” such as “dies,” “dydd,” “tag,” and even “day” itself (plus, less directly, “jour” from Latin “diurnus”). So, somewhat unusually, the word “lá” isn’t used in the names of the days of the week. But you probably noticed that already!
The “dia” form of “day” also shows up in the old spellings of the Irish words for “today” and “yesterday,” which are “indiu” and “indé.”
So here’s the chart. Hope you find it helpful. There are additional notes for three of the terms below.
|“Root”||Subject Form||“Dé” Form (w “tuiseal ginideach” ending)||“ar an” Form||Easter Terms|
|*Domhnach||An Domhnach||Dé Domhnaigh||ar an Domhnach||Domhnach Cásca|
|*Luan||An Luan||Dé Luain||ar an Luan||Luan Cásca|
|*Máirt||An Mháirt||Dé Máirt||ar an Máirt, alt., ar an Mháirt (U)||Máirt Chásca (2)|
|*Céadaoin||An Chéadaoin||Dé Céadaoin, or alt., Dé Céadaoine (U)||ar an gCéadaoin, alt. ar an Chéadaoin (U)||Céadaoin an Spiaire, (? Céadaoin Naofa) (3)|
|*Déardaoin||An Déardaoin||Déardaoin (1)||ar an Déardaoin, ar Déardaoin||Déardaoin (na) Mandála|
|*Aoine||An Aoine||Dé hAoine (h-prefix)||ar an Aoine||Aoine an Chéasta|
|*Satharn||An Satharn||Dé Sathairn||ar an Satharn, alt. ar an tSatharn (U)||Satharn Cásca|
1) Although it’s not often explicitly stated, “Dé” is not needed before “Déardaoin” because it’s already built into the word. Having said that, a recent Google search brought up about 300 hits for “Déardaoin” with “Dé” in front of it! Either the usage is changing, or these are all just slip-ups. Bhur mbarúlacha, a léitheoirí?
2) I noted last year (http://blogs.transparent.com/irish/?s=Eastertide) that I found no instances of “Máirt Chásca” being used online for “Easter Tuesday,” but, interestingly, this year I found three hits. The three are duplicates (sigh!) and all refer to the founding of the Kilkenny branch of the Gaelic League in 1897. However else the phrase may be used or not used, it’s interesting to note this designation as opposed to just saying “April 20th,” which was the date of Easter Tuesday in 1897, if http://www.easterbunny.com/date-of-easter/easter-date-for-1897.html serves me right. Go raibh maith agat, a Choinín Cásca! An ceann ponc com, that is!
Of course, there is a long-standing tradition in both Irish and British writing of dating certain events by referring to a holiday, instead of a date, as in the réamhráite of “An Fear Eagair,” in Myles na gCopaleen’s parody An Béal Bocht being written on “Lá an Ghátair” [Day of Distress] and “Lá an Luain” [Day of Doom]. Or, more straightforwardly, the preface to C. S. Lewis’s That Hideous Strength, dated “Christmas Eve, 1943.” It’s not a practice I’ve seen used much in American literature.
As for the general significance of Easter Tuesday, as noted last year, I still see it listed as a public holiday in just one place, An Tasmáin. There it is described as a “restricted public holiday currently observed by certain awards/agreements and the State Public Service (http://www.wst.tas.gov.au/employment_info/public_holidays). Suimiúil! A New Zealand site (http://www.principalskit.org.nz/support-staff/) discusses Easter Tuesday as a potential holiday for employees of New Zealand Educational Institute, but they must have served 10 years and they must incorporate it into their annual leave. I don’t quite get that last bit, but I guess it doesn’t really matter. Suffice it to say that Easter Tuesday may have greater recognition elsewhere than seems apparent in 21st-century America. Many American school districts simply make their Spring Break surround Easter and avoid all discussion as to whether the break has anything to do with Easter at all.
3) There are plenty of references to the Wednesday before Easter being called “Céadaoin an Spiaire” (Wednesday of the Spy) in Irish, but for “Céadaoin Naofa” (the presumed form for “Holy Wednesday”), my search online turned up one questionable reference (in a very mixed-up hybrid site) and in dictionaries I found nothing. As I understand it, the term “Spy Wednesday” has been changed to “Holy Wednesday,” but I simply don’t find much evidence of this usage in Irish and I also can’t find an exact year for the change. Vatican II? If it were that long ago, I’d expect to find more evidence of “Céadaoin Naofa” online. Maybe I’m just barking up the wrong tree, but between Google searches, online dictionaries and hard-copy dictionaries, I usually find some evidence of what I’m looking for, vocabulary-wise. Of course, I always try to build on what I’ve heard and read in everyday usage for years, but I do like to check these sources for more specific information. Btw, I also found nothing under the old spelling, which would be “Céadaoin Naomhtha,” but of course, the formal date of the change, assuming there is one, might preclude that. Hmmm. Lenited and eclipsed versions of the above? Amas ar bith! (No hits) and no luck in dictionaries. Sin sin go dtí an bhliain seo chugainn, is dócha.
And, last but not least, a bit of Google-based trivia that some of you may find amusing as I did. When I tried searching for “Máirt Chásca” without comharthaí athfhriotail and without sínte fada, the first hit (of 7,360,000!) that came up was for the K-Mart in Chaska, Minnesota. Wonders never cease! On that bemused note, SGF, Róislín
P.S. Anyone still wondering about the phrase “Aimsir na Cásca”? Why “weather”? Answer: here it’s not “weather.” “Aimsir” can mean “time,” “tense,” or “tide” in the sense of “time.” So “Aimsir na Cásca” is “Eastertide.”

History of Rapa Nui
Your location: Welcome! (Main page) / Culture, history / History of Rapa Nui
Was the first highest rank leader of Easter Island, he is believed to have brought his people on 2 boats more than 1.000 (perhaps even 1.700) years ago to the island.
Western literature refers to Hotu Matu'a as to "Rapa Nui's first king", although it is known that there were no real kings, but rather tribal rulers in Polynesia, we continue to use this term. Hotu Matu'a was considered the "Ariki Mau" by the locals, this meaning sort of a "major leader" or "highest ruler".
The settlement of the island
With certainly we can affirm that Easter Island has been inhabited for over 1.200 years. But, specialists still debate on when the first settlers lead by the legendary Hotu Matu'a arrived.
Specialists consider that the island was colonized sometime between 300 BC and 800 BC. Pollen analysis, DNA analysis and also the studies of local legends point out to various periods between this interval. Of course, some people might have arrived later and others earlier, but it is generally accepted by the great public that the island was uninhabited before 300 BC, despite the fact that there is scientific evidence that Easter Island was inhabited before Hotu Matu'a's arrival.
According to the legends, the Ariki Mau, Hotu Matu'a arrived from an island or group of island called Hiva. Linguistic analysis of the Rapa Nui language suggests that the place of origin was the Marquesas Islands.
Legends say that a person called Hau-Maka (Haumaka) had a dream in which his spirit travelled to an island located far away in order to look for new land for the ruler Hotu Matu'a.
Hau-Maka's dream trip took him to the Mata Ki Te Rangi, meaning "Eyes that look to the Sky", an island located in the center of the Earth. This piece of land was called "Te Pito 'o the Kainga", meaning "center of the Earth".
After Hau-Maka woke up, he told about his dream to Motu Matu'a, the supreme leader who ordered 7 men to travel to the island. So they did and they return to Hiva with the news that indeed, there is new land far away. Following this discovery, Hotu Matu'a traveled with 2 boats with settlers and colonized what we call today "Easter Island".
Several hundreds of years ago a bloody conflict had broken out on Easter Island. This is attributed to a variety of factors: remoteness, overpopulation, deforestation, tribal rivalry.
Easter Island is one of the most isolated islands
in the World. Even today, if you fly with a modern airplane from Santiago,
Chile, it takes 5-6 hours to get there. Imagine how difficult it was about
1.500 years ago!
It is believed that this island was formed by ancient volcanic eruptions.
Roggeveen, the Dutch discoverer of the island had estimated a number of 2.000 - 3.000 inhabitants in 1722. But specialists analyzed the bones, the legends and have come to the conclusion that around the 1500s and the 1700s there could have been as many as 10.000 - 15.000 people living on the island.
Overpopulation could have been the primary reason why the locals started fighting each other. This is believed to have lead to the splitting of the population into several tribes, families. Some think there were 2 tribes fighting, others believe there were multiple families.
During the fights, many moai statues and ahu platforms were destroyed, magnificent statues pulled down. Perhaps it was a revenge against the god(s)? Or just because of anger at the constructors? Perhaps the towards the ancestors who had cut down so many trees in order to move the statues?
The tribal wars have even lead to cannibalism.
During Roggeveen's visit it was noticeable that life on the island has degenerated due to deforestation and the depletion of the island's natural resources.
Today, Easter Island has very few trees, this is due to the fact that the locals had used up all wood for firewood, boat and house construction, but certainly have irresponsibly cut down large amounts of trees for building tools to move and put the moai into place.
Once there were forests of palm trees on Rapa Nui, now the only palm trees that exist were planted. So are all other trees which were brought here from other islands and the Americas.
The disappearing of forests has coincided with the conflict on the island. There was not enough wood to make fishing boats, therefore the islands could forget about going out for fishing and also about leaving the island! The disappearance of wood has also led to the decrease of the number of bids, which could not construct nests anymore. The locals found themselves stuck for good on what they believed to be the "Center of Earth".
The discovery of Easter Island
On Sunday, April 5th, 1722, the first Europeans arrived to the island called by locals "Te Pito 'o Te Henua".
Because it was discovered on Easter, it was named "Easter Island".
The discoverer was Jacob Roggeveen, a Dutch captain.
The name we hear so often, "Rapa Nui" is a newer one, given to the island by Polynesians in the mid 1800.
The oldest name known for this island is "Te Pito 'o Te Henua".
Over 800 statues are today on the island, but when Roggeveen discovered Easter Island, these were in pretty good shape, many in place. Afterwards many have fallen. It is generally believed that there were revolts, conflicts and the islanders pulled them down. There even are theories that point out to the possibility of tsunami tidal waves, which could have demolished moai statues, for example it is strongly suggested that the site of Ahu Tongariki was destroyed by such a force coming from the ocean.
Recovery from the conflicts, colonization and more tragedy
Following the drastic decrease of population induced by the tribal violence and famine, Rapa Nui had recovered only by the mid 1800s, when about 4.000 people lived there. But in the 1800s and the 1900s, more and more Europeans and South Americans arrived to Easter Island, which had become part of Chile in 1888.
Tragically many Rapa Nui people were forcefully deported to Peru and Chile, many others died of diseases brought in by the white man.
All these have almost lead to the extermination of the whole population. In 1877 only 111 Rapa Nui people existed on the island.
Later, the island's population took a positive turn and many Polynesians, Amerindians and white men from Chile and Peru came to settle here.
Today tourism, fishing, some agriculture account for the main economic resources of the island. In fact, tourism which so far helped the island may be its biggest threat as more and more people flock to this tiny triangular land on a weekly basis.

In a commentary in the February issue of the journal Nature, a team of scientists from University of California, San Francisco has suggested that sugar should be regulated like alcohol and cigarettes.
In an article entitled ‘The toxic truth about sugar’, the UCSF group suggests that like alcohol and tobacco, sugar is a toxic, addictive substance that should be highly regulated with taxes, laws on where and to whom it can be advertised, and even age-restricted sales.
In response, the American Beverage Association issued the following statement:
"The authors of this commentary attempt to address the critical global health issue of non-communicable diseases such as heart disease and diabetes. However, in doing so, their comparison of sugar to alcohol and tobacco is simply without scientific merit. Moreover, an isolated focus on a single ingredient such as sugar or fructose to address health issues noted by the World Health Organization to be caused by multiple factors, including tobacco use, harmful alcohol use, an unhealthy diet and lack of physical activity, is an oversimplification.
“There is no evidence that focusing solely on reducing sugar intake would have any meaningful public health impact. Importantly, we know that the body of scientific evidence does not support that sugar, in any of its various forms - including fructose, is a unique cause of chronic health conditions such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease or metabolic syndrome."
Source: American Beverage Association
- If you enjoyed this article, you may also like this: ABA puts calorie information at your fingertips
- Caffé Culture 2013, in pictures
- Tetra Pak receives DuPont Continuing Innovation Award
- Pom-Bear Zoo snacks from Intersnack

Date: September 16th 2006
Hair loss is experienced by all of us at one or the other time. To know the causes of hair fall, it is very essential to know the structure of hair and its normal growth cycle.
Structure of hair
The hair on our scalp can be divided into two parts, the root and shaft. The root part of hair is in the skin (epidermis) of scalp. The hair root is surrounded by a pouch like structure called follicle. The base of hair root is in the shape of a bulb. This bulb is indented by capillaries and nerve fibers. The cells in the center of bulb divide. The newly divided hair cells push the previous cells up. The cells which move upwards die slowly forming hard hair shaft. The hair shaft has three layers the cuticle, medulla and cortex.Cuticle is the outer layers and protects the inner layers. It is transparent. Healthy cuticle gives a shiny appearance for hair and unhealthy cuticle gives lifeless look. The medulla is the innermost layer composed of large cells. The cortex is the layer between cuticle and medulla. This contains pigment and keratin. Cortex determines the bulk and strength of hair. The hair follicle contains oil secreting glands which make the hair shiny .Stress and illness diminish secretion of oil and pigments causing graying of hair.According to Ayurveda the hair is considered as a tissue which uses the same nutrients of bone and considered as a tissue which is formed as bi-product of bone tissue.
Normal cycle of hair growth.
About 10 % of the hair on the scalp is in a resting phase at any given time. The resting hair falls after 2 to 3 months and new hair starts growing in its place. The growing phase continues for 2.25 to 6 yrs. During this phase each hair grows approximately 1 cm per month. At any given time about 90% of the hair on scalp will be in growing phase. Few strands of hair fall as the part of normal hair growth cycle. But some people may experience excessive hair fall which is more than normal cycle. Excessive hair loss can affect men, women and children.
Causes of hair loss
1. Hormonal imbalance in men and women: In men high concentration of dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in hair follicles causes hair fall. In women hormonal imbalances during pregnancy and after delivery cause hair fall.
2. High amount of sebum in scalp clogs pores of scalp and prevent nutrition to hair follicle.
3. Inadequate nutrition causes hair fall.
4. Stress, worry, lack of sleep, worry and anxiety cause hair fall
5. Long standing diseases like typhoid, viral infections, anemia, surgery etc cause general debility which lead to hair fall
6. Some medicines used for gout, chemo therapy of cancer , birth control pills , antidepressants etc cause hair fall
7. Diseases like lupus, diabetes cause hair fall.
8. Tying hair tightly pulls the hair from follicles and cause traction alopecia.
9. Heredity also causes hair fall.
10. Dandruff or Fungal infection of scalp. 11. Accumulation of dirt on scalp causes blocking of pores and weakens hair roots. This leads to hair fall.
According to ayurveda the causes of hair loss are described as follows:-
1. Too much exposure to dust, sunlight, water and other pollutants.
2. Too much of sweating.
3. Irregular sleeping pattern.
4. Anxiety, depression, insomnia.
5. Unhygienic way of living
7. Alcohol consumption.
Hair Loss Remedies
1. Liberal intake of vitamins.
2. High protein and iron rich diet.
3. Consumption of raw vegetables, fresh fruits, salads, green leafy vegetables regularly.
4. Washing hair regularly ( twice weekly ) with suitable shampoo.
5. Using relaxing techniques to overcome stress, anxiety and sleeplessness.
6. Preventing fungal infections of scalp.
7. Preventing hairstyles which pull hair.
Due to these causes the tridoshas get vitiated and cause hair loss. The vitiated doshas affect the scalp skin and cause hair fall occurs. Medicated oil with the herbs Bhringaraja ( Eclipta Alba ), Amalaki ( Embelica officinalis ), Haritaki ( Terminalia chebula ) and Vibhitaki ( Terminalia bellirica ) is a best remedy for hair fall.
Leave a Reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.

WILDLIFE organisations have issued a reminder about the impact of recent hot waves on native birds.
With sweltering conditions, and temperatures in the 40s predicted again over the coming weeks, head of research at Bird Life Australia James O’Connor is encouraging people to fill their birdbaths and leave water out.
Mr O’Connor said over the past few weeks, thousands of native birds had felt the effects of the heat wave, both in the city and in the country.
“Hot weather always takes its toll, but if it only lasts for a day or two, birds can usually survive until the weather cools down again,” he said.
“However, when it’s hot for day after day, like the rest of us they start to feel the effects.”
He said, like everyone else, birds needed to drink lots of water and shelter from the heat during the hot weather.
“Unlike the rest of us, they can’t turn on a tap for some cold water, or switch on an air-conditioner to cool down,” he said.
“Just a few months ago, wetlands were brimming with water, but now many are just parched expanses of cracked mud.
“Birds need water to drink every day, and when the wetlands dry out, they need to find water somewhere else or they will die.”
Mr O’Connor suggested the best thing people could do to lend the birds a hand was to place a dish of water in the shade.
“So that the birds can have a drink or cool off in it,” he said.
“And make sure it’s not too deep so that birds won’t drown in it!
“Also, if you have a birdbath in your garden, make sure it’s topped up regularly and placed in the shade so the water doesn’t heat up too much.”
He added it was important to keep the water out of the reach of the neighbourhood cats.
“Heat-stressed birds are easy prey for them,” he said.

The What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) was established in 2002 by the U.S. Department of Education's Institute of Education Sciences to provide educators, policymakers, and the public with a central and trusted source of scientific evidence of what works in education. The WWC is administered by the Department, through a contract to a joint venture of the American Institutes for Research and the Campbell Collaboration.
To provide information needed by decision-makers, the WWC reviews and reports on existing studies of interventions (education programs, products, practices, and policies) in selected topic areas. WWC reviews of the evidence apply a set of standards that follow scientifically valid criteria for determining the effectiveness of these interventions. The WWC provides its findings in accessible, user-friendly, online reports, which include the following:
- Reports on evaluation studies that pass the WWC standards
- Reports on the research base for each identified intervention
- Reports that synthesize the evaluation studies of interventions within defined topic areas
A Technical Advisory Group (TAG) composed of the nation's leading experts in research design, program evaluation, and research synthesis advises on the standards for evaluation research reviews and monitors and informs the methodological aspects of WWC reviews and reports.
The WWC is committed to ensuring that its products and services meet user needs and invites input from educators, policymakers, researchers, and members of the public. All products are available through the WWC website at www.whatworks.ed.gov

Do you cringe at the word “xeriscape”? Does that mean boring, thin-leaved, un-colorful plants to you? Well think again. Xeriscape gardening can look lush, colorful and be a snap to maintain. To help people learn how to have a beautiful garden while being water consious, Colorado Springs Utilities has created two xeriscaped demonstration gardens for denizens to learn about and apply water thriftiness in their own gardens. The display at these gardens provides a lesson for everyone, even if you don’t live in a drought prone area. Can you imagine not having to water much *at all* between rains?
(Editor's Note: This article was originally published on September 1, 2008. Your comments are welcome, but please be aware that authors of previously published articles may not be able to promptly respond to new questions or comments.)
Even if you don't live in Colorado Springs, the Rocky Mountains, or even in a dry climate, the suggestions from these demonstration gardens will help you save time watering and money on your next water bill. Colorado and areas like it have wonderfully dry climates due to low humidity and unfortunately sometimes high winds.For most gardeners, this means both dry skin and dry soil.Besides a good moisturizer, here's how to cope.Plant water-wise plants and irrigate intelligently!
Once the plants on this list get established (one-two weeks) they don't need much water, if any, at all.With the growing water shortage in Colorado and many other states, this is an important feature for sustainability in the coming years.The Mesa Road Xeriscape Garden (one of CSU's featured demonstration gardens) is actually a lush, colorful and peaceful place that requires very little water.Come along for a tour and a xeriscaping lesson, Colorado style.
Why should you xeriscape?
The biggest and most widely misunderstood lesson of xeriscaping is planting in water-usage zones, or hydrozones. That is, putting plants that need lots of water next to ones that need lots of water, and putting plants that can don't need any water with the like. Seems logical right? If you put an iris next to a nasturtium, you are bound to do one of three things: overwater the iris, underwater the nasturtium, or kill both. It just makes sense to put your irises with your Blanketflowers and your Nasturtium next to your cannas. That doesn't sound all that boring, right?
When you really get down to it though, xeriscaping does mean planting flora that does not require much additional water than the average rainfall of your area. Once established, they should practically grow themselves.
CSU (the utilities company, not the university) has created two demonstration gardens to showcase how good xeriscaping can look: the Mesa Xeriscape Demonstration Garden and the Cottonwood Creek Park Xeriscape Garden in Colorado Springs. Along with some planting tips and the right plants, xeriscaping never has to be humdrum.
Bee Balm - Monarda
Blanketflower - Gaillardia
Texas Red Yucca surrounded by other colorful xerics
Lavender and Creeping Thyme
Plants you'll find at the Mesa Xeriscape Demonstration Garden (and you should try!)
Silver Blade Evening Primrose
Dwarf Garden Phlox
Rocky Mountain Sumac
Mullein 'Southern Charm'
Mexican Feather Grass
Dwarf Goldenrod 'Goldenbaby'
Blue Mist Spirea
Pale Purple Coneflower
Gray Creeping Germander
California Fuchsia 'Orange Carpet'
Some more hardy xeric plants to check out:
Red Hot Poker
Autumn Joy Sedum
The Mesa Garden also has a demonstration rock garden, which usually are made up of small xeric plants. Some great xeric rock garden plants are sedums, Penstemon, Dwarf Barberry, Edelweiss, Lamb's Ear, Oregano, Hens and Chicks, Rupturewort, and Cattail Iris. The list of attractive rock garden plants is just about endless.
For more information on fantastic, hardy xeric plants, here is a great link:
Xeric gardening does not have to be colorless or boring as you can see from all of these beautiful flowers showcased at the Mesa Xeriscape Demonstration Garden. Even if you just put in a few xerics, you can benefit from the decreased water usage.
All photos taken at Mesa Xeriscape Demonstration Garden, Colorado Springs, Colorado. Copyrighted to Susanne and Kyle Talbert
About Susanne Talbert
I garden in beautiful Colorado Springs, half a mile from Garden of the Gods. Since we bought our first house two years ago, I have been busy revamping my 1/4 acre of ignored decomposed granite.
My garden passions include water gardening, vines, super-hardy perennials, and native xerics. By day, I am a high school ceramics teacher as well as a ceramicist and painter.

Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
use in Native American music
...Native Americans developed lingua francas in order to facilitate trade and social interaction; in these areas, song texts may feature words from a lingua franca. Many Native American songs employ vocables, syllables that do not have referential meaning. These may be used to frame words or may be inserted among them; in some cases, they constitute the entire song text. Vocables are a fixed...
What made you want to look up "vocable"? Please share what surprised you most...

Blocking production of a pyruvate kinase splice-variant shows therapeutic promise
Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
– Cancer cells grow fast. That’s an essential characteristic of what makes them cancer cells. They’ve crashed through all the cell-cycle checkpoints and are continuously growing and dividing, far outstripping our normal cells. To do this they need to speed up their metabolism.
CSHL Professor Adrian Krainer and his team have found a way to target the cancer cell metabolic process and in the process specifically kill cancer cells.
Nearly 90 years ago the German chemist and Nobel laureate Otto Warburg proposed that cancer’s prime cause was a change in cell metabolism – i.e., in cells’ production and consumption of energy. In particular cancer cells have a stubborn propensity to eschew using glucose as a source to generate energy. This is known as the Warburg Effect.
While metabolic changes are an important feature in the transformation of normal cells into cancer cells they are not now thought to be cancer’s primary cause. Despite this, metabolic changes remain an attractive target for cancer therapy, as Krainer and colleagues show in a paper published online today in Open Biology
, the open-access journal of Great Britain’s Royal Society.This image compares glioblastoma cells untreated or treated with antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) that modulate splicing for PK-M. The cells are visible under light microscopy in the left column, and the DNA in their nuclei shows up when using the blue dye DAPI in the second column. PK-M2 is visualized using a red stain in the third column, with the merge of the images in each row in the forth column. The 2nd and 3rd rows show cells that have been treated with ASOs. The red dye is nearly all gone indicating that there is less PK-M2 and that the ASOs have worked. Image courtesy of Zhenxun Wang and Adrian Krainer. (click to enlarge)
One difference between metabolism in cancer and normal cells is the switch in cancer to the production of a different version, or isoform, of a protein produced from the pyruvate kinase-M (PK-M) gene. The protein version produced in normal cells is known as PK-M1, while the one produced by cancer cells is known as PK-M2.
PK-M2 is highly expressed in a broad range of cancer cells. It enables the cancer cell to consume far more glucose than normal, while using little of it for energy. Instead, the rest is used to make more material with which to build more cancer cells.
PK-M1 and PK-M2 are produced in a mutually exclusive manner -- one-at-a-time, from the same gene, by a mechanism known as alternative splicing. When a gene’s DNA is being copied into the messenger molecule known as mRNA, the intermediate template for making proteins, a cellular machine called the spliceosome cuts and pastes different pieces out of and into that mRNA molecule.
The non-essential parts that are edited out are known as introns, while the final protein-coding mRNA consists of a string of parts pasted together known as exons. The bit that fits into the PK-M1 gene-coding sequence is known as exon 9, while it is replaced in PK-M2 by exon 10. In this way alternative splicing provides the cell with the ability to make multiple proteins from a single gene.
Krainer, an authority on alternative splicing, previously published research
on the protein regulators that facilitate the splicing mechanism for PK-M. His team showed that expression of PK-M2 is favored in cancer cells by these proteins, which act to repress splicing for the PK-M1 isoform. In the study published today the team explains that it decided to target the splicing of PK-M using a technology called antisense, rather than target the proteins that regulate the splicing mechanism.
Using a panel of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), small bits of modified DNA designed to bind to mRNA targets, they screened for new splicing regulatory elements in the PK-M gene. The idea was that one or more ASOs would bind to a region of the RNA essential for splicing in exon 10 and reveal that site by preventing splicing of exon 10 from occurring.
Indeed, this is what happened. “We found we can force cancer cells to make the normal isoform, PK-M1,” sums up Krainer. In fact, a group of potent ASOs were found that bound to a previously unknown enhancer element in exon 10, i.e., an element that predisposes for expression of the PK-M2 isoform, thus preventing its recognition by splicing-regulatory proteins. This initiated a switch that favored the PK-M1 isoform.
When they then deliberately targeted the PK-M2 isoform for repression in cells derived from a glioblastoma, a deadly brain cancer, all the cells died. They succumbed through what is known as programmed cell death or apoptosis -- a process whereby the cell shuts down its own machinery and chops up its own DNA in committing a form of cellular suicide.
As to why the cells die when PK-M2 is repressed: the team found it was not due to the concomitant increase in PK-M1 (the cells survived even when extra PK-M1 was introduced). Rather, it was the loss of the PK-M2 isoform that was associated with the death of the cancer cells. How this works is still unclear but a subject of investigation in the Krainer laboratory.
The next step will be to take their ASO reagents into mouse models of cancer to see if they behave the same way there. While there are some technical and methodological obstacles to overcome, Krainer is optimistic.
“PK-M2 is preferentially expressed in cancer cells, a general feature of all types of cancer -- it’s a key switch in their metabolism,” he says. Thus targeting the alternative splicing mechanism of PK-M2 using ASOs has the potential to be a cancer therapeutic with many applications.
The paper can be obtained online at the following link: Zhenxun Wang, Hyun Yong Jeon, Frank Rigo, C. Frank Bennett and Adrian R. Krainer. 2012 Manipulation of PK-M mutually exclusive alternative splicing by antisense oligonucleotides. Open Biology 2: 120133. http://rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/10/120133.full
The research described in this release was supported by the National Cancer Institute grant CA13106, the St. Giles Foundation, and a National Science Scholarship from the Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore. About Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Founded in 1890, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) has shaped contemporary biomedical research and education with programs in cancer, neuroscience, plant biology and quantitative biology. CSHL is ranked number one in the world by Thomson Reuters for impact of its research in molecular biology and genetics. The Laboratory has been home to eight Nobel Prize winners. Today, CSHL's multidisciplinary scientific community is more than 360 scientists strong and its Meetings & Courses program hosts more than 12,500 scientists from around the world each year to its Long Island campus and its China center. Tens of thousands more benefit from the research, reviews, and ideas published in journals and books distributed internationally by CSHL Press. The Laboratory's education arm also includes a graduate school and programs for undergraduates as well as middle and high school students and teachers. CSHL is a private, not-for-profit institution on the north shore of Long Island. For more information, visit www.cshl.edu.
Written by: Edward Brydo
n, Science Writer

Plant Care GuidesPerennials | Bulbs | Trees and Shrubs | Vegetables | Fruits | Herbs
Mesclun and Salad Greens
About This PlantSweet corn varieties include yellow, white, and bi-colored types. Because corn is wind-pollinated, it should be planted in blocks of at least four rows rather than in long single rows. By planting early, mid, and late-season varieties you can extend the harvest over several weeks. Plant corn on the north side of the garden to prevent it from shading nearby crops.
Site SelectionSelect a site with full sun and well-drained soil. Prepare the garden bed by using a garden fork or tiller to loosen the soil to a depth of 12 to 15 inches, then mix in a 2- to 4-inch layer of compost and/or aged manure.
Planting InstructionsPlant corn directly outdoors after all danger of frost has passed and the soil temperature is about 60 degrees F. Corn requires a good deal of nitrogen for optimum growth, so work plenty of aged manure into the soil the previous fall and plan to fertilize with additional nitrogen during the growing season if necessary. Plant corn seeds in blocks of at least four rows with 2 to 4 feet between rows, sowing the seeds 1-1/2 to 2 inches deep and 6 to 8 inches apart.
CareThin the corn to stand 12 to 16 inches apart when the plants are 4 to 5 inches tall. Provide at least 1 inch of water a week. Control weeds with frequent shallow cultivation until the plants are knee high. Then apply a 3- to 5-inch layer of mulch. Watch for signs of nitrogen deficiency (yellowing leaves) and respond with quick side-dressings of a nitrogen-rich fertilizer such as fish emulsion. Contact your local County Extension office for controls of common corn pests such as corn earworms and European corn borers.
HarvestingSweet corn should be harvested when its ears are completely filled out and a pierced kernel shows a milky white liquid. Sweet corn varieties (except for supersweet varieties) lose their sweetness soon after harvest. Immediately after picking prepare the ears for eating or preserving.

The talk, made available by the Center for Design Innovation (via The Next Web), was from 1983's International Design Conference at Aspen, at which a 20-something Steve Jobs spoke to how personal computers would change the world forever. His insight was eerily prescient as he described a day when email would dominate the communications landscape, people would use portable network-connected computing devices and users would be able to interact with machines in new and innovative ways.
In about 20 minutes, Jobs summarized the then-current state of personal computing, noting that the market was about to see a significant boom. He also said that computers would likely be poorly designed, a theory that became reality with the early beige boxes of the 80s and early 90s, including Apple's own Apple II.
Jobs' vision of "good design" meant not only building aesthetically pleasing machines, but devices that had a utility of function like user-friendly GUIs akin to those seen on early Macs.
Near the end of his talk, Jobs looked even further into the future, hinting that technology like artificial intelligence and predictive computing could one day be a possibility.
He recalls how books helped him learn straight from the source instead of being filtered through interpretation when he was in school, citing Plato and Aristotle as two examples. The problem, Jobs said, was that the great minds couldn't be tapped once they were dead. To this, he proposed a machine that can collect data, compiling it into a type of artificial intelligence.
"I think as we look toward the next 50 to 100 years, if we really can come up with these machines that can capture an underlying spirit, or an underlying set of principles, or an underlying way of looking at the world so that then when the next Aristotle comes around?" Jobs said. "Maybe if he carries around one these machines with him his whole life and types in all this stuff, then maybe someday after the person's dead and gone we can ask this machine, 'Hey, what would Aristotle have said?what about this?' And maybe we won't get the right answer?but maybe we will. And that's really exciting to me."
A video of the speech as well as an accompanying audio file can be found at the Center for Design Innovation's blog.

Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT) is a method of therapy which blends features of two disciplines:
- Cognitive therapy aims to identify and alter cognitive distortions (warped or inaccurate thoughts);
- Mindfulness is a meditative practice from Buddhism, which aims to help people identify their thoughts, moment by moment, but without passing judgement on the thoughts.
In MBCT, the patient is urged to recognize and accept undesired feelings as they come and go instead of trying to push them away. Traditional cognitive therapy, or cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), focuses on changing negative content of thoughts while MBCT emphasizes the process of paying attention to thoughts and feelings moment by moment and without judgment. Changing the patient's relationship to the suffering caused by negative thoughts is the key because there is no possible way to alleviate all suffering. No therapy or meditation will prevent unpleasant things from happening in our daily lives but the two practices combined may provide more objectivity from which to view these unpleasant things.
MBCT's main technique is based on the Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) eight week program, developed by Jon Kabat-Zinn in 1979 at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center. Research shows that MBSR is enormously empowering for patients with chronic pain, hypertension, heart disease, cancer, and gastrointestinal disorders, as well as for psychological problems such as anxiety and panic. People often misunderstand the goal of therapy and especially mindfulness. Relaxation and happiness are not the aim, but rather a "freedom from the tendency to get drawn into automatic reactions to thoughts, feelings, and events" . Patients change the relationship to chronic pain so the pain becomes more manageable.
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy grew largely from Jon Kabat-Zinn's work. Zindel V. Segal, J. Mark G. Williams and John D. Teasdale helped adapt the MBSR program so it could be used with people who had suffered repeated bouts of depression in their lives. Currently, MBCT programs usually consist of eight-weekly two hour classes with weekly assignments to be done outside of session. The aim of this program is to enhance awareness so we are able to respond to things instead of react to them. "We can respond to situations with choice rather than reacting automatically. We do that by practicing to become more aware of where our attention is, and deliberately changing the focus of attention, over and over again". The structure of MBCT requires strong commitment and work on the clients' part but the rewards can be lasting.
Effectiveness of MBCT Edit
Research is now showing the effectiveness of mindfulness in the prevention of relapse. The UK National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE) has recently endorsed MBCT as an effective treatment for prevention of relapse. Research has shown that people who have been clinically depressed three or more times (sometimes for twenty years or more) find that taking the program and learning these skills helps to reduce considerably their chances that depression will return. In a study conducted with 145 participants, all the patients had previously recovered from depression and then relapsed. These sufferers were split randomly into groups providing different methods of treatment. Within a year, patients who were undergoing MBCT "reduced relapse from 66% (control group) to 37% (treatment group)". "Whereas most people might be able to ignore sad mood, in previously depressed persons a slight lowering of mood might bring about a potentially devastating change in thought patterns". The core skill of MBCT is to teach the ideas of recognizing these thought patterns in order to break away from the false constructs of our mind. Relapse is avoided because the onset of depression is recognized before it has fully developed. The vicious cycle is stopped before it even gets started.
Benefits of MBCT and mindfulness practice Edit
Mindfulness meditation is a useful tool in dealing with many different scenarios. Practicing mindfulness aids patients, laypersons, and therapists. This approach to meditation focuses our attention back to the present, to what is happening right now in this exact moment. When one is mindful, the attention is focused on the present so judgment cannot be placed. Often, our pain and mental discomfort are caused by the judgment placed on the present moment and not by what is actually happening. This judgment and negative thinking is what can possibly lead to depression. MBCT prioritizes learning how to pay attention or concentrate with purpose, in each moment and most importantly, without judgment.
Segal and his partners found that "thoughts and feelings could interact with each other in a damaging, vicious spiral". Through the practice of mindfulness, we recognize that holding onto some of these feelings is ineffective and mentally destructive. Viewing things mindfully requires not turning away from any feeling but instead being open to the experience while trying not to engage defense mechanisms. All thoughts are welcomed into the mind equally so that one does not judge the thought or herself for thinking the thought. Gaining perspective on one's own thoughts allows us to escape the mental grooves and ruminative thinking that plagues us. Through mindfulness practice the spiral of negative thought is stopped before one finds herself at the bottom looking up.
Not only is this practice helpful to laypersons but to the actual therapist doing this type of MBCT. As a therapist, mindfulness can be implemented into therapy sessions, and used as a means of self-care in the therapist's personal life. "Meditating therapists often report feeling more 'present', relaxed, and receptive with their patients if they meditate earlier in the day". Mindfulness incorporates not judging thought. By having that non-judgment, the therapist allows the patient to fully express true feelings by having that openness. "As the therapist learns to disentangle from her own conditioned patterns of thoughts that arise in the therapy relationship, the patient may discover the same emotional freedom". The concentration development from mindfulness also helps the therapist be able to stay fully engaged with the patient. The mind naturally wanders to other things but mindfulness is the answer to being unfocused. There is a degree of perspective that also comes with mindfulness meditation. This new perspective allows a therapist to see other solutions or options to a patient's problem he or she may not have been originally aware of. "Having this [perspective] enables the therapist to have some flexibility in finding a formulation that accords with the patient's understanding". As therapists help their patients come to these solutions and become more fully functioning, it may be easy to think they are powerful and all knowing. Maintaining perspective prevents therapists from 'buying their own press'.
As means of self-care, P. Fulton and his fellow authors would say "offering love and care to ourselves replenishes the physical and emotional reservoirs that are necessary to care for others" (p. 87). When looking at burn-out rates in the social service fields, one can see that self-care is absolutely necessary whether one thinks they need it or not. Meditating saturates these reservoirs so compassionate, sincere work can continue. Also by dealing with personal suffering through this practice, therapists develop greater empathy and become more openhearted to the needs of their clients.
Depression as the inspiration of MBCT Edit
Depression is a more serious problem than how it is presently seen. The World Health Organization (WHO) conducted a study and came up with the following projection for the year 2020: "of all diseases, depression will impose the second largest burden of ill health worldwide". Research shows that at any given time, ten percent of the United States has experienced this type of clinical depression in the last year alone. Women being affected at a significantly higher rate (20-25%) than men (7-12%). The people who are affected with this common mental disorder are also the least likely to get help or treatment.
Depression is a severe and prolonged state of mind in which normal sadness grows into a painful state of hopelessness, listlessness, lack of motivation, and fatigue. Depression can vary from mild to severe. When depression is mild, one may find himself brooding on negative aspects of himself or others. He may feel resentful, irritable or angry much of the time, feeling sorry for himself, and needing reassurance from someone. Various physical ailments could also occur that have no correlation to physical illness.
Depression is classified as clinical when the episode inhibits a person's ability to accomplish routine daily tasks for at least two weeks. If suddenly 'normal' activities become difficult to do or the interest to do them is lost completely for a sustained amount of time, clinical depression could be a possibility. A change in basic bodily functions may also be experienced. The usual daily rhythms seem to go 'out of kilter'. One can't sleep, or one sleeps too much. One can't eat, or one eats too much. Others may notice that the sufferer may become agitated or slowed down. One may find that required energy for activities that used to be enjoyed is now gone. He or she may even feel that life is not worth living, and begin to develop thoughts that he or she would be better off dead.
Currently the most commonly used treatment for major depression is antidepressant medication. These medications are relatively cheap, and easy for family practitioners (who treat the majority of depressed people) to prescribe. However, once the episode has past, and the client has stopped taking the antidepressants, depression tends to return, and at least 50% of those experiencing their first episode of depression find that depression comes back, despite appearing to have made a full recovery. After a second or third episode, the risk of recurrence rises to between 80% and 90%. Also, those who first became depressed before 20 years of age are particularly likely to suffer a higher risk of relapse and recurrence.
The main method for preventing this recurrence is the continuation of the medication, but many people do not want to stay on medication for indefinite periods, and when the medication stops, the risk of becoming depressed again returns. People are turning to new ways of helping them stay well after depression. To see what it is most helpful to do, we need to understand why it is that we may remain at high risk, even when we've recovered. Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy seems to be a complementary method to treating acute and chronic depression.
Why do we remain vulnerable to depression? Edit
New research shows that during any episode of depression, negative mood occurs alongside negative thinking (such as 'I am a failure', 'I am inadequate, 'I am worthless') and bodily sensations of sluggishness and fatigue. When the episode is past, and the mood has returned to normal, the negative thinking and fatigue tend to disappear as well. However, during the episode a mental association has formed between the mood that was present at that time, and the negative thinking patterns.
This means that when negative mood happens again (for any reason) a relatively small amount of such mood can trigger or reactivate the old thinking pattern. Once again, people start to think they have failed, or are inadequate - even if it is not relevant to the current situation. People who believed they had recovered may find themselves feeling 'back to square one'. They end up inside a rumination loop that constantly asks 'what has gone wrong?', 'why is this happening to me?', 'where will it all end?' Such rumination feels as if it ought to help find an answer, but it only succeeds in prolonging and deepening the mood spiral. When this happens, the old habits of negative thinking will start up again, negative thinking gets into the same rut, and a full-blown episode of depression may be the result.
The discovery that, even when people feel well, the link between negative moods and negative thoughts remains ready to be re-activated, is of enormous importance. It means that sustaining recovery from such depression depends on learning how to keep mild states of depression from spiralling out of control.
Future of MBCT Edit
Further research is being conducted to identify all the different uses of MBCT. Significant decreases in anxiety, depression, with a resulting increased sense well being, have been found so far. Research being conducted will evaluate MBCT as a useful technique with patients who are diagnosed with cancer or haematological illness. Mindfulness practice is being done over various cultures and demographics. Ellen Langer has been focusing on the future of mindfulness.
- Jon Kabat-Zinn
- Dialectical behavior therapy
- Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
References & BibliographyEdit
- REDIRECT Template:Reflist
- Segal, Z.V., Williams, J.M.G. & Teasdale, J.D, 2002, Mindfulness–based Cognitive Therapy for Depression. A New Approach to Preventing Relapse. Guilford Press.
- Teasdale, JD, Segal, ZV, and Williams, JMC. How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse and why should attentional control (mindfulness) help? Behav Res Ther (1995) 33:25-29.
- Teasdale, JD, Segal, ZV, Williams MG, Ridgeway, VA, Soulsby, JM, Lau, MA. Prevention of Relapse/Recurrence in Major Depression by Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy. J. of Consulting and Clinical Psychology (2000) 68:615-623.
- Williams JMG, Teasdale JD, Segal ZV and Soulsby J. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy reduces overgeneral autobiographical memory in formerly depressed patients. J Abnorm Psychol (2001).
- [http://www.mbct.co.uk/ Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (UK). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy Homepage. Very complete website with information on books, founders, and workshops.
- What is Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction?
- The Centre for Mindfulness Research and Practice
- Oxford Cognitive Therapy Centre
- MBSR & MBCT
- How to do Mindfulness Meditation[[Category:Mindfulness
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|
<ref>tags exist, but no
<references/>tag was found

POMEROY — George Wright has always been somewhat of a conservationist at heart, so it was no surprise to see him transplanting king-sized hickory nuts into a tub of dark soil.
“King hickory nut trees are scarce here,” he says. “My goal is to help get them re-established in this part of the country.”
Asked where he got his “seed” hickory nuts, he said a couple of places, one being underneath a tree near Annie Chapman’s Morgan Rest Bed and Breakfast on Lincoln Hill in Pomeroy.
The whole process of starting King hickory nut tree starters began a number of months ago. George said it takes storage of the nuts in a cold place six to eight months in order for them to germinate. So they remained refrigerated until the weather began to warm a few weeks ago at which time he planted them in a tub and then waited and watched until little sprouts finally came up and growth began.
His goal has always been to plant enough so he could keep a few for himself and have enough left to give away to others interested in propagating the king-sized hickory nuts.
The plants have now grown into little trees four to six inches high and are ready to be planted in areas large enough to accommodate a tall tree which in a dozen or more years from now will yield hickory nuts.
George is ready to give them away to someone like him who wants to see the King Hickory Nut trees more plentiful in Meigs County.
Anyone interested in getting one of the dozen or so tree plants can leave their name and telephone number with his daughter, Susan Clark Dingess, at Clark’s Jewelry Store and George will get in touch with them. He has some specific instructions on how to handle the planting and care for the delicate plants so that they will survive.

National Conservative Political Action Committee
The National Conservative Political Action Committee (NCPAC; pronounced "nick-pack") was a New Right political action committee in the United States that was a major contributor to the ascendancy of conservative Republicans in the early 1980s, including the election of Ronald Reagan as President, and that innovated the use of independent expenditures to circumvent campaign finance restrictions.
In 1979 Time magazine characterized NCPAC, the Conservative Caucus and the Committee for the Survival of a Free Congress (headed by Paul Weyrich) as the three most important ultraconservative organizations making up the New Right.
NCPAC was founded in 1975 by conservative activists John Terry Dolan, Charles Black and Roger Stone, with help from Richard Viguerie and Thomas F. Ellis. The group got its start through direct mail solicitations. "The shriller you are, the better it is to raise money," explained co-founder Terry Dolan.
NCPAC became one of the first groups to circumvent the contribution limits of the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA) by exploiting the "independent expenditure" loophole permitted under a 1976 U.S. Supreme Court ruling. Although federal law restricted political action committees' expenditures to $10,000 per candidate, an organization could spend unlimited amounts of money supporting or opposing a particular candidate as long as their campaign activity was not coordinated with a candidate. NCPAC pooled independent contributions in order to make independent expenditures on campaign attack ads. Not only did this circumvent campaign finance restrictions, but it prevented candidates from being associated with advertising created on their behalf. NCPAC Chairman Terry Dolan was quoted as saying, "A group like ours could lie through its teeth, and the candidate it helps stays clean." Dolan later said he was describing a hypothetical situation, not NCPAC's actual tactics.
1978 election 
NCPAC's first major target was Democratic Senator Dick Clark of Iowa in the election of 1978. Three weeks before the November 1978 election, incumbent Clark had a 30 percentage-point lead in campaign polls, but he lost to Republican Roger Jepsen, 52 to 48 percent. Clark's defeat was attributed to intense anti-Clark campaigning conducted by direct mail, mailgrams, and leaflet distribution during the final weeks of the campaign, attacking Clark for his positions on abortion, gun control, and the Panama Canal Treaty. NCPAC took credit for Clark's defeat and was encouraged to expand its efforts in the 1980 election.
1980 election 
Clark's defeat, for which NCPAC took credit, encouraged NCPAC and other allied organizations to expand their efforts in the 1980 election, when NCPAC spent at least $1.2 million. Four of the six incumbent Democratic Senators targeted by NCPAC in 1980, John Culver (Iowa), George McGovern (South Dakota), Frank Church (Idaho), and Birch Bayh (Indiana), were defeated. Senators Alan Cranston of California and Thomas Eagleton of Missouri were also targeted, but achieved re-election.
1982 election 
NCPAC hoped to repeat its success in the 1982 election. Initially the group targeted a list of 20 Senators for defeat, including Pat Moynihan of New York, Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts, Paul Sarbanes of Maryland, and John Melcher of Montana. The organization later trimmed its target list to five incumbents, and spent $4.5 million in the 1982 elections. However, only one of its targets, Democrat Howard Cannon of Nevada, failed to win re-election. Sarbanes was charged with being "too liberal for Maryland," but voters did not respond to the NCPAC message. Sarbanes made NCPAC's tactics a major issue in his campaign. Democratic Senator John Melcher, a veterinarian, countered a commercial that claimed he was "too liberal for Montana" by running a TV commercial of his own featuring cows. After a shot of "out-of-staters" carrying a briefcase full of money off an airplane, one cow remarked, "Did ya hear about those city slickers bad-mouthing Doc Melcher? One of 'em was stepping in what they've been trying to sell."
Later years 
L. Brent Bozell succeeded Dolan as the group's head after Dolan's death in 1986.
The organization is based in Alexandria, Virginia.
- The New Right Takes Aim, Time magazine, August 20, 1979
- Thomas Frank, "The Tilting Yard: Charlie Black's Cronies" Wall Street Journal July 2, 2008
- Running with the PACs Time magazine, October 25, 1982
- The Washington Post, August 10, 1980, p. F1, as cited at http://www.bartleby.com/73/150.html
- Richard F. Fenno, Jr., Richard F. Fenno, Senators on the Campaign Trail, University of Oklahoma Press, 1998 ISBN 0-8061-3062-8, ISBN 978-0-8061-3062-0, page 111
- Richard F. Fenno, Jr., Richard F. Fenno, Senators on the Campaign Trail, University of Oklahoma Press, 1998 ISBN 0-8061-3062-8, ISBN 978-0-8061-3062-0, page 114
- Richard F. Fenno, Jr., Richard F. Fenno, Senators on the Campaign Trail, University of Oklahoma Press, 1998 ISBN 0-8061-3062-8, ISBN 978-0-8061-3062-0, page 115
- No Thunder from the Right, by Jane O'Reilly, Time magazine, Nov. 15, 1982
- A Bag of Tricks: Independent Expenditures, Center for Responsible Politics opensecrets.org website, archived January 13, 2008.
- New Resolve by the New Right, by Edwin Warner, Time magazine, December 1, 1980
- NCPAC's Waterloo, by Chuck Lane, The Harvard Crimson, September 25, 1982
- Attack PAC Time magazine, Oct. 25, 1982

Dating photos relies on a combination of:
- internal evidence - clothing, subject matter, composition, props, etc
- identification of people in it - what age were they when the photo was taken? how does this fit with known birth dates?
- production processes - different materials (eg. type of photographic paper) and chemical processes resulted in characteristic types of photo. Standard sizes of commercial prints have changed over time.
- photographer - photographer's marks and advertising can be used to identify the photographer, hence the period the business operated.
Jayne Shrimpton and Maureen Taylor's books are good references, but they concentrate on the 1850-1950 period.
The scanned image shows a black-and-white print. The informal outdoor setting suggests it was taken by an amatuer photographer. I think this print has been cut down from a larger original because prints usually had white borders on all sides.
Commercially processed prints tended to come in standard sizes, which is derived from the size of the negative. Typically commercial processesing produced contact prints (exactly the same size as the negative) and enlargements of the whole negative, which maintain the aspect ratio of the negative. Unfortunately in this case, we do not know the size of the original print, so we can't deduce the size of the negative.
As othe answers have suggested, the 1950s is strongly indicated. At that time, colour photography existed, but was not as widely popular and affordable as black-and-white.

Open source software is becoming more popular and its price is certainly drawing raves.
Open source software is software that is distributed along with its source code. This is usually done free and it is done with the purpose of allowing the improvement of the software be driven by the general user and developer base. This way, the software can definitely apply to user needs and interests as well as draw closer to perfection in the most efficient way possible. Many organizations have adopted the open source philosophy in order to produce the premier software of their markets and many nonprofit organizations have coalesced in support of open source software. Even governments have heralded their support of open source software and some have even gone as far as to initiate mandates that render the distribution of open source software all but compulsory.
Free? Free? Free?
Corporations benefit from open source software as it gives them the capacity to penetrate the market in one of the most effective and cost-efficient ways. These entities can garner loyalty, market presence, and increased stability with the proliferation of open source as opposed to proprietary software. Developers benefit from open source software in that they have the capacity to learn and perfect their methods as well as apply their methodologies and innovation to other large-scale enterprises. This can benefit them as both something they can put on their resume as well as something that they can apply to later projects. Individual users benefit from open source software in that they desires and needs are what drives the development of software that is usually free, especially during its initial stages.
Managing Free Software?
Open source management is usually handled cooperatively, but can also be taken care of through several software tools. On one hand, the Open Source Initiative and the debian-legal mailing list offer networking solutions to open source software management, while on the other, individual teams and firms can track the development of open source software through tools created for that purpose. There is a multitude that is available on the market, many of which also happen to be open source.
The Asian open source software movement has been gaining steam almost at a faster rate than in the Western World. Not only are there many organizations that are dedicated to the development and distribution of open source software, many Asian governments have spearheaded initiatives to make open source software the most-used software development approach. These initiatives have largely been due to a desire to become technologically independent of proprietary software from United States-based corporations. As a result of these pursuits, though, many essential sectors of Asian society, including education and healthcare, have been improved through open source software.
Open source software differs from free software or “freeware” in that it is distributed with the source code and with the intention to initiate the gradual improvement of such software. As a result, open source software is often distributed to a larger segment of the market and is not normally used as an advertising method, while freeware is. Accordingly, open source software is available to and can be used by absolutely anyone.
The development of open source software is contingent on each respective program or platform’s developers. Alternately, its presentation, purpose, and distribution are based on the open source philosophy, which may alter how the software is initially presented. For example, while proprietary software is often produced as a “finished version,” open source software is presented as a work-in-progress, with the expectation that members of the market base will work to gradually improve the software.

Butter Flavoring Linked To Alzheimer's
If you've been looking for one more thing to worry about, here it is.
If you're a fan of butter-flavored microwave popcorn, a new study finds a flavoring used in the product may trigger Alzheimer's disease. University of Minnesota drug-design expert Robert Vince, PhD, and colleagues found that diacetyl causes brain proteins to misfold into the Alzheimer's-linked form called beta amyloid. Vince's team also found that diacetyl has an architecture similar to a substance that makes beta-amyloid proteins clump together in the brain -- clumping being a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. Even more, the popcorn butter flavorant can pass through the blood-brain barrier and can inhibit the brain's natural amyloid-clearing mechanisms. Diacetyl, already linked to lung damage in people who work in microwave popcorn factories, is also used to produce the distinctive buttery flavor and aroma of margarines, snack foods, candy, baked goods, pet foods, and even some chardonnays.(Tipped by JMG reader SIdan)

MYSTIC, Conn. (AP) — Oceanographer Robert Ballard, best known for discovering the Titanic wreck, has new plans to plumb the depths of the seas.
Ballard said Thursday that his latest deep-sea venture will send crews combing through the Black, Aegean and Mediterranean seas for artifacts from ship wrecks and ancient civilizations.
His research vesse set out from a port in Turkey last week on a four-month mission that will use four remote-operated vehicles and sonar technology to explore lost cities.
At a news conference, Ballard said that while he has a general idea what his crew might find, the exploration is about looking for the unknown.
"We're fascinated by extremely confusing parts of our planet and we say 'let's go there and see if we can figure it out,' " said Ballard.
The 211-foot ship, carrying a team of about 15 scientists, will travel through waters including the Hellenic and Aeolian Arcs, the Gorringe bank and the Straits of Sicily — a course that will take it near deep trenches, continental faults and cities under the surface of the Mediterranean that are more than 2,000 years old. The journey is expected to wrap up in November off the coast of Israel.
Ballard, who is also a professor at the University of Rhode Island, founded the Institute for Exploration at the Sea Research Foundation, the nonprofit environmental organization that also runs Mystic Aquarium. In addition to leading an international team that discovered the RMS Titanic in 1985 on the floor of the North Atlantic, Ballard found the wrecks of the battleship Bismarck and the PT-109 torpedo patrol boat that John F. Kennedy commanded during World War II.
The 69-year-old explorer said his ship will dispatch video and audio feeds from this newest venture to connect with the public as he pursues new discoveries. The material will be available online and at a theater at Mystic Aquarium, and teams of educators will rotate aboard the ship to host information sessions and explain the latest finds.
Mission co-leader Katherine Croff Bell said the live technology lets the ship expand beyond the knowledge of the scientists onboard.
"If we don't have the proper expertise on the ship we can call somebody on shore and have them be a part of the exploration in real time," Bell said.
Paul Johnson, an oceanographer at the University of Washington who has worked with Ballard, said these types of expeditions help stir public interest in deep-sea research. He said the voyage was not a traditional research mission and would likely involve a mixture of education, entertainment and "probably some science mixed in there."
The ship's primary mission is to make discoveries, not try to extract artifacts or disturb the seabed. For Ballard and the E/V Nautilus, that means setting themselves up for to find something new by planning trips over unusual or unknown areas.
"What really excites me is when you go looking for one thing and find something more important," Ballard said.
"So we are all about creating moments of discovery by trying to get a little lucky," he said.
On the Web:
E/V Nautilus website: http://nautiluslive.org/

The man behind ‘Twin Bridges,’ Gen. Thaddeus Kosciuszko, remembered as the Revolutionary War hero he was
HALFMOON — To countless Northway travelers, the span over the Mohawk River is simply a way to get to and from work, or fun Adirondack vacations.
Most people call it the “Twin Bridges.”
To veterans advocate Carol Hotaling, of Clifton Park, the structure has a much deeper meaning – a tribute to the Revolutionary War hero that it’s officially named after — Gen. Thaddeus Kosciuszko.
The bridge, which first opened in 1959, underwent a major reconstruction project this fall.
“I would like to propose a rededication of this bridge,” she said. “He (Kosciuszko) was born in Poland, came to a struggling America, volunteered his services to the Continental Army and became chief engineer.”
Hotaling, the “Yellow Ribbon Lady,” has made countless yellow decorations for veterans-themed events, celebrations and observances, and works tirelessly to support troops stationed overseas.
Kosciuszko’s accomplishments were many, including the fortification of West Point. But his most important contribution was designing the American defenses for the 1777 Battles of Saratoga, which proved to be the Revolution’s turning point.
Gen. Horatio Gates, the American commander, gets most of the credit for the victory at Saratoga. Without Kosciuszko, though, it never would have happened.
“It was his use of topography and design of defenses that gave Americans an extremely strong and defensible position,” said Bill Valosin, a Saratoga National Historical Park ranger.
Specifically, artillery placed atop Bemis Heights stopped the flow of British supplies on the Hudson River, directly below, and kept them from using the main north-south river road. Continued...
The southward advancing British army, under Gen. John Burgoyne, was trying to reach Albany, where it would meet British forces moving up the Hudson Valley led by Gen. William Howe. The goal was to split the colonies in two, and bring the American rebellion to a quick end.
At Saratoga, however, the river forms a bottleneck and thanks to Kosciuszko’s well-designed defenses, the Americans controlled it. Burgoyne’s army split up into three separate columns – one near the river; the other two about a mile and two miles inland, respectively.
However, Kosciuszko built an L-shaped three-quarter-mile long line to the west, and another about two-thirds of a mile to the south and west, to hold off attacks from those directions, too.
None of this work began until Sept. 12, one week before the first battle.
“He (Kosciuszko) wasn’t directly in the (battle) lines,” Valosin said. “But his fortifications, where and the way that he placed them, forced the British to abandon the direct route south.”
Born in February 1746, Kosciuszko came to America looking to gain experience and make a name for himself, which he unquestionably did. In Europe, he’s considered one of the Revolution’s greatest heroes, perhaps second only to George Washington.
After the war, he helped lead an insurrection against the Russian occupation of Poland.
In August 1797, still suffering from battle wounds during the insurrection, he came back to the U.S. and lived in Philadelphia. That historic home is now the smallest site, one fifth of an acre, in the entire National Park system.
The next spring, Kosciuszko left Philadelphia for France. He dreamed of seeing a unified and free Poland, but Napoleon’s rise to power dashed those hopes. He spent the last two years of his life in Soleure, Switzerland where he died in 1817.
Recently, there’s been some debate because of constantly changing European borders, about whether Kosciuszko was born in Poland, Lithuania or Belarus. Continued...
Regardless, there is no question about his role as a hero during the American fight for independence.
His good friend Thomas Jefferson called him “as pure a son of liberty as I have ever known.”
Hotaling would like people to remember that during the course of their busy travels over the bridge that bears Kosciuszko’s name.
“It’s one way we can show him the respect he deserves,” she said.
See inaccurate information in a story? Other feedback and/or ideas for us to consider? Tell us here.
What should we investigate? Have a tip you want us to look into? Tell us here.
Location, ST | website.com
National News Videos
- Police & Courts: May 19, 2013 (744)
- Corinth woman dead, two injured in Lake Luzerne crash (698)
- Saratoga Springs Democratic Committee endorses slate of candidates (342)
- Skidmore College's Class of 2013 celebrates commencement (278)
- Public to vote Tuesday on Saratoga Springs City School District's proposed $113 million budget, choose board of education members (267)
- High school athletes, coaches survive respective budget proposals (205)
- Police & Courts: May 17, 2013 (177)
- Creating jobs a goal for Wilton town board in 2010 (5)
- PHOTOS: Saratoga Springs High School Prom 2013 (1)
- Corinth woman dead, two injured in Lake Luzerne crash (1)
- Saratoga Springs Democratic Committee endorses slate of candidates (1)
- Saratoga Rowing Association takes 4 gold medals in early stages of championship regatta (1)
- Skidmore College's Class of 2013 celebrates commencement (1)
Recent Activity on Facebook
Barbara Lombardo is the managing editor of The Saratogian.
Updates on Spa City and Saratoga County business news and trends.
This blog aims to supplement the daily coverage published online and in the paper.
Reporter Caitlin Morris offers insights into the issues affecting Saratoga County residents.

Stuttering: Risk Factors
During an evaluation for Reference stuttering Opens New Window, a health professional will consider a child's risk factors to help find out whether the problem is temporary (normal disfluency) or likely to persist (developmental stuttering).
Risk factors (things that increase risk) for stuttering include:Reference 1
- Having a family member whose stuttering did not resolve on its own.
- Being male. Boys are more likely than girls to keep stuttering.
- The age that it starts. Children who start to stutter before age 3½ are more likely to outgrow it than children who start to stutter at an older age.
- The amount of time that it's lasted. A child who has stuttered for at least 6 months may be less likely to outgrow it on his or her own. If it's lasted longer than 12 months, there's even less of a chance that a child will outgrow it on his or her own.
- How clear the speech is. A child who speaks clearly with few, if any, speech errors may be more likely to outgrow stuttering than a child whose speech errors make him or her hard to understand.
- Having speech irregularities that have lasted 18 months or more.
Usually each risk factor taken individually is not significant. Rather, the strength of each risk factor and how many are present can help a health professional determine whether stuttering is likely to be a long-term problem.
|By:||Reference Healthwise Staff||Last Revised: Reference August 7, 2012|
|Medical Review:||Reference Susan C. Kim, MD - Pediatrics
Reference Louis Pellegrino, MD - Developmental Pediatrics

My Child Has These Odd Behaviors!
Autism in Children with Down Syndrome
by Cyndi Ringoen
Austin’s parents have taken him to the doctor. They have a few concerns to discuss. Austin rejects hugs and kisses from them; he won’t leave his shirt on; he screams every time his mom needs to vacuum the house; he sits for hours by himself quietly humming while lining up cars in a neat row. The doctor observes the child in front of him. Austin won’t make eye contact. He isn’t responding to directions (seems almost not to hear), instead he is quietly sitting while continually flipping the pages of a book. “Ah hah!” thinks the doctor. His diagnosis is Autism.
There is a small, but consistent and significant portion of children with Down syndrome who also become labeled as autistic. Once parents have come to terms with the diagnosis of Down syndrome and all it entails, the addition of yet another label, another set of obstacles often becomes overwhelming. In this article I hope to provide families with demystifying information regarding the label of “autistic,” proactive observation techniques to detect autistic-like or sensory behaviors, and practical ideas for eliminating the behaviors.
|Understanding the Autism Label||What Parents Should Look For|
|What Can a Parent Do?||Conclusion|
The label of “autistic,” whether for a person with Down syndrome or not, is a symptomatic label. This means you receive this label if you have a certain number of symptoms on a list. It is important to know that “autism” is not a disease that you can take a blood test or x-ray to detect. What I see in my work with children and families is that many doctors throw around this label rather haphazardly because of a few symptoms. Having the label or not having the label doesn’t change the fact that the family is dealing with a number of behaviors and symptoms that need to be addressed. The earlier that parents can identify and eliminate the symptoms, the better the chance of the child developing without autistic-like behaviors.
Autism is basically a dysfunction of the sensory channels. This means that some senses are hyperactive (over active) and some are hypoactive (under active). Because of this there are atypical responses to different stimuli. We have five main sensory channels and each of them may be affected with hyper- or hyposensitivities.
Sound. For example, it is common for those affected with autism to be hypersensitive to sound. Sound can actually cause pain and discomfort. Parents may notice the following: covering of ears with hands to block out the sound, extremely negative behavior in certain locations, physical withdrawal or auditory shut down in noisy environments, inconsolable crying that only stops when the child is removed from the noise, or hearing and reacting to sounds before others can even perceive them. If the sounds are too uncomfortable the child will learn to totally turn off the hearing and then cease to make progress in speech and language development—sometimes almost appearing deaf. Often when a person is hypersensitive to certain sounds there are other sounds to which they are hyposensitive, or that they do not process at all. This greatly affects speech, as it is the ability to hear and process tones well that culminates in the ability to produce sound and speech effectively. To onlookers this behavior appears strange and inappropriate but most people would react the same way if they were dealing with auditory hypersensitivity. The solution is to address the problem of the hypersensitivity to sound. Then the “strange” behavior will dissipate.
Touch. Touch, or tactility (the ability to interpret tactile input) can be oversensitive causing withdrawal or reactions to deep touch (hugs) or light touch (tickling, tags, clothing material), discomfort with haircuts or hair combing, aversion to water at certain temperatures, aversions to textures—both on the skin and in the mouth, or overactive gag reflex. Tactility can be hyposensitive, meaning the brain doesn’t even acknowledge that something has touched the body. Instead of overreaction there is a lack of reaction. Parents may notice falling and bruising without the normal response, lack of response to hot and cold, lack of ticklish response, and lack of mouth response to hot and cold.
Smell. Hypersensitivity to odors can cause odd behaviors such as hand sniffing, object and person sniffing, aversion to food odors causing gagging or rejection of food. Hyposensitivity to odor can cause problems with lack of motivation to eat, and inability to distinguish between edible and inedible objects.
Taste. Hypersensitivity to taste can cause gagging or rejection of food. Hyposensitivity to taste can cause lack of motivation to eat, and inability to distinguish between edible and inedible objects. Problems with appropriate sensory information for odors and smell can cause serious eating difficulties.
Sight. We have two main types of vision, peripheral and macular/central. Peripheral vision picks up on edges and motion. Central or macular vision is what we use to learn with, we see details with it, we are able to line up rows and columns, and clearly distinguish letter, numbers, words etc. When a person has overdeveloped or hyperperipheral vision they attend to “odd” things–things which have edges and movement: dangling strings, fans, open and shutting doors/drawers, edges of walls, and often their hands and fingers. Underdeveloped macular vision or hypomacular vision causes difficulties such as lack of eye contact, lack of interest in pictures, books, and television.
Persons diagnosed with “autism” have a combination of the above sensory dysfunctions. One of the most common profiles I find in a person labeled autistic is: hypersensitive to light touch, hyposensitive to deep touch, hyperauditory, hyperperipheral vision and hypomacular vision. Austin, described above, has this set of dysfunctions. This type of person is not receiving information in the same way as you and I, and therefore, is not responding to stimuli in their environment as you and I would.
The most likely reason a child with Down syndrome would begin to be labeled “autistic” is because of something called “sensory play.” Sensory stimulation, self-stimulation behaviors, self-stim, and sensory play are all terms referring to the same type of actions. They are behaviors that a child engages in that are “odd,” repetitive, sometimes obsessive, but they are all inputting information into the “broken” sensory channel. This is so negative because it reinforces what is already wrong. Sensory play does more than just stop the positive development for the moment. It seems to create endorphins in the brain. Endorphins produce happy feelings. As the child engages in sensory play he wants to do it more and more; he craves it; and often it can become an addiction.
There are many, many types and variations of sensory play. A majority of sensory play is visual, often stimulating the peripheral vision. But sensory play can also be auditory or tactile, too. Following is a list of some common sensory play activities:
|Repeatedly opening and shutting doors or drawers, flipping pages of books, flipping books or toys, flicking toys with fingertips, wiggling fingers in front of face, wiggling fingers at side of face, hand flapping, holding toys to the side of face and shaking, twirling or shaking strings and ropes, nose up to the TV, watching TV sideways, spinning wheels of cars, spinning toys, spinning self, head shaking, rocking, continuous humming, echolalia (repeating videos, ads, or conversation but not communicating), hand wringing, excessive touching/sweeping with fingertips, wall walking, non-language repetitive auditory sounds, banging, pounding, tongue sucking, tongue play, excessive picking of their own skin, pacing/walking in patterns or circles, lining up toys.|
This is not meant to be a complete list, but rather a general description that may help parents when observing the behavior of their children. Most of these activities are not inappropriate in and of themselves. Some are even developmentally appropriate at certain stages. They become inappropriate and turn into sensory play when they are done repeatedly or obsessively. I have found that parents usually are very good judges of what might be potential sensory play. If I point out some behavior that they should try to eliminate, they often confess that they had a funny feeling about it, or thought it wasn’t positive.
As the child spends more time in sensory play they are undoing the positive developmental input that their parents or caregivers are trying to impart to them. Sensory play does more than just undo current input. It can actually cause significant regression in the developmental and cognitive ability of a child.
One of the most severe examples I ever assessed was a child who had a very involved family. They were spending a lot of time each day with him on his developmental progress. In addition, they were ensuring that he was supervised almost constantly so he could not engage in any type of sensory play. His short-term memory was growing; he was able to speak to me in short sentences; he was reading some words and he was very tuned in and following directions. I saw him about four months later. He was not following any directions; he was totally tuned out, engaging in sensory play constantly. His short-term memory had regressed by two to three years, and he wasn’t able to communicate at all with me.
What happened during the four months to cause this? His mother had given birth to a baby who was understandably taking up much of the family’s time and energy. The older child was then left to engage in sensory play as much as desired for four months. No blame should be put on the family. They were dealing with a real life situation. But this situation illustrates the extreme urgency and importance of stopping any and all sensory play so that a child’s development will continue progressing in a positive manner.
My suggestion is for parents to become expert observers of their children’s play. If you notice some of the above-mentioned repetitive behaviors, try to immediately distract and redirect the child’s attention to something more appropriate. Changing this behavior at the beginning is relatively easy compared to the task of trying to change it after it becomes addictive and obsessive. Along with eliminating the sensory play, it is of the utmost importance to have a neurodevelopmental evaluation of the child, which can then pinpoint any sensory dysfunctions and provide you with specific methods of stimulation and activities to normalize the sensory channels. This will offer you the very best possibility of eliminating the “autistic” symptoms, thereby providing your child with the best possible opportunities for continuing in their development.
Normalizing the sensory channels is part of the plan for anyone with sensory dysfunction. What follows are some quick, general ideas regarding appropriate sensory input for helping children develop optimally.
Hearing. I suggest the use of Samonas Sound Therapy, which has a proven track record in reducing sound sensitivities. It can also help normalize the hearing of any frequencies that the child is not hearing well. Used correctly, Samonas or Sonas Therapy should be done very gently with short durations for optimal results. In addition, parents can provide lots of good quality auditory input—reading stories to the child, the child listening to stories on tape, talking face to face to the child.
Touch. Parents can provide tactile input to their child for a few minutes several times a day. Provide deep pressure (squeezing), starting at the fingertips and working toward the shoulders and starting at the toes and squeezing up to the thighs. Deep pressure often calms children who display autistic-like symptoms. Give deep hugs (bear hugs) lots of times a day. You can also provide light touch with tickling (fingertips) or a feather on the limbs.
Smell. Provide the child with the opportunity to smell a variety of pleasant odors, i.e. orange oil, peppermint, coffee grounds. Provide the input for a few minutes, several times a day.
Taste. Allow opportunity to taste sweet, sour and salty tastes to stimulate the taste buds. Use only minute amounts for a child that is hypersensitive to taste. Provide the input for a few minutes, several times a day.
Vision. Provide lots of opportunity to develop good central/macular vision. Talk face to face as much as possible. Play catch; pop bubbles. Practice visual tracking by holding small toy away from face and moving it slowly side to side and up and down for child to follow. Discourage inappropriate use of peripheral vision (described above as sensory play). High interest television and videos, if monitored by parents, can be used to help develop central vision. The child must sit at least three feet away and be looking directly at the TV, and not out of the corner of the eyes. Looking at books and picture cards is also a positive visual stimulation exercise.
Stopping Sensory Play. By far the most important thing you can do for a child with autistic behaviors is to stop all the sensory play and spend as much one-on-one time with them as possible. If you detect sensory play early, then all you need to do is to distract and redirect the child’s activity and it will not likely develop into anything more serious. However, if you are the parent of an older child who has done some of these behaviors on a consistent basis your job will be more difficult. By structuring the child’s down time so that someone is with them, interacting and playing with them, you will reduce the sensory play because there will be less time for the child to engage in it. Sometimes it means removal of certain types of toys that seem to increase the sensory play.
Inputting the appropriate information to the sensory channels will help the child to gradually become interested in their environment in a more typical way. Stopping sensory play in a child for whom it has become a way of life is difficult. But usually this only lasts a certain amount of time, until the “addiction” quality wears off from lack of stimulation. As the sensory play decreases, the parents start to enjoy interacting with and discovering a new side of their child—a child who is more “tuned in,” less withdrawn, more interactive, and easier to teach.
Autism is just a word. It is a word for a group of symptoms. If your child acquires the “autistic” label or begins to display sensory dysfunctions, you will need to address each of the individual issues. The good news is sensory problems respond very well to intervention, thereby eliminating the original symptoms.
Cyndi Ringoen is a certified neuro-developmentalist who writes individual, home-based educational programs for parents to do with their children. Her expertise covers a range of disabilities and “labels” including Down syndrome and autism. As a mother and foster mother of many children with disabilities over the years, she has conducted neurodevelopmental programs in her own home with her children. She is a founding member of ICAN, an association of neuro-developmentalists, and through ICAN can refer parents to a neurodevelopmental practice near their home.

Major depression and other mood disorders account for a substantial proportion of medical disabilities in the United States. They can also worsen the outcome of other medical disorders, including diabetes, heart disease and cancer.
This has led Washington University physicians to practice and develop new and more effective treatments for this devastating disorder, focusing on the use of brain stimulation methods.
These include electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), a core treatment for severe and refractory mood disorders.
Researchers are developing new methods for use of vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), two novel approaches that have received FDA approval in recent years. Several physicians also have expertise in deep brain stimulation (DBS), a form of treatment that is in its infancy as a tool for treating highly refractory psychiatric disorders.
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS): Brain activity is triggered through weak electric currents, changing the excitability of corticospinal and corticocortial pathways.

Cyber Bullying Leaflet Launch
Sue Ball Consultant for BRAG and Parents from Nechells Parents Forum launched a leaflet of advice for parents and carers about how to prevent and tackle cyber-bullying. Cyber-bullies use the internet, mobile phones or any other form of digital technology to threaten, tease or abuse someone.
This useful resource, produced by Birmingham City Council’s Young People and Families Directorate, in association with Nechells Parents Forum and the POD, helps parents understand how to be cyber-safe, how to spot the signs if their child is a victim of or an instigator of cyber-bullying and what steps to take to stop it. The leaflet provides useful, practical advice with local and national contacts for further support and guidance.
The launch took place at Nechells Zone Olympics at the Alexander Stadium on June 15th Noran Flynn, Director of the POD, and organiser of the Olympics Event said “Nechells parents are keen to support their children at our Olympics, and promote the values of respect, excellence and friendship. They are also very concerned about the rise in cyber-bullying and have worked hard, with Birmingham’s Bullying Reduction Action Group (BRAG) to produce this leaflet to help parents across Birmingham deal with cyber-bullying and keep their children safe”
How to tackle cyber-bullying:
New technologies are amazing. Mobile phones, smart phones, the internet and social networking slites like facebook allow us to keep in touch with our friends and family more easily and to have access to a wide range of information on the world-wide web. They can help children with their learning, prepare them for life in a technological world and improve their communication skills.
But as well as the positives, we all know that there are some negatives and that cyber-bullying is on the increase. Because many children and parents are worried about cyber-bullying Nechells Parents Forum have worked with Birmingham City Council’s Bullying Reduction Action Group (BRAG) to produce an advice leaflet for parents called How to Tackle Cyber-bullying.
This leaflet helps parents understand what cyber-bullying is, how to spot the signs if their child is a victim of or an instigator of cyber-bullying and what steps to take to stop it. It also gives useful, practical advice with local and national contacts for further support and guidance.
Sue Ball said “The Olympic values of respect, excellence and friendship are important to us all. Thank you to the POD and all the members of Nechells Parents Forum, who helped to create this leaflet. It gives great advice to parents and carers across Birmingham about how they can best help their children to lead happy and bully-free lives, build respectful friendships and stay safe from cyber-bullying.”
For more information about Anti-bullying work in Birmingham
Events This Month
Latest Blog Posts
Tue, 14th May 13 at 4:00pm
Some pupils from year 5 in our Nechells EAZ schools: Cromwell, Nechells, St Clement's, St Joseph's and St Vincent's all went to Aston University today for a day of fun, experiments, experiences and inspiration for their future careers. The young people learnt all about team work, had a tour of the campus and then became mini scientists extracting DNA from kiwi fruits. The Nechells Schools and their pupils would all like to say a big thank you to Bal and her team of student volunteers at Aston University for the opportunity they give every year to some our most Gifted and Talents pupils, they really enjoy this fantastic experience, we hope that our pupils will all continue to study hard and in time become the graduates of the future.

There are many interactions between fisheries, including aquaculture and capture fisheries as well as their intermediate forms in freshwater and marine environments, and other uses of the aquatic systems such as agriculture, flood control, power generation, tourism, mining, transportation, land development (e.g. housing), and urban and industrial effluent disposal.
Synergistic interactions between fisheries and agriculture are primarily derived from the recycling of livestock or farming wastes and nutrients and optimal use of scarce land and water resources. In aquaculture, the active search for synergies has led to a number of development and management concepts such as Integrated Agriculture-Aquaculture (IAA), Integrated Irrigation-Aquaculture (IIA), as well as to livestock-fish or rice- fish production systems. These synergies have been enhanced by improving the use of water and reducing agricultural impacts on aquatic systems, e.g. through the Integrated Pest Management concept (IPM). These improvements have been beneficial in improving water and fish quality and productivity. Unexpected synergies have also been detected in marine fisheries where the nutrients of continental origin (e.g. phosphates, nitrates), often a source of eutrophication and red tides, are believed to have increased productivity (e.g. in the Mediterranean and the North Sea).The development of reservoirs and other small-water bodies for agricultural and other purposes offers additional opportunities for both aquaculture, culture-based fisheries through stocking, and capture fisheries.
Antagonistic interactions between agriculture and fisheries occur where these two sectors compete for the same kinds of resources, especially land and water, where rising productivity in one production system leads to reducing productivity in the other. For example, bad farming practices and deforestation impact on aquatic habitats and water resources - and therefore on fishery resources productivity and quality - through erosion, siltation, pollution and eutrophication (and red tides) resulting from excessive use of pesticides and fertilisers. Similarly, extensive saltwater or brackish water culture on coastal land areas affects the quality of soils (salinization, water logging) and the quality and level of the water table. Dams established for the purpose of irrigation, flood control or energy production impair fish migration and reproduction routes and change the qualitative nature of the habit which in turn influences the aquatic communities, e.g. changing species composition from riverine to lacustrine species. Efficiency in the use of water, primarily fresh water, and land resources is becoming of central importance to sustain increases in fisheries so as to provide for rural village communities and supply urban areas with the needed quantity, quality and variety of food. In many areas where human activities have rapidly expanded during the last decade, there is increasing pressure on limited land and water resources.
There are also interactions between capture fisheries and aquaculture. Development of aquaculture may adversely impact capture fisheries through habitat change associated with farming systems or impacts of introduced species. There is competition for space between the production systems; for habitat and resources between wild and farmed species; for the market between respective harvests and products; for wild seeds. Pollution from aquaculture may also be a problem. On the other hand, aquaculture may provide alternative employment in overexploited areas or additional resources for fishing through enhancement, and may be an important alternative source of fish for rural communities thus reducing the fishing pressure and helping in the rehabilitation of wild fish stocks.
The negative sides of these numerous interactions is progressively being recognised by Governments and industry and integrated management of natural resources is the strategy of choice to improve efficiency despite obvious implementation difficulties. The integrated management of watersheds, river basins and coastal areas (and of productive ecosystems in general) aims at managing sectoral components as parts of a functional whole. The overall objective of better integration between fisheries and other sectors in policy development and management is to maximize synergistic interactions and minimize antagonistic ones.
Awareness of inter-sectoral dependencies, through the environment and the global economy, is rapidly rising, stimulated inter alia by growing media coverage of ecological catastrophes, advances in data processing and information technology, development of ecological economics, increased mobilisation of social forces through NGOs communications. The abilities of local communities to participate in information gathering, analysis, decision-making and enforcement is better recognised together with the need to involve them directly in decisions regarding common property resource use. All of this has created favourable conditions to fully realize the benefits of better integration between fisheries and agriculture as well as of these sectors with the rest of the economy.
Numerous difficulties remain on the way towards better integration. Among these:
- the technical difficulty of integrated development planning;
- the political and economic difficulty of an equitable allocation of resources;
- the organisation of a balanced leadership of the interaction between sectors;
- the decentralisation of rights and responsibilities;
- the development of the human resources necessary for effective decentralisation;
- the cost of better understanding of the ecosystems functioning and resilience;
- the application of the precautionary approach when information is lacking;
- the development of integrated indicators of sustainability.

From a hotel room in Vancouver, Krista and Diamond discuss education, cognitive neuroscience, the importance of play, and more
What Adele Diamond is learning about the brain challenges basic assumptions in modern education. Her work is scientifically illustrating the educational power of things like play, sports, music, memorization and reflection. What nourishes the human spirit, the whole person, it turns out, also hones our minds.
An improvisational storytelling class of 5th and 6th graders draw on Adele Diamond's educational philosophy and demonstrate three important executive functions.
Pertinent Posts from the On Being Blog
Previous "On Being" guest, Adele Diamond, tells a story about meeting the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala, India at a Mind and Life Institute dialogue. We highlight some of the passages Adele Diamond presented to the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala — including texts from Rabbi Heschel, Bashevis Singer, Rachel Naomi Remen, and Henri Nouwen.
A bit of the backdrop for producing a slideshow about executive function.
Karen Armstrong prefers Hillel's version; Adele Diamond prefers Jesus' variation. Both take away a call to action. Hear them both.
A New York Times article features Adele Diamond's work the weekend before our interview.
About the Image
Voices on the Radio
Host/Producer: Krista Tippett
Managing Producer: Kate Moos
Associate Producer: Nancy Rosenbaum
Associate Producer: Shubha Bala
Technical Director/Producer: Chris Heagle
Senior Editor: Trent Gilliss
Associate Web Developer: Anne Breckbill
A renowned Tibetan Buddhist teacher shares his thoughts on the meaning of happiness, and how he understands spirituality as "contemplative science."
Stuart Brown, a physician and director of the National Institute for Play, says that pleasurable, purposeless activity prevents violence and promotes trust, empathy, and adaptability to life's complication. He promotes cutting-edge science on human play, and draws on a rich universe of study of intelligent social animals.

Indigenous Websites:Information Networks
Indigenous Websites: Opinion
Aborigines Milton- Ulladulla region
Produced in consultation with the Kupa Piti Kungka Tjuta, the Senior Aboriginal
Women from Coober Pedy, South Australia. Documents their knowledge of atomic
tests in the 1950's and 60's and their continued struggle against the proposed
waste dump in their traditional lands.
for Native Title and Reconciliation; their site has some great information,
and things you can join in on, - the Sea of Hands etc.
Events, newsletters, competitions and more, organised by ANTaR and Lets
Talk, all for the purpose of reconciliation.
Australia National reconciliation
body with partners in each State - includes archives of the old Council
sign in if you still want to say sorry...
Native Title Another group doing things,
including the Sorry Books, Sea of Hands, and Fax Direct.
National Public Discussion - Native Title and Reconciliation .
Media Coverage of Indigenous Issues:
ABC Indigenous Online
NATIONS) RECENT PRESS RELEASES Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination - in particular covering UN
comments on Australia's racism.
The Koori Mail
Excellent coverage of current Indigenous issues. It is a newspaper,
so students needing published articles: this is for YOU!
Australian Native Title Documents
World Indigenous Links:
back to AAR Homepage
text marked up by Sarah
last updated 12th Feb 2006
Begun February 1996.

Over the top of the atomic stitch is the main song line, and these patterns are recognized holistically by the shaman as the main identifying characteristic of the corresponding icaro. When I observed the shamans singing a cloth, they would trace their index finger along this main song line pattern, the melody rising or descending in general accordance with the rise and fall of the line. Again we see the visual metaphor of the shamanic staircase, represented as a descending song line.
Along the main song line itself and at various points of intersection along its path, can be seen the beautiful geometric designs called the floras. These flowers represent turning points where the song may take a new direction, such as a new verse or chorus. According to Herlinda, it is also the point where new life is born into the cosmos.
The colors of these flowers have significance as well, and they are woven in eight colors; black and white as the base colors of the cloth and primary stitch patterns; red corresponding with blood, childbirth, and the historical conflict between the Amazonian tribes; yellow for sunlight; green for the jungle; and blue for the rivers and lakes. Other colors include purple and orange their significance is not yet known.
*Source: "Woven Songs Of The Amazon" (Icaros and Weavings of The Shipibo Shamans) by Barrett H. Martin
Write Your Own Review
Shipibo-Conibo, Village of San Francisco, Amazon, Peru
The Shipibo are one of 14 indigenous tribes living in the Amazon basin in Peru and at present consist of around 35,000 people living in over 300 villages in the Pucallpa area situated mainly along the Rio Ucayali. They believe that the universe was sung into being by a giant anaconda, and as she sang, the patterns of her skin covered the universe. The intricate weavings created for centuries by the Shipibo are an ornate representation of the serpent's skin and, at the same time, are the actual, written music for the songs (icaros). Traditionally, the knowledge of the weaving patterns and songs has been passed down through the women, but due to the recent presence of western influences on the younger generations of women, these traditions are rapidly being lost.
The textile you see here is from the family of the late Herlinda Augustine and other women of the village of San Francisco. Herlinda Fernandez Augustine was one of a few Shipibo-Conibo indigenous woman healers – onaya or auahuasca shaman, whose life work is a unique repertoire of ancient songs (called icaros) which she uses to affect healing of her people and change in the world around her. Her songs speak of the power of plants and the importance of harmony between Man and Nature. She was featured in the award winning documentary film by Anna Stevens and her icaros are featured in a CD by the same name. Herlinda is survived by her husband Enrique, mother Manuela, daughter Magdalena and son Henry.
View other products from Herlinda

Some folks laugh at the notion of Uncle Sam reaching his hand literally into our backyards and regulating almost every drop of water. But, a bill in Congress would do just that. And if it passes, not just farmers and ranchers would be affected, but all landowners.
The Clean Water Restoration Act, or S. 787, gives the government the right to extend its reach to any body of water from farm ponds, to storm water retention basins, to roadside ditches, to desert washes, even to streets and gutters. The legislation leaves no water unregulated and could even impact standing rainwater in a dry area.
Private property owners beware.
While it has "restoration" in its title, it does anything but. The Clean Water Restoration Act is not a restoration of the Clean Water Act at all. It is a means for activists to remove any bounds from the scope of Clean Water Act jurisdiction to extend the government's regulatory reach. But, what the activists won't tell you is that the Clean Water Act is working, and has been for the last 36 years.
Put simply, this legislation would replace the term "navigable waters" from the Clean Water Act with "all interstate and intrastate waters." Farm Bureau supports the protection of U.S. navigable waters, as well as rivers and streams that flow to navigable waters -- all of which are already protected under current law. But, if the Clean Water Act is applied to all waters, farmers and ranchers would be significantly impacted due the number of farming activities that would require permits.
Under this new law, areas that contain water only during a rain would be subject to full federal regulation. Further, not only would many areas not previously regulated require federal permits, those permits would be subject to challenge in federal court, delaying or halting these activities resulting in a huge impact on rural economies.
Farmers and ranchers do a good job taking care of the land. As I often say, they are America's first environmentalists. They use modern conservation practices to protect our nation's water supplies. Many times these efforts are put in place voluntarily because farmers are driven by a strong stewardship ethic.
However, the restoration bill largely disregards the positive conservation role farmers and ranchers are playing. It replaces good works with strict rules. Rather than restore the Clean Water Act, it just brings a new truckload of restrictions for the people who do most to protect our water.
The Clean Water Restoration Act is regulatory overkill. It is written to give the federal government control of structures such as drainage ditches, which are only wet after rainfall. Taking these changes one step further, it would likely give federal regulators the ability to control everyday farming activities in adjacent fields.
Hard-working farm families can't afford, nor do they deserve, Uncle Sam's hand reaching into their backyards, their fields or even their puddles of rainwater.
Bob Stallman is president of the American Farm Bureau Federation.

Encyclopedia of Southern Jewish Communities
History of Congregation B'nai Israel, Little Rock
B’nai Israel congregation was first organized at the close of the Civil War, as increasing numbes of Jewish merchants and businessmen settled in Little Rock. In the summer of 1866, residents raised money to purchase a Torah scroll and ram’s horn for the upcoming High Holy Day services. Originally called the Little Rock Congregation, the group formally incorporated as B’nai Israel in 1867 and elected Morris Navra as its first president. Samuel Peck joined the congregation as a spiritual leader the following year. Many early congregants were adherents to Reform Judaism, and in accordance with the practices of some Reform congregations at the time, they referred to their leader as Reverend Samuel Peck. B’nai Israel was one of the founding members of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, now the Union for Reform Judaism.
The group met in a small room on East Markham Street during its early years. The single room was officially dedicated on July 13, 1867. Soon, the young congregation began to work toward to building a suitable synagogue. In 1869, they purchased land on Center Street. In 1871, they laid the cornerstone for their first building. The congregation hosted a benefit ball to raise funds for a temple at 304 Center Street, which was dedicated in September of 1872. That same year, the congregation acquired land for a cemetery. Congregants also established a Sabbath School called Talmud Yelodim. The school enrolled 69 students in the first six months and began holding confirmation classes the following year. B’nai Israel also offered other communal organizations, including a Temple choir and a Board of Relief established to care for Jewish burials and illnesses. Rabbi Jacob Block served B’nai Israel from 1872 to 1880.
Disagreements about religious observances and liturgy led to a rift in the 1870s as the Jewish community of Little Rock began to divine along denominational lines. After disagreements over religious observances and liturgy, a group of more traditional members left to establish a separate Orthodox service. In time, this group evolved into the congregation Agudat Achim.
During this same period, B’nai Israel was finding it hard to keep a rabbi in Little Rock. From 1881 to 1891, they had three different rabbis, and went over a year without a full-time rabbi. Rabbi Charles Rubenstein came in 1891, and stayed for six years, playing a leading role in convincing the congregation to build a new home.
The increasing arrivals of Jewish newcomers to Little Rock swelled the congregation’s ranks. By the close of the 1800s, B’nai Israel had nearly 200 members and had outgrown the Center Street Temple. In 1897 the congregation erected a large ornate structure on the corners of Broadway and Capitol Streets. The magnificent yellow-bricked edifice bore a Byzantine-inspired dome capping a Romanesque tower as well as tall Gothic windows and spires. The interior, designed to seat up to 700, incorporated elements of Grecian and Roman theater architecture.
Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise, founder of the UAHC, dedicated the new temple on May 9, 1897. Rabbis from Memphis, Camden, Pine Bluff, and Fort Smith were also part of the dedication ceremony. The congregation continued to grow under a series of capable and popular rabbis trained at Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati. Under the leadership of Rabbi Louis Wolsey, who served from 1899 to 1907, the congregation was so successful that in 1907 the temple was enlarged to accommodate the new members. That same year, B’nai Israel had 220 member families, and an annual income of over $7000. They had 156 students in their weekly religious school. A Ladies Temple Aid Society had been founded in 1903, and boasted 170 members by 1907. B’nai Israel grew over the next decade, and by 1917 it had 300 members.
The pulpit at B’nai Israel continued to experience high turnover during the first quarter of the 20th century. Rabbi Louis Witt had the longest tenure, serving from 1907 to 1919. In 1926, Rabbi Ira Sanders assumed the pulpit at B’nai Israel. He had formerly served as associate Rabbi at a large, cosmopolitan synagogue in New York. On Decoration Day of that year (now called Memorial Day), Sanders gave a speech titled: “Why the North and the South Should Meet Together.” Members of the Little Rock community happened to be in the audience, and they were so impressed that they enticed Sanders to accept the rabbinate at B’nai Israel. Sanders agreed and served as the beloved rabbi of B’nai Israel for the next 37 years. The days of the revolving door rabbis were over, another sign in the development of B’nai Israel.
During the Civil Rights era, Sanders was an eloquent and vociferous advocate of integration, at a time when many of his congregants avoided the subject for fear of reprisals. The late 1950s saw a spate of synagogue bombings across the south, and in October of 1958 Sanders received a threat that B’nai Israel would be bombed the following Friday eve. Rabbi Groner of Agudat Achim received a similar threat. Sanders decided to proceed with services, and that Shabbat undoubtedly became one of great joy for the Jewish community when the appointed hour passed without incident.
The congregation flourished under Sanders inspired leadership. The physical structure continued to expand, adding an education wing in 1949, a memorial library and an art gallery. The Temple was remodeled in 1953 and 1954, and the congregation continued to see strong attendance even as the Jewish population dwindled in smaller Arkansas towns. Rabbi Sanders retired in 1963 and assumed the role of Rabbi Emeritus, a role he served until his passing in 1985. His replacement as the congregation leader, Rabbi Elijah E. Palnick, maintained Sanders legacy of supporting civil rights and facilitating dialogue between Little Rock residents of diverse religious and racial backgrounds. Palnick was followed by Rabbi Eugene Levy, who has led B’nai Israel since 1987.
In 1975, congregants made the difficult decision to leave their building and build a new temple in West Little Rock. Many of the furnishings and even edifice stones from the old temple were lovingly preserved. The spacious, modern structure better served the community’s needs, and today the congregation continues to offer a complete range of educational, religious and social programming.

Nestled in a quiet residential neighborhood in Long Beach, Calif., are 4.7 acres of Spanish, Mexican and American history, where families helped transform southern California from its ranching beginnings to a modern, urban society.
Rancho Los Cerritos includes an 1844 adobe building, formal gardens and landscaped grounds. It is a national, state and local landmark, owned and operated by the city as a public museum and historic site since 1955.
As the country’s economic crisis works its way to the regional and local municipal forefront, the Rancho has found itself on the list for possible budget cuts. It begs the question, “Can one put a price on historic culture?”
While the answer seems obvious, the reality from a fiscal viewpoint is that this rare community treasure does not sustain itself financially.
From The Start
The original Rancho site was 27,000 acres of pastures for cattle and sheep that, starting in the late 19th century, gave way to development of the cities of Long Beach, Lakewood, Signal Hill, Bellflower and Paramount.
The site boasts a two-story adobe building with 22 ground-floor rooms and a serene central courtyard. It possesses outstanding potential for an interpretation of historical themes, beginning with the period of Native American occupation and continuing through the romanticized Spanish Colonial Revival Period of the 1920s and 1930s. The rich artisan materials of the area are present throughout the building. The 2- to 3-foot thick walls tell the story of the Native Americans who made adobe blocks using mud from the site. The beams were hand-hewn redwood from the Monterey area, and a majority of the rooms in the east wing contained redwood planked floors.
The construction of the ranch house began in 1844 by then-owner John Temple. The building was one of the largest and most impressive domestic adobes of its time for colonial Southern California, and its extensive gardens were unique for the time period. Temple built the ranch house as a country home and headquarters for his cattle-ranching operation. Its second owners, Flint, Bixby & Co., stocked the land with sheep. During the 19th century, horses, carriages and buggies were saddled and prepared in the courtyard. There were troughs and hitching posts, and blacksmithing and cooking facilities.
The ”milk room” opened onto a second courtyard north of the house, and contained rows of shining pans filled with cream both for churning and for the table–“clotted cream, thick enough to spread with a knife upon hot baking-powder biscuits, or a steaming baked potato.” Other original buildings on the site were a barn, corn crib, adobe brick oven, wool barn, a dip for the sheep after they had been sheared, a sheep barn and a granary. The large, 2-acre garden planted by Temple appeared to be a mixture of New England and subtropical influences.
In 1930, the well-known landscape architect, Ralph Cornell, created a garden plan for the new owners of Rancho Los Cerritos. He incorporated native plants, preserved many of the trees and plants surviving from previous owners, and reintroduced some plant species from the 19th-century garden. Surviving landscape elements included an osage orange, three pomegranate, two citrus, two olive and three Italian cypress trees. Several black locust trees also survived, along with a large Moreton Bay fig.
Cornell’s overall plan called for a sweeping driveway for the southern entrance and western boundary, bordered by curving layers of trees and shrubs. Outside the south wing, he planted a grid of both familiar and exotic fruit trees. A central lawn surrounded the Moreton Bay fig, bordered by trees and shrubs along a walkway. Through his use of rich materials and plantings, Cornell created a pleasant garden atmosphere to surround the remodeled living quarters. Even today, over 80 years after he created the gardens, many of the historic plantings are still alive and well.
A Red-Carpet Reputation
In March 1934, a Historic American Building Survey was made of Rancho Los Cerritos. Three years later, it was designated by the Department of the Interior as possessing “Exceptional historic or architectural interest,” being “most worthy of careful preservation for the benefit of future generations.”
In 1943, the city began working to acquire the Rancho as a historic site. The city opened a museum, and completed the purchase in 1956 for use as a historical monument, park and library. Rancho Los Cerritos was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1970.
Presently, the city administers the Rancho through the Department of Parks, Recreation and Marine. The city holds title to the site and provides the entire funding for its operations. The Friends of Rancho Los Cerritos is a volunteer support group, which assists the site with its programming, and supports the educational and preservation mission. The Rancho Los Cerritos Foundation, a non-profit arm of the organization, was established in 1994, and is tasked with fundraising and development for restoration, capital projects and educational enhancements.
As the city faces a looming $52-million budget deficit next year, policymakers will be faced with difficult decisions. What public programs and services can be eliminated with the least impact? With public health and safety as a priority, fire, police and health services should take precedence.
Libraries and parks are further down the list. How important are the cultural and historic resources to overall city operations and function? Many say these resources are “optional” and not core services.
In 2007 and 2008, Rancho Los Cerritos raised $37,700 in revenue from programs, donations and gift-shop sales. The operational cost has a $467,000 price tag, subsidized by the city. Can the city afford to keep the site open during a financial crisis?
These are extraordinary times. Numbers on a spreadsheet tell a very different story than the one that is tangible at the Rancho. Translation is lost between profit and loss statements and the general atmosphere of the site.
Gazing at the magnificence of the 130-year-old Moreton Bay fig that sits on the back lawn area of the Rancho, one wonders about the Native Americans, the families and visitors who have enjoyed its grandeur and elegance over the centuries. This place, which represents a lifestyle reminiscent of the earlier tranquil days of ranch living. This place, where the owners entertained guests and played bridge after Sunday dinner, lit the large, two-story Christmas tree with real candles, and was the site of the annual Easter-egg hunt.
These were real experiences, of real people. It is the story of many generations from all walks of life–entrepreneurial businessmen, close-knit families, people who helped shape the community and region. Theirs are stories about land and economic development, cultural diversity and the growth of the city. And if there remains no choice but to close down this historic landmark, what is in store for this tree and these buildings that have survived and been a part of so much?
Despite the engaging history of Rancho Los Cerritos, these modern times force us to deal with funding realities.
Rancho Los Cerritos will soon turn a new page in its history book. One can only hope that the vivid memories can be kept alive through continued education about this neighborhood jewel, and a bookmark will steadfastly remain in its place until we are again able to forge ahead in better times.
Sandra Gonzalez, FASLA, is the manager for the Planning & Development Bureau for the city of Long Beach’s Parks, Recreation and Marine Department. She can be reached via e-mail at email@example.com

OLMOS CREEK (UVALDE COUNTY)
OLMOS CREEK (Uvalde County). Olmos Creek rises (at 29°08' N, 100°04' W) in far southwestern Uvalde County two miles southeast of Dabney and runs south for twelve miles to its mouth (at 29°01' N, 100°04' W) on Muela Creek, fourteen miles northwest of La Pryor in northwestern Zavala County. The creek name is Spanish for "elm trees." The stream rises in flat to gently sloping terrain with local depressions or sinkholes; the land here is surfaced by very shallow to shallow and stony clays and loams that support scrub brush and grasses. The creek continues through low-rolling hills and prairie with deeper clayey and loamy soils that support chaparral, some mesquite, and grasses. Toward the mouth of Olmos Creek the terrain becomes low relief, surfaced by deep loams and clays that support pecans and other hardwoods and various grasses.
The following, adapted from the Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition, is the preferred citation for this article."OLMOS CREEK (UVALDE COUNTY)," Handbook of Texas Online (http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/rbo19), accessed June 19, 2013. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

Researchers at the EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) have created a way to store data in the form of DNA a material that lasts for tens of thousands of years. The new method, published today in the journal Nature, makes it possible to store at least 100 million hours of high-definition video in about a cup of DNA.
There is a lot of digital information in the world about three zettabytes' worth (that's 3000 billion billion bytes) and the constant influx of new digital content poses a real challenge for archivists. Hard disks are expensive and require a constant supply of electricity, while even the best 'no-power' archiving materials such as magnetic tape degrade within a decade. This is a growing problem in the life sciences, where massive volumes of data including DNA sequences make up the fabric of the scientific record.
"We already know that DNA is a robust way to store information because we can extract it from bones of woolly mammoths, which date back tens of thousands of years, and make sense of it," explains Nick Goldman of EMBL-EBI. "It's also incredibly small, dense and does not need any power for storage, so shipping and keeping it is easy."
Reading DNA is fairly straightforward, but writing it has until now been a major hurdle to making DNA storage a reality. There are two challenges: first, using current methods it is only possible to manufacture DNA in short strings. Secondly, both writing and reading DNA are prone to errors, particularly when the same DNA letter is repeated. Nick Goldman and co-author Ewan Birney, Associate Director of EMBL-EBI, set out to create a code that overcomes both problems.
"We knew we needed to make a code using only short strings of DNA, and to do it in such a way that creating a run of the same letter would be impossible. So we figured, let's break up the code into lots of overlapping fragments going in both directions, with indexing information showing where each fragment be
|Contact: Mary Todd-Bergman|
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

In the above applet, there is a pull-down menu at the top to select which function you would like to explore.
The selected function is plotted in the left window and its derivative on the right.
1. Exponential function with a fixed base
The initial example shows an exponential function with a base of k, a constant (initially 5 in the example). What does the derivative look like? It sort of looks like the original exponential function, but rising more steeply. Move the k slider around and notice what happens to the shape of the derivative.
Are there some values of k for which the derivative rises less steeply than the original curve? What value of k makes the two curves look similar? You can get even closer to this magic value for k by setting x = 1 and then watching the value of f '(1) (shown in a box in the right hand graph) as you move the k slider. Since f (1) = k, when f ' (1) = k, the two curves are identical. Once you get close using the k slider, you can also fine tune the value of k using the left and right arrow keys on your keyboard. You should find that for k ≈ 2.718 the function and its derivative are the same. The exact answer is k = e. In fact, you can type "e" into the k input box to make the curves the same. So,
What about when the base is a number other than e? It appears that the derivative is like the original exponential, but stretched or squished. In fact, that is what happens, and the shortcut is
2. Exponential function with a base between 0 and 1
What about for 0 < k < 1? Select the second example from the drop down menu. This is the same function, but now the k slider will let you select values from 0 to 5 (instead of just from 1 to 5, as in the previous example). What happens to the derivative curve? Why? What is the sign of the logarithm of a number between 0 and 1? The rule given above still works in this case.

By 2003, plenty of data suggested that pesticide drift was harming communities, but the pesticide industry and regulators refused to act.
For 20 years, the California Air Resources Board had been conducting experiments, looking for pesticides in the air around fields sprayed with pesticides. They found them. In 2003, PAN pulled together and analyzed this information in a breakthrough report, Secondhand Pesticides. We found that many pesticides remained in the air near fields at high levels for hours, or even days after application. Anyone in the vicinity of such applications faced exposure.
Sept. 9, 2008 Drift Catcher selected as 2008 Tech Awards Laureate by the Tech Museum of Innovation
PAN's air monitoring device, invented by chemist and senior scientist Dr. Susan Kegley, was designated a 2008 Tech Awards Laureate, one of 25 global innovations recognized each year for applying technology to benefit humanity and spark global change.
The Tech Awards, a signature program of The Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose, California, selected the Drift Catcher from among hundreds of nominations representing 68 countries, for "empowering communities for health and sustainability" to measure concentrations of hazardous pesticides as evidence to prevent exposure to pesticide drift.
In over 20 years of our own direct field work with agricultural communities, PAN's international network had heard countless stories about how drift-affected communities had come to expect illness, nausea, rashes, and worse in the hours and days after fields had been sprayed. So, with communities across the country asking us to do something about drift, we invented the an air monitoring system we call the "Drift Catcher." It's affordable, robust and based on the same technology used by the California Air Resources Board in its studies.
The big idea? Put the tools necessary to prove pesticide drift into the hands of people who live through it. Make sure those tools are reliable and useable - the rest is just science.
Since its 2003 launch, Drift Catchers have been used in 27 projects in nine states by scores of trained volunteers and community leaders. Below are two case studies.
South Woods Elementary School in St. Johns County, Florida, is bordered on three sides by a large seed farm that sprays pesticides throughout the school year. Motivated by concerns about the health of the children at the school, residents of the county have been using the Drift Catcher to monitor the air near the school since 2006.
Exposure to the chemicals we found by South Woods Elementary are associated with a wide range of adverse health effects: endosulfan interferes with hormones and is linked with autism, birth defects and delayed puberty; diazinon is neurotoxic; and trifluralin and chlorothalonil are suspected to cause cancer. All are particularly dangerous for children.
Maybe now the school board will recognize the pesticide problem & take more serious actions to prevent future drift.– Alex Lowe, student in Hastings
In addition to focusing local, regional, and national media attention on the issue of pesticide drift, the reports on the 2006 and 2007 sampling have led the formulation of state policy recommendations on school siting and have been used by PANNA it’s campaign for the phaseout of endosulfan.
Lindsay, CA, is a predominately Latino community in California’s fertile San Joaquin Valley. The town grew up around orange trees, and most of its homes and schools are situated right next to groves where neurotoxic organophosphates are routinely sprayed. Acute exposure to these insecticides can cause nausea and vomiting, tremors and seizures, and even death; studies link chronic exposure with asthma and learning disabilities.
A local group, El Quinto Sol de America, used Drift Catchers from 2004 to 2006 to document the movement of chlorpyrifos (a neurotoxic, organophosphate insecticide) out the groves and into their yards. Here's a map of the Lindsay project, and a 4-pg summary of the results.
Results from biomonitoring and drift catching in Lindsay have since become the bedrock of efforts to win no spray buffer zones around schools and residential areas. Local activists in Tulare, Kern, and other agricultural counties across California have used these result to successfully push their County Agriculture Commissioners for buffer zones around schools and other sensitive sites.

Man vs. Meltdown
Will Japan's nuclear crisis end in catastrophe?
When the unexpected happens, even at a nuclear power plant, don't freak out. All you have to do is cool the cores. Just add water. If you can't deliver it through a pump, you can spray it from a truck or dump it from a helicopter. If pressure builds up, you can vent it. Yes, that might entail releasing some radiation. But releasing radiation isn't the end of the world. It's better to go nuclear in small doses than in a catastrophic blast.
While the workers at Fukushima wage this fight, the rest of us should rethink power plant construction with the same innovative urgency. American plants built with a container design similar to Fukushima's have already been upgraded to relieve pressure in the event of overheating. The Japan crisis suggests other fixes as well. Put diesel generators on higher ground. Require longer-lasting batteries to power the cooling system when the electrical grid goes out. And for crying out loud, build some robots.
Nothing is more exasperating than reading reports about all the things that can't be done at Fukushima—fixing valves, pumping water, ascertaining damage, dousing spent-fuel pools—because of heat, radiation, or the risk of explosion. Last year, BP plugged an oil leak a mile under the Gulf of Mexico with the aid of remotely operated vehicles. Why doesn't Japan, the world's most robotically advanced country, have unmanned vehicles on hand to do simple but dangerous jobs at a radiation-contaminated nuclear power plant? Ten minutes ago, I got a newsletter from the unmanned-vehicles industry about all the cool things robots are doing to help Japan. It has not a word about the nuclear reactors. That's disgraceful.
To head off the next nuclear accident, we need to rethink the parameters of plant design. Why do we build backup cooling pumps for reactors but not for spent-fuel pools? And we need layers of protection that are truly independent. If some safety mechanisms require electricity, others should be functional without it. Store cooling water above the reactor so you can deliver it with plain old gravity if you lose power. And diversify the layers. At Fukushima, all the gizmos failed, but the containers have largely held firm. Build in different kinds of protection—barriers, gizmos, training, manual tools—so that if one kind fails, another can intercede.
If everything goes wrong, and your reactor melts down, don't give up. You still have evacuation and iodine. And even if Fukushima becomes another Chernobyl, nuclear energy still has a much better safety record than fossil fuels, just as stocks have a better track record than bonds over the long term, despite the occasional crash. But that safety record depends on us. We have to learn from Fukushima, just as we learned from Chernobyl. We have to diversify our means of managing disasters and averting meltdowns. We have to give ourselves a fighting chance when things go wrong, as they sometimes will. Fukushima's workers haven't surrendered. We shouldn't either.
Human Nature's latest short takes on the news, via Twitter:
Will Saletan covers science, technology, and politics for Slate and says a lot of things that get him in trouble.
Photograph by Jung Yeon-Je/AFP/Getty Images.

Harvard economist Andrei Shleifer has a new paper on The Age Of Milton Friedman that begins with:
The last quarter century has witnessed remarkable progress of mankind. The world’s per capita inflation-adjusted income rose from $5400 in 1980 to $8500 in 2005.Schooling and life expectancy grew rapidly, while infant mortality and poverty fell just asfast. Compared to 1980, many more countries in the world are democratic today.
The last quarter century also saw wide acceptance of free market policies in both rich and poor countries: from private ownership, to free trade, to responsible budgets, to lower taxes. Three important events mark the beginning of this period. In 1979, Deng Xiao Ping started market reforms in China, which over the quarter century lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. In the same year, Margaret Thatcher was elected Prime Minister in Britain, and initiated her radical reforms and a long period of growth. A year later, Ronald Reagan was elected President of the United States, and also embraced free market policies. All three of these leaders professed inspiration from the work of Milton Friedman. It is natural, then, to refer to the last quarter century as the Age of Milton Friedman.

Cruisin' Comet (December 21, 2004)
Hi-res TIF (3.0M)
Casually arcing above the Sun (from right to left in these SOHO LASCO views) this
week, comet SOHO-884 was first
seen by SOHO on Dec. 16, 2004. For the first couple of days in the video clip the
comet's tail is clearly
discernible, but then due to our viewing angle it seems to fade.|
The comet was first spotted in four images taken by SOHO's ultraviolet, interstellar medium-viewing SWAN instrument by Michael Mattiazzo, but he was not certain about it. On Dec. 16th, a bright comet entered C3 and was first reported by John Sachs. Shortly after, Sebastian Hoenig pointed out that this comet had the very real possibility of being Michael's SWAN comet, a connection that was soon confirmed. So many hands were involved in making the discovery. The comet is not a member of any known group of comets, but instead one that does not appear on a regular schedule as some do. SOHO has now discovered over 160 comets this year alone and as can be seen in the name "SOHO-884", this is the 884th comet discovered by SOHO since its launch in December, 1995.
Comets are frozen balls of ice and dust that are believed to have been created when the universe was very young. In fact, scheduled for July 2005, NASA's Deep Impact's spacecraft will arrive at Comet Tempel 1 and become the first mission to impact the surface of a comet. You can learn about this mission at http://deepimpact.jpl.nasa.gov/.
SOHO began its Weekly Pick some time after sending a weekly image or video clip to the American Museum of Natural History (Rose Center) in New York City. There, the SOHO Weekly Pick is displayed with some annotations on a large plasma display.
If your institution would also like to receive the same Weekly Pick from us for display (usually in Photoshop or QuickTime format), please send your inquiry to email@example.com.

10 Tips for Parents of Prospective College Students
1. Choosing a Career/Choosing a Major
Ultimately, your son or daughter should make the choice. Of course, you may want to mention factors to consider, such as job market demand, salary ranges, long-range opportunities, skills required, etc. Just because an occupation is "hot" now does not mean it will be equally in demand in 10 years or that your child has the aptitude or motivation for it.
2. Choosing to Double Major/Choosing a Major and Minor
Most employers do not place a premium on a double major. It usually requires an extra one or two semesters to obtain a second major and does not particularly enhance a student's marketability. Exceptions would be a second major or a major and minor chosen for a specific career, such as English and chemistry for technical writing, or a health policy major and business minor for hospital administration.
3. Grade Point Average (GPA)
Some students who get off to a rocky start eventually pull up their grades; however, this can be very difficult to do. Many employers stress the student's overall background: work experience, number of hours worked during the school year to finance college, leadership activities, etc. Encourage your son or daughter to make academics a high priority beginning with his or her freshman year. It is important to remember that it may take him or her a while to adjust to the rigorous academic demands of college.
4. Obtaining Marketable Skills
Most employers today put more emphasis on graduates' skills than on their academic majors. Encourage your son or daughter to develop strengths in at least two or three of the following areas:
- Computer skills (e.g., programming, word processing, spreadsheets, data base management, e-mail, Internet);
- Quantitative skills (e.g., accounting, statistics, economics);
- Communication skills (e.g., written and oral);
- Marketing/selling skills (e.g., sales, publicity, fundraising);
- Scientific skills (e.g., lab skills, scientific research);
- Foreign language skills (e.g., especially Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, or Russian);
- Leadership skills (e.g., supervisory, extracurricular leadership roles, teamwork/team leader).
5. Leadership Activities
Many employers rate leadership activities even more highly than GPA. Students who were very active in high school activities may be less involved in college extracurricular activities. However, employers regard high school as "ancient history" for a college senior. It is more valuable for a student to be involved in a few meaningful leadership roles on campus than to be in a "laundry list" of many campus clubs.
You may want your son or daughter to work in his or her hometown every summer. However, the experience gained as a lifeguard or ice cream shop counter clerk does not compare to that which comes from an internship (paid or unpaid) in the career field that he or she aspires to enter. Future employers will seek graduates with relevant, real-world work experience. Some students have little to write about on a resume if their summers were spent in school, traveling, or working at low-level jobs. We strongly suggest that students seek career-related experience for their sophomore and junior summers even if they must live away from home or accept an unpaid internship. Students needing financial support can combine an unpaid internship with a paid job such as waiter/waitress, etc.
7. Graduating Early, Graduating Late
Some students graduate early through advanced placement credits, heavy course loads, and summer school courses. The advantages are lower educational expenses and the ability to start employment or graduate school earlier. The disadvantages may include the sacrifice of academic honors, work experience, and extracurricular and volunteer activities that may contribute to a student's maturity level and qualifications. Other students graduate late due to light course loads, academic difficulties, changing majors, poor academic advising, lack of direction, or reluctance to leave the cocoon of the college environment. Advantages to late graduation include the ability to improve grades with light class loads, extra time to change majors, the ability to take additional electives to improve marketability, and extra time to gain more career-related or leadership experience. Disadvantages to late graduation are increased college costs and possible disapproval of employers and graduate schools.
8. Planning for Graduate/Professional School
About 88 percent of the nation's college freshmen indicated in a recent survey that they plan to go to graduate or professional school, yet only about 24 percent do so within a year of completing their bachelor's degree. Students aspiring to graduate or professional school should: Be clear about the reasons they want to go on for further education; research the qualifications required for admission and be realistic about their chances of acceptance; and always have a "Plan B" or back-up plan in case they are not accepted. Students should discuss their interest in graduate or professional school well before their senior year with their academic adviser; the college's graduate or professional school adviser (e.g., the pre-law or pre-med adviser); and a college career adviser to obtain advice and guidance from three different perspectives.
9. Taking Time Off
Many students want to take time off after college graduation from college before attending graduate school or taking a career-related job. Future employers will want to know how the student has spent the intervening time. Do activities during this period demonstrate relevance to future career goals and/or a good work ethic? While short-term travel may be personally broadening, it does not increase a student's marketability to employers unless it is seen as career related. Therefore, the time off may result in a longer job search. For example, management trainee programs, which often begin shortly after graduation and hire large numbers of new graduates, may be filled by the time your child is ready to begin a job search.
10. Using the College Career Services Office
Students should begin using their campus career office in their freshman year. Virtually all career offices provide individual career counseling/advising, career planning workshops, internship assistance, and career fairs and programs. Your son or daughter should seek help early with choosing a career and preparing for it. Competition for good jobs, particularly in certain fields, is stiff. The career office can advise students about how to become a strong candidate for their field of interest.
Source: Article by Marcia B. Harris and Sharon L. Jones

The Future of Salmon and Trout Stocking in Lake Michigan
Five species of salmon and trout support a world-class recreational fishery in Lake Michigan. Stocking has played an important role in maintaining the balance between predators and forage fish, such as the non-native alewife, since the late 1960s. If too many salmon and trout are in the lake, forage fish decline and salmon starve or fall prey to disease. If too few salmon and trout are in the lake, the non-native alewife could foul beaches and affect native species populations.
Ongoing research is being used to investigate the possibility that changes to stocking policy could improve fisheries and limit the risk of predator-prey imbalance. Fisheries managers in Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois and Indiana will set a stocking policy for Lake Michigan salmon and trout by fall of 2012.
LAKE MICHIGAN SALMON STOCKING SURVEY RESULTS
Survey results are now available and are being considered along with biological data and other factors as managers move toward a decision on future stocking policy.
See: Survey Results
Lake Michigan Salmon Stocking Workshop
Lake Michigan College, Benton Harbor, Michigan
Saturday, April 14, 2012
This half-day workshop was free and open to the public. Participants learned more about specific options for stocking policy and had the opportunity to speak with fisheries managers about the future of Lake Michigan fisheries. Check out the recorded webinar for more details.
- Lake Michigan Salmon Stocking Strategies Briefing (PDF)
Includes overview of collaborative decision-making process, status of fishery and forage base, and stocking options under consideration.

Elementary School • Holidays
Encyclopedia of American Holidays and National Days: Volume 1 http://0-ebooks.abc-clio.com.ilsweb.lvccld.org/main.aspx?l=E&t=title
Encyclopedia of American Holidays and National Days: Volume 2 http://0-ebooks.abc-clio.com.ilsweb.lvccld.org/reader.aspx?isbn=9780313014918
Holidays - Kids InfoBits http://0-galenet.galegroup.com.ilsweb.lvccld.org/servlet/KidsInfoBits?subTopic=Social%2BStudies&locID=lvccld_main&failover=0&topic=History%252C%2BGovernment%2B%2526%2BSocial%2BStudies&c=1&searchTerm=Holidays&ste=5&tbst=tsrch&tab=1&bConts=55
More of the Best Holiday Crafts http://ebooks.lvccld.org/ContentDetails-Subject7.htm?ID=EADCA235-983B-45A5-916E-06827FD39655
A collection of 65 holiday-based craft projects. In addition to Valentine’s Day, Earth Day, Easter, Halloween, Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, Kwanza, and Christmas, a number of new holidays have been added, including Flag Day, Memorial Day, 4th of July, President’s Day, and St. Patrick’s Day. There are creative decorations, favors, cards, and gifts designed to enhance holiday celebrations throughout the year.
Hooray for Halloween! http://whyfiles.org/097halloween/index.html
This site examines "the science of Halloween: bats, brains and cemeteries" (THE WHY FILES). Learn about the biology of bats, the study of the human brain, and the archaeology of burials through this humorous, Halloween-themed article.
New Crafts for Thanksgiving http://ebooks.lvccld.org/ContentDetails-Subject7.htm?ID=F513FEF0-6D4C-4DE2-BF26-4E3A2E82016F
It features crafts such as gourd turkeys, pilgrim place cards, and a stick trivet.
Holidays, Festivals, and Celebrations of the World Dictionary http://0-go.galegroup.com.ilsweb.lvccld.org/ps/i.do?id=GALE|9780780809826&v=2.1&u=lvccld_main&it=etoc&p=GVRL&sw=w
Describes 2,500 holidays, festivals, commemorations, holy days, feasts and fasts, and other observances from all parts of the world. Entries cover popular, ethnic, religious, and historic events of international, national, regional, and local significance.
World Holidays: A Rosen Guide for Children http://0-go.galegroup.com.ilsweb.lvccld.org/ps/i.do?id=GALE|5QVJ&v=2.1&u=lvccld_main&it=aboutBook&p=GVRL&sw=w
A guide to celebrations and holidays around the world, including religious, civic, and cultural practices.

HAND-HELD computers have many uses -- but who would have thought they could take art home from a museum?
That is just what is happening at the current Biennial exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York. At a special kiosk, visitors can download ''Tap,'' a digital artwork by James Buckhouse, into electronic organizers equipped with the Palm operating system, and with that download, receive their own digital dancer (male or female, the viewer picks). The dancer practices, learns from other dancers and gives recitals.
Technology in museums, especially the artistic kind, has traditionally meant audio guides. This was not a deliberate oversight; many museums began testing an array of Jetsons-style gadgetry a few years ago, but the dot-com bust and the economic downturn have delayed progress. Museums are now slowly recapturing their momentum. Many are experimenting with the latest technology, and soon their galleries may be wired (or go wireless) for the Internet, allowing visitors to use their hand-held computers to download information about an entire collection or a single object, to explore a museum's hidden archives or bookmark Web pages.
The Exploratorium, a science and art museum in San Francisco, is developing the Electronic Guidebook Project, which will not only allow visitors to download additional material on their hand-held computers, but also create a password-protected personal Web page, meaning people can revisit their own selection of the museum's collections from any computer.
The American Museum of the Moving Image in New York is testing eDocent, a wireless network in its galleries that will allow visitors to download information into their hand-held computers and bookmark Web pages. The network may also give audiences viewings of what they cannot see in the gallery. Like many museums, the Museum of the Moving Image can display only a small percentage of its collection, 1,200 of 90,000 objects. When eDocent becomes a reality, which is not expected until 2003, audiences could see much of this hidden collection.
''Because our collection is so extensive, we have a huge amount of material to link,'' said Rochelle Slovin, the museum's director. ''The ultimate goal of eDocent is for the information to be so rich and extensive that you could go deeper and deeper into the layers.''
The Walker Art Center in Minneapolis is preparing for a $90 million renovation and expansion project, which will break ground in 2003. Central to the renovation is a wireless network that will provide visitors with more information about objects in the museum, said Andrew Blauvelt, the museum's design director.
He thinks that hand-held computers will not be the only way to download material. Indeed, Mr. Blauvelt is interested in what he calls ''social computing,'' which is a shared or collaborative computer experience. This could involve a group sitting at a ''smart'' table, where touch screens embedded in the tabletop would allow many users to tap into Walker's collections and resources, and simultaneously interact and discuss the information with others. To explore other social computing possibilities, Mr. Blauvelt has invited more than 30 artists, designers and architects to submit ideas.
He is also interested in futuristic options, like wearable computer guides. ''Technically, the iPAQ is wearable,'' he said, referring to Compaq's hand-held device. ''This is more radical, where circuitry is stitched into a fabric or a scarf.''
Many museums hope that the new technology lures younger audiences. ''We have an entire generation coming up speaking digital as a first language,'' said Leonard Steinbach, a program creator at the Cleveland Museum of Art.

When you lose weight, you not only feel better, but your fat cells are much healthier.
So says endocrinologist Andrew Greenberg, director of the Obesity Metabolism Laboratory at Tufts University in Boston.
Your body needs fat cells to be healthy, but in obese individuals when fat cells get very big, those cells are at risk of dying, he says.
"A fat cell is 95% fat. If it dies, it leaves behind insoluble fat, and the body views it as a foreign body, much like it would splinter," Greenberg says.
That excess fat is scooped up by macrophages, scavenger cells that are part of the immune system. During this process, some of the fat and other inflammatory proteins get released into the blood stream, which can significantly increase a person’s risk of developing diabetes, he says.
However, there is evidence that if you lose weight, you have fewer dying fat cells and significantly fewer fat-engorged macrophages, Greenberg says.
Think fat just hangs around and does nothing? It doesn’t
By Nanci Hellmich, USA TODAY
PHOENIX â€” Most people think of fat as an inert blob, but fat cells release powerful chemicals.
In obese people, the fat tissue often produces too many bad hormones and too few good ones, says Susan Fried, director of the Clinical Nutrition Research Unit of Maryland at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore.
BETTER LIFE: The skinny on losing weight
Fried and other scientists discussed the latest research on fat cells here at the annual meeting of the Obesity Society. Fried talks about the relationship between obesity and fat cells.
Q: Do people have different numbers of fat cells?
A: A person at a healthy weight might have 10 billion to 20 billion, and an obese person can have up to 100 billion. Babies are born with about 10 billion. You naturally increase the number of fat cells, like other kinds of cells, as you grow.
Q: Is everybody born with the same number of fat cells?
A: No. There is a genetic component to how many you have, but I would say less than 5% of obese people have a genetic tendency to have a greatly excess number. It appears in animal experiments that animals that are overnourished in the womb and shortly thereafter tend to have more fat cells.
The number can increase at any time if you overeat long enough and hard enough. When your fat cells get to a maximum size, they send a signal to (fat-precursor) cells to become full-fledged fat cells. It may be that having too many hungry fat cells somehow makes us eat more.
But overweight people (those who are not obese but are one to 30 pounds over a healthy weight) don’t generally have an excess number. You can gain 30 pounds easily by increasing the size of current fat cells and not adding new ones.
Q: What do white fat cells do?
A: White fat cells store energy and produce hormones that are secreted into the blood. In theory, if we overeat, our fat cells will produce a little more of the hormone leptin, which will go to our brain and tell us we have plenty of energy down here; not to eat any more. If it worked perfectly, no one would get fat, but it doesn’t work perfectly, so many of us do get fat.
When fat cells are small, they produce high amounts of some hormones such as adiponectin. It is a good guy because it keeps the liver and muscles very sensitive to insulin and fights diabetes, heart disease and other diseases. But in obese people, fat cells tend to shut down the production of adiponectin, and that has bad effects on health, and it’s one reason people develop diabetes and heart disease.
Q: Does losing weight shrink the size of your fat cells?
A: If you are eating less energy than you require, your cells release fat for fuel and then shrink. If you are obese and have 100 billion fat cells and you lose a lot of weight, your fat cells may go down to a normal size, but you still have 100 billion. So you may still be overly fat, but you will be healthier since small fat cells produce more of the good fat hormones like adiponectin.
Q: Can you explain the new discoveries about brown fat?
A: While a white fat cell stores energy, a brown fat cell’s job is basically to generate heat. We always thought brown fat was only in human babies and helped keep them warm. Now there is more evidence that there are more brown fat cells in adults than we originally thought. Brown and white are not really related because they don’t come from the same precursor cell or stem cell.
Brown fat cell comes from the same kind of precursor cell as a muscle cell. Even though there are very few brown fat cells in adult humans, it looks like there is a lot of variability between people. There is increasing evidence that some humans, particularly lean ones, tend to have brown fat cells mixed in with their white fat cells in some regions of their body. So if we can figure out how to persuade the body to make more brown fat cells, we may be able to fight the tendency to gain excess weight.

Next: My Tiles are Cracking in the Corners
My tiles are wearing out
Tiles are well known for their durability and wear resistance. But, we need to always remember that tiles are not indestructible. If mistreated, or subjected to harsh conditions, or wrongly selected for purpose, the glaze on a ceramic tile will scratch or it can wear.
There needs to be an understanding of the difference between 'wearing' and 'scratching.' Wearing is where the glazed surface is thinning and eventually actually work through. Scratching is damage to the surface from a harder substance that scratches the glaze. Heavy scratching can actually dull the surface of a glazed tile. It is damage to the surface, but it is not actually wearing through. Much like granite in a heavy traffic area will dull off from scratching, but is not worn.
The best way to avoid tiles becoming worn is to get good advice when selecting them. This way, tiles that are suited to the area can be chosen and that includes for reasons such as colour, ease of cleaning, durability, and resistance to wear.
The other way is to keep the floor clean and free from sand and abrasive dirt. This is especially important at doorways to the outside of a home or building. Abrasive grit is brought in under shoes and if there is a doormat, this grit is removed and left on the doormat. Even gravel (which can be equally as hard as granite) can be trapped under a shoe and then trodden onto the tiled surface.
What can cause the problem?
• Absense of doormats at doorways to the outside of a home. These remove grit and sand from shoes which can be very abrasive on tiled surfaces. Think of sandpaper, which can actually just be sand trapped on the paper, yet is highly abrasive.
• Incorrectly specified tiles that are not suited to the traffic conditions of an area. Always heed the advice of the Beaumont Tiles consultant and explain clearly the conditions to which the tiles will be subject.
• Keep your tiles clean. A clean tile won't have a film of accumulated grinding dirt on the surface.
• Avoid the use of unnecessary chemicals, especially acid based ones and the use of hard cleaning implements such as steel wool. These too will deteriorate the surface of a tile.
So what can I do now?
Once the glaze on tiles has worn, it can't be rejuvenated in any way.
Likewise, damage by harsh scratching cannot be reversed.
Scratched tiles will continue to perform as a tile should. But, once a tile surface has worn through, and the protective glazed surface is gone, the tile will need to be replaced.

Chronic diseases such as asthma, arthritis, cancer, heart disease and diabetes are ongoing, generally incurable illnesses. Collectively, chronic diseases are the number one cause of death and disability in the U.S. With a better understanding of the molecular basis of health and disease, biotech scientists are developing improved methods for diagnosing, treating and preventing chronic disease.
Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the U.S., and the number of new cases continues to rise by epidemic proportions. Diabetes patients use insulin, a biotech therapy, to control their critically important glucose levels. Insulin use can also reduce the risk of diabetes complications like eye, kidney and nerve disease by 40 percent.
Scientists have been studying the cone snail since the 1970s to better understand our nervous system. Through this research, scientists were able to isolate the peptides in the venom of the cone snail, A synthetic version of one of those peptides, manufactured by Elan under the brand name PRIALT®, was approved by the FDA in 2004 as a treatment for adults with severe chronic pain.

Who's most likely to get Parkinson's disease?
In the U.S., the disease is more likely to affect men than women, more likely to affect white or Hispanic individuals than black or Asian people and much more likely to affect those over sixty than those younger, according to a study published in the American Journal of Epidemiology in 2003.
Other research suggests that globally, you're more likely to get Parkinson's if you live in an industrialized country like the U.S. than if you live in a less developed nation. However, there's no clear-cut data on the demographics.
"It's hard to believe that we don't have that data now," says Dr. J. William Langston, founder and director of the Parkinson's Institute, "but ... it's not available anywhere in the world." In part, this is because Parkinson's disease affects a relatively small population -- at most one to two percent in the United States -- and because of difficulties in consistently diagnosing the disorder.
Is the risk of getting this disease growing?
There's even less data on how the rate of Parkinson's cases have changed since it was first identified in 1817. The number of cases is rising as the global population ages, but it's not clear whether Parkinson's is affecting a larger percentage of the population than it has in the past. Some research has found that the risk of getting Parkinson's in the U.S. rose slightly between 1935 and 1985, but when it comes to tracing the history of the disease, major data holes remain.
"Certainly, there have been individuals described hundreds and hundreds of years ago that have what sounds very much like Parkinson's disease," says Dr. Michael Zigmond, a Parkinson's researcher at the University of Pittsburgh. However, he adds, "We can't easily evaluate people who are not here now, even through the eyes of a neurologist 50 or 100 years ago." What we call Parkinson's today, doctors might have diagnosed differently in the past. What doctors used to call Parkinson's we may now have identified as something else.
However, there are some new projects underway on the demographics of the disease. For example, the California Parkinson's Disease Registry will collect detailed information on every Parkinson's diagnosis in that state. Says Dr. Langston, "This will tell us for the first time, is the disease increasing, changing with time? Are there pockets or clusters of the disease? Are there differences in rural versus urban areas, socioeconomic differences, etc.?"
What causes Parkinson's?
Even though Parkinson's was formally identified almost 200 years ago, scientists are still trying to find out what causes it. "We still don't have a smoking gun, that's for sure," says Dr. Langston. "But that's what we're looking for."
The greatest obstacle to pinpointing what causes it is that there seems to be no single cause. In some cases, the disease appears to be a genetic defect, while in others, exposure to toxic substances or certain viruses seems to be a factor. Some scientists believe a mix of environmental exposures and underlying genetic sensitivities may ultimately explain what triggers the disease.
What about environmental factors?
Sorting out the possible environmental influences on Parkinson's disease is a big challenge.
In the early 1980s, after discovering the toxin MPTP -- very similar to a compound found in a common pesticide -- could induce Parkinson's virtually overnight, scientists expected to track down the chemicals responsible for causing the disease in a matter of a few years. Nearly three decades later, "Very few individual specific compounds have been identified," says Dr. Langston. "Most of these are modest risk factors, two to threefold increase in risk."
Scientists have tracked disparate leads in search of an environmental explanation. They've researched Parkinson's-like symptoms in an individual who ingested petroleum products, in Taiwanese women who'd contracted a herpes virus and in people from Guam who eat a type of seed known to contain a neurotoxin. While finding a common thread among these scenarios has proved nearly impossible, much of the research has led back to pesticide exposure as the leading suspect in causing a large number of Parkinson's cases.
How clear is the link between pesticide exposure and Parkinson's?
According to Dr. William Langston, "I don't think we're yet at the point of being able to say unequivocally that if you live in an area where there's more pesticides than other areas, you're at a higher risk." But new research may illuminate the link.
One study is mapping Parkinson's cases in California against areas known to have high pesticide use. Another is collecting data from over 50,000 licensed pesticide applicators in two states to track whether these individuals face an increased risk of getting Parkinson's. "This, I think, may really answer the question of not only whether pesticides are an increased risk, but also, specifically, which pesticides," Dr. Langston hopes. "Because it's their profession, they know what they use, as opposed to, I couldn't tell you what I sprayed with in the garage last week."
Is there a gene, or genes, that causes Parkinson's?
So far scientists have identified six forms of genetic Parkinson's and are searching for more. However, the number of cases with a genetic link is a tiny portion of the overall number of cases. Still, doctors hope that better understanding the genetic form of the disease could help unravel the mysteries about other forms of Parkinson's.
But the genetic component of Parkinson's has also proved more complicated than once thought. Scientists have determined there's no single gene for Parkinson's -- one gene may trigger the disease in one family, while a different gene triggers it in another family.
Scientists also suspect that in some cases, developing genetic Parkinson's may require having multiple trigger genes, because studies of families with a high incidence of the disorder have shown that some individuals can carry the main gene identified as causing Parkinson's yet never develop symptoms.
How far along are scientists in figuring out the interaction -- the connection -- between genes and the environment?
A large study of over 20,000 identical twins -- who share the same genetic code -- is underway to trace when different environmental exposures can trigger Parkinson's in one twin but not the other and under what circumstances both twins develop Parkinson's.
Why is Parkinson's so hard to diagnose?
Diagnosing Parkinson's can be a challenge in part because some mild Parkinson's symptoms at first just seem like the universal effects of aging -- a tremor in the hand, difficulty balancing and shuffling the feet.
"I think everybody gets a little Parkinsonian as you get older," says Dr. Clive Svendsen, who is studying stem cell therapies for Parkinson's at the University of Wisconsin. "And in fact, most of the literature points out a gradual reduction in dopamine neurons" -- the neurons whose death causes Parkinson's best-known physical symptoms -- "over time in everybody."
What are the hallmark symptoms? Do all patients have the same symptoms?
There's no clear epidemiological record of whether the specific symptoms doctors look for and patients express have evolved over time, but the hallmark of Parkinson's has always been tremors throughout the body. Making a definitive diagnosis has often proved difficult, however, because the exact nature of the symptoms can vary widely from patient to patient. Recent studies show that even members of the same family who share a single genetic form of Parkinson's may display very different symptoms. One patient may have foot tremors accompanied by difficulty sleeping, while another may have hand tremors and difficulty keeping his balance.
What are the new discoveries about Parkinson's symptoms?
In recent years scientists have found that Parkinson's is much more than a disease of shaking limbs.
"When I started my residency, this was a very simple disease," recalls Dr. William Langston. "A number of cells die in a small area of the brain that made a chemical called dopamine. When they died, you had no more dopamine. Without dopamine, it's difficult to move. ... And that's the way we diagnosed it. When dopamine's down, you got rigid, you developed a tremor, gait became slowed and shuffling, etc. Any neurologist can diagnose that."
But now, says Langston, "At this point in time, we know that Parkinson's is a much more complicated disorder. Many different areas of the brain can be affected. It probably evolves in a very specific order, starting in the low brain stem and then eventually affecting other areas, including the nigra, which causes Parkinsonism [the tremors]. But all of these other areas of the brain that are affected can also cause symptoms."
These newly-recognized symptoms range from loss of the sense of smell to digestive problems to depression.
Why has it taken doctors so long to recognize the wide array of symptoms now connected to Parkinson's? "Because [patients] don't come to neurologists if they have, say, sleep disorders or loss of sense of smell or even constipation, which is a very bothersome symptom in Parkinson's," says Langston.
How close are we to having an earlier, more accurate diagnosis of Parkinson's?
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, part of the National Institutes of Health, is working on improving its guidelines for diagnosing Parkinson's to reflect the latest science. Other researchers are focusing on finding new ways of identifying the disease altogether. Some are searching for a Parkinson's biomarker -- a biological trait displayed only in people who have or are at risk of developing the disease.
And now that sense of smell has been tied to Parkinson's, a study led by the Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders and the University of Pennsylvania is seeking to determine if how well a person performs on a test to identify 40 common odors can predict the individual's likelihood of developing Parkinson's. So far, they've found the average person can identify 35 of the odors, while the average diagnosed Parkinson's patient can only correctly name 20.
How close are scientists to finding a cure?
As scientists learn more about the great complexity of Parkinson's disease, hopes for finding a cure within the next few years is fading. But all the new information is paving the way for inventing better treatments that won't cure Parkinson's completely but will minimize the disease's effects.
"What we have to think about is whether the patient would be happy with still having constipation, still having other side effects of the disease, but being able to maintain a movement without arresting tremor and being able to initiate their own movement," says Dr. Clive Svendsen. "We're looking for a treatment that ... isn't curing it, but it's making the quality of life better."
If there's no cure in sight in the near future, what are the treatment options?
Since the 1960s, the leading treatment for Parkinson's has been the drug Levodopa, or L-dopa, a compound that can counteract the loss of dopamine neurons that causes the tremor symptoms of the disease. In the past couple of decades, deep brain stimulation -- a treatment that involves implanting a pacemaker-like device to deliver electric shocks to the parts of the brain that are damaged in Parkinson's patients -- has become another widely-employed treatment that generally produces positive results.
But the effectiveness of L-dopa decreases the longer a patient uses it, and deep brain stimulation requires a highly invasive operation, so scientists continue to look for better Parkinson's treatments.
As explored in My Father, My Brother and Me, doctors have recently started studying the power of exercise as a therapy to not only keep Parkinson's patients physically healthy but beneficially alter their brain chemistry.
What are some of the newer treatments being pursued?
Another area that offers great promise is neuroprotection, explained by Dr. Langston as "the idea of protecting nerve cells from dying or damage, ... another great Holy Grail in the field of neurology."
Scientists studying neuroprotection are looking for chemical substances that, when introduced into the brain, could either blunt the effects of Parkinson's disease on a patient after he is diagnosed or, better yet, prevent Parkinson's altogether. "The problem is," according to Dr. Langston, "I think it's a laboratory concept that jumped into the clinical all too quickly. In a laboratory animal, you can actually measure nerve cells after an experiment. We can't do that in humans. We have no way to really show we've slowed down the progress of cell death in living humans."
With thousands of potentially helpful chemicals to test, and without the scientific ability to widely screen substances for their ability to protect human brains against damage, Langston suggests researchers focus less on the effects of these substances on the brain itself and more on their effects on the patient as a whole.
"For the moment, where I think we need to focus in clinical trials is delaying disability. We clinicians can measure that. So start a patient on your neuroprotective agent. We can't prove [the neuroprotection], but if disability is really delayed or completely stopped, I think that would be very compelling."
Other scientists are working on refining the mode of delivery for a known neuroprotective substance. "There are some very powerful drugs for Parkinson's disease that are very difficult to get into the brain," says Dr. Svendsen. "GDNF [glial cell derived neurotrophic factor] is one of those drugs. ... Even at late stage Parkinson's, you have lots of neurons left, they just don't have any dopamine left in them, and they're very shrunken. And in that sense, [growth factors like GDNF] might again be like the fertilizer. Put it onto those cells, and even though they've practically disappeared, the growth factor will make them rejuvenate and start to produce dopamine again."
The problem, says Svendsen, is, "You can give [GDNF] peripherally in the blood, but it doesn't penetrate the blood-brain barrier [to get into the brain]. The idea is to design stem cells that make this drug, put the stem cells in the brain, and then they'll deliver it -- rather like a Trojan Horse. The brain accepts the stem cell because it's [a brain cell] and it's going to integrate and migrate and get into the brain tissue. ... And that's how we can sneak drugs into the brain, [overcoming] this powerful blood-brain barrier, which usually blocks this process."
The major obstacle Svendsen needs to solve to implement this type of therapy is creating an off switch of sorts for the cells that will produce GDNF. "It does remind me of the Walt Disney Fantasia movie and 'The Sorcerer's Apprentice,'" he says, "when Mickey Mouse is in the basement with the sorcerer and he gets a great way to make the broomsticks carry the water up and down. And, of course, it goes horribly wrong because [they] carry too much water, and it's overflowing, [so he] chops the broomsticks in half [but] they just keep carrying the water up and down.
"I wake up at night with that dream in my head, thinking, boy, if we put cells in the brain that produce [GDNF] that we think it's great and then it has a toxic effect, we can't switch it off. ... But on the other hand, we need to move forward in these diseases. ... It's a difficult one."
Could Parkinson's be a "gateway disease?" Could solving it clear the way to understanding -- even curing -- other neurological conditions?
"I think there's a general sense in the scientific and medical community that solving any of these major diseases -- Parkinson's, Lou Gehrig Disease, Alzheimer's -- could have an enormous impact on the others," says Dr. William Langston. But for many years, Parkinson's received special attention.
"For many years, the thought was Parkinson's was the perfect disease to lead the way in terms of solving these diseases," Langston explains. "The main reason for that is we were totally focused on one small area of the brain known as substantia nigra -- literally, black stuff -- [a] small pigmented dark area in the brain that sits atop the brain stem. Now, that looked like a pretty easy target, not a big nucleus. We fix that, we get more of the normal chemistry restored in the brain, and we fix the disease. To some degree, I think, that's still true. But we're now learning that Parkinson's is actually much more complex."
As scientists have learned that the symptoms of Parkinson's go far beyond the movement problems linked to the decay of the substantia nigra, they've realized that the simplicity that once made this seem like an easy neurological disorder to crack -- the best candidate for a cure -- was an illusion.
Does that mean what's learned about Parkinson's will have no effect on our ability to solve neurological diseases?
No. The complex nature of Parkinson's doesn't rule out the ability of breakthroughs studying this disease to have an impact on the understanding and treatment of other disorders.
"I think you're going to see most surgical therapies carried out first in Parkinson's disease," says Langston, citing the disease's pronounced effect on a small area of the brain. "And that's already happening with gene therapy, where genes are inserted in the brain to try to make cells healthier. ... If we get to the point of stem cells going in, all of that will probably be done with Parkinson's first."
Dr. Clive Svendsen is studying how to use stem cells to deliver growth factor -- a chemical that can regenerate important nerve cells in the brain -- as a treatment for Parkinson's. He points out that, "The Department of Defense has funded work in Parkinson's disease for a number of years. ... I think some of this comes through lobbying of people like Muhammad Ali and Michael J. Fox, and certain senators, to try and get funds appropriated specifically for Parkinson's disease. A number of veterans get Parkinson's disease. [With] Gulf War syndrome, there's an increased performance of ALS [another neurodegenerative disease]. And just neuro injury in wartime conditions is important to the Army. They're looking to stem cells releasing growth factors as a potential treatment for their troops on the field and for their veterans." Solving even a part of Parkinson's could still help solve parts of other brain disorders.
Are stem cells key to finding a cure?
Theoretically, stem cells should be able to replace the damaged brain cells whose degeneration leads to Parkinson's symptoms.
"We have shown very clearly that our basic science work in the laboratory ... proved that we can restore ... brain function in patients," says Dr. Ole Isacson of the Parkinson's Research Center at Harvard Medical School. "But we do need a lot of work to overcome the obstacles of making this happen [in] every case and in a reliable way."
"When we started with neurotransplants -- and we started with fetal cells first, and eventually the hope was stem cells would replace those -- we thought this was gonna be easy," Dr. William Langston explains. "We just put the cells in, fix this one small area of the brain, and we cure the disease. And we were very disappointed when that didn't happen. I think now with our evolving concept of Parkinson's disease, treating this one small area of the brain that we can already treat pretty well with surgical therapies, [stem cell therapy is] important but I think it is no longer the Holy Grail."
Some patients who've received experimental cell transplants have seen their symptoms improve, while others have experienced no change or even gotten worse.
"Some more extreme critics of this field," says Dr. Clive Svendsen, "would say that we now have two types of Parkinson's. We have Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's plus transplant disease."
[Editors' Note: Researchers at MIT's Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research have developed a new method of reprogramming the skin cells of Parkinson's patients into "an embryonic-stem-cell-like state," using "the resulting cells to derive dopamine-producing neurons, the cell type that degenerates in Parkinson’s disease patients." According to The New York Times, this method, "would in principle allow the brain cells that are lost in Parkinson's to be replaced with cells that carried no risk of immune rejection."]
Why haven't stem cell transplants worked so far?
There are many reasons scientists have encountered obstacles in engineering successful stem cell treatments for Parkinson's.
"The comparison I always use is, imagine trying to wire your house after it was built," says Langston. "I mean, when you build a house, all the wiring goes in very early. When the house is built, if you had to do all the wiring afterwards, that would be pretty tricky. Now imagine you're trying to do that in a living brain with 4 billion neurons."
Some stem cells revert from the type of cells they've been cultivated to become -- generally dopamine neurons when dealing with Parkinson's -- back into generic stem cells when they're placed in the brain. And an adult brain seems to have ways of recognizing embryonic stem cells as not belonging. "We're learning there're all types of signals in the adult brain that tell these little guys to go away," says Langston.
Furthermore, a stem cell's inherent ability to develop into any kind of cell -- the property that makes them useful -- can also be a hazard. Says Isaacson, "While we know that we can generate the dopamine neuron, it also tends to generate other cell types, including skin, and maybe even bone. So the challenge is, even though we can get the cell we want, [we need] to eliminate the other unwanted cells, lest they would grow into tissues that would be very problematic and even dangerous to the patient."
In some cases, says Langston, "We don't even understand the reasons why the attempts we've already done have failed."
The risk of stem cell procedures compared to the safety of other relatively effective Parkinson's treatments gives some scientists pause. "The patients will have [to] think about this," says Svendsen. "Am I gonna risk a new procedure that hasn't been tried or go with the steady state procedures which we know work?"
Two perspectives on the promise of stem cells...
Because of the practical difficulties surrounding stem cell procedures, some scientists no longer think of them as a potential wonder cure-all.
"It's not popular to say that stem cells aren't the answer, but I now believe they are not," says Langston. "I don't think we should give up with them. I think they're gonna help other diseases, and eventually they may really help Parkinson's. But I don't think that should be our major focus. The brain is not a pincushion. We can't keep plucking cells in all over the place."
Others are more optimistic, although they point out it may take many years to fix the current problems with stem cell transplant technologies.
"What we're facing is the same kind of problems that you see almost in engineering. If you think of the early development of airplanes, or flight, the first airplane crashed very quickly," says Ole Isacson.
"But many years, in a way, is still a short time in my world, because if you think about the kind of discoveries that are necessary to make a medical treatment available to a large group of patients, decades is the norm rather than the exception."
"We're looking at this through the Parkinson's window," says Clive Svendsen, "but if you look outside the Parkinson's window and go to the rest of the world, [there are] lots of places that this technology will be used, I'm sure."

Dermatology is the a branch of medical science dealing with the skin, its structure, functions, and diseases.
Dermatologists specialize in diagnosing and treating conditions related to the skin, hair, and nails, including concerns related to cosmetic issues, such as sun damage and aging, as well as skin cancer, and other medical skin conditions.
Dermatologists who have additional interest and skill in performing surgical procedures are referred to as dermatologic surgeons or dermasurgeons.
Specialty terms like "dermatologist" and "dermatologic surgeon" are often unregulated and may be used in some states by any doctor, regardless of their training and credentials.
So, for instance, a doctor who has an active medical license and is board certified in Internal Medicine but who has not undergone any specialty training in dermatology may refer to him or herself as a dermatologist or dermasurgeon, despite the fact that their training and credentials may not reflect specialization in this area of medical practice.
The skin is the largest organ of the human body, and as a result, dermatologists typically offer a wide variety of treatments for it.
Whether you wish to correct wrinkles, crepey skin, or razor bumps, a board certified dermatologist or dermasurgeon may help you by offering a single treatment or any combination of the following:
Cosmetic dermatology - Non-surgical procedures
- Laser treatments
- Chemical peel
- Injectable fillers
- Botox and Dysport
- Lip augmentation
- Non-surgical nose job
- Non-surgical facelift
- Acne treatment
- Acne scar removal
- Vein treatment
- Scar removal
- Skin tightening
Cosmetic dermatology - Surgical procedures
Most dermatologists and dermasurgeons also offer treatments for a variety of medical skin conditions, in addition to cosmetic treatments. Although most skin problems can create aesthetic concerns, the following conditions are usually considered medical issues, and treatment may be covered by insurance.
Medical dermatology - Conditions treated
- Skin cancer

Dec. 8, 2011 "Dressing" atoms with laser light allows high angular momentum scattering to be seen for the first time in long-lived atomic Bose-Einstein condensates at ultracold temperatures.
Scientists at the Joint Quantum Institute (JQI) have for the first time engineered and detected the presence of high angular momentum collisions between atoms at temperatures close to absolute zero. Previous experiments with ultracold atoms featured essentially head-on collisions. The JQI experiment, by contrast, is able to create more complicated collisions between atoms using only lasers. This innovation may facilitate the creation of exotic quantum states that can be exploited for practical applications like quantum computing. The key to the JQI approach is to alter the atoms' environment with laser light. They "dress" rubidium atoms by bathing them in a pair of laser beams, which force the atoms to have one of three discrete values of momentum. In the JQI experiment, rubidium atoms comprise a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). BECs have been collided before. But the observation of high-angular-momentum scattering at such low energies is new.
The new JQI results are being reported in the journal Science.
One of the cardinal principles of quantum science is that matter must be simultaneously thought of as both particles and waves. When the temperature of a gas of atoms is lowered, the wavelike nature of the atom emerges, and the idea of position becomes fuzzier. While an atom at room temperature might spread over a hundredth of a nm, atoms at nano-kelvin temperatures have a typical wavelength of about 100 nm. This is much larger than the range of the force between atoms, only a few nm. Atoms generally collide only when they meet face to face.
However, to study certain interesting quantum phenomena, such as searching for Majorana particles -- hypothetical particles that might provide a robust means of encoding quantum information -- it is desirable to engineer inter-atomic collisions beyond these low-energy, head-on type. That's what the new JQI experiment does.
Scattering experiments date back to the discovery of the atomic nucleus 100 years ago, when Ernest Rutherford shot alpha particles into a foil of gold. Since then other scattering experiments have revealed a wealth of detail about atoms and sub-atomic matter such as the quark substructure of protons.
A convenient way of picturing an interaction between two particles is to view their relative approach in terms of angular momentum. Quantized angular momentum usually refers to the motion of an electron inside an atom, but it necessarily pertains also to the scattering of the two particles, which can be thought of as parts of a single quantum object.
If the value of the relative angular momentum is zero, then the scattering is designated as "s-wave" scattering. If the pair of colliding particles has one unit of angular momentum, the scattering is called p-wave scattering. Still more higher-order scattering scenarios are referred to by more letters: d-wave, f-wave, g-wave, and so on. This model is referred to as the partial waves view.
In high energy scattering, the kind at accelerators, these higher angular-momentum scattering scenarios are important and help to reveal important structure information about the particles. In atomic scattering at low temperatures, the s-wave interactions completely swamp the higher-order scattering modes. For ultralow-temperature s-wave scattering, when two atoms collide, they glance off each other (back to back) at any and all angles equally. This isotropic scattering doesn't reveal much about the nature of the matter undergoing collision; it's as if the colliding particles were hard spheres.
This has changed now. The JQI experiment is the first to create conditions in which d-wave and g-wave scattering modes in an ultracold experiment could be seen in otherwise long-lived systems.
Ian Spielman and his colleagues at the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) chill Rb atoms to nano-kelvin temperatures. The atoms, around half a million of them, have a density about a millionth that of air at room temperature. Radiofrequency radiation places each atom into a superposition of quantum spin states. Then two (optical light) lasers impart momentum (forward-going and backward-going motion) to the atoms.
If this were a particle physics experiment, we would say that these BECs-in-motion were quantum beams, beams with energies that came in multiples of the energy kick delivered by the lasers. The NIST "collider" in Gaithersburg, Maryland is very different for the CERN collider in Geneva, Switzerland. In the NIST atom trap the particles have kinetic energies of a hundred pico-electron-volts rather than the trillion-electron-volt energies used at the Large Hadron Collider.
At JQI, atoms are installed in their special momentum states, and the collisions begin. Outward scattered atoms are detected after the BEC clouds are released by the trap. If the atoms hadn't been dressed, the collisions would have been s-wave in nature and the observed scattered atoms would have been seen uniformly around the scattering zone.
The effect of the dressing is to screen the atoms from s-wave scattering in the way analogous to that in some solid materials, where the interaction between two electrons is modified by the presence of trillions of other electrons nearby. In other words, the laser dressing effectively increased the range of the inter-atom force such that higher partial wave scattering was possible, even at the lowest energies.
In the JQI experiment, the observed scattering patterns for atoms emerging from the collisions was proof that d-wave and g-wave scattering had taken place. "The way in which the density of scattered atoms is distributed on the shell reflects the partial waves," said Ian Spielman. "A plot of scattered-density vs. spherical polar angles would give the sort of patterns you are used to seeing for atomic orbitals. In our case, this is a sum of s-, p-, and d- waves."
Simulating Solids Using Gases
Ultracold atomic physics experiments performed with vapors of atoms are excellent for investigating some of the strongly-interacting quantum phenomena usually considered in the context of condensed matter physics. These subjects include superconductivity, superfluids, the quantum Hall effect, and topological insulators, and some things that haven't yet been observed, such as the "Majorana" fermions.
Several advantages come with studying these phenomena in the controlled environment of ultracold atoms. Scientists can easily manipulate the landscape in which the atoms reside using knobs that adjust laser power and frequency. For example, impurities that can plague real solids can be controlled and even removed, and because (as in this new JQI experiment) the scattering of atoms can now (with the proper "dressing") reveal higher-partial-wave effects. This is important because the exotic quantum effects mentioned above often manifest themselves under exactly these higher angular-momentum conditions.
"Our technique is a fundamentally new method for engineering interactions, and we expect this work will stimulate new directions of research and be of broad interest within the physics community, experimental and theoretical," said Spielman. "We are modifying the very character of the interactions, and not just the strength, by light alone."
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
- R. A. Williams, L. J. Leblanc, K. Jiménez-García, M. C. Beeler, A. R. Perry, W. D. Phillips, I. B. Spielman. Synthetic Partial Waves in Ultracold Atomic Collisions. Science, December 8 2011 DOI: 10.1126/science.1212652
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. is about to replace all residential gas and electric meters with smart meters, saying the meters manage consumers' energy usage better, and in time, save money.
Some customers are questioning whether the new technology would be bad for your health.
Smart meters basically reads itself then sends the energy usage reading wirelessly to BGE. The utility company has touted the benefits to customers, eventually saving customers money.
"You are going to be able to actually go onto your computer, you are going to be able to see in near real time -- 24 hours, roughly -- your energy usage," BGE spokesman Rob Gould said.
But not everyone is looking forward to smart meter technology, including Junghie Elky, who said she suffers from something called electromaganetic sensitivity, and believes radio frequencies make her sick.
"I'm a little bit nervous about that, a bit worried about the health effects," Elky said. "At my worst, I was so sensitive, I could not touch things with electricity without feeling pain. I couldn't watch TV because the radiation from the screen would make me dizzy."
Elky said she would experience headaches, fatigue and ear aches that forced her to take a leave of absence from work.
Magda Havas, an associate professor of environmental and resource studies at Trent University in Ontario, Canada, has studied electromagnetic sensitivity for decades. She said 3 to 5 percent of the population suffer severe symptoms, and up to a third of the population have mild to moderate symptoms.
"There are so many sources of radiation, so smart meters are just one additional source," Havas said. "We have a lot of it in our home. We live near cell phone antennas and they all emit radio frequency. What seems to happen is once the smart meters go in, people seem to be fine, and then a few of them become quite ill."

Guest blogger Jon Bowermaster is a writer and filmmaker. His most recent documentary is "SoLa, Louisiana Water Stories" and his most recent book is OCEANS, The Threats to the Sea and What You Can Do To Turn the Tide.
Typically at this time of year a certain breed of shopper purposefully wanders the fish stalls of their favorite grocer taking stock of the piles of fresh oysters carefully arranged on crushed ice or to pick up and judge the heft in their hands of tightly packed tins of caviar, which sell for anywhere from $50 to $2,000.
But maybe this is the year to lay off those two favored treats and replace them with something slightly less traditional: squid.
I know, a big bowl of calamari hardly compares to one of caviar… but, man, there’s a lot of squid out there these days. I’m sure some of those very popular sustainable fish chefs have already dreamed up some special calamari entrée to take advantage of the boom.
How much squid is out there? It’s estimated that around-the-world squid in mass outweighs the human population. And that’s with sperm whales alone munching down more than 100 million tons of squid each year.Squid are one of the most important foods in the ocean, along with other prey like sardines and pollock. Whales and seabirds depend on abundant squid to raise their young, particularly during breeding season.
Along the coast of California, the market squid season has been so abundant the state Department of Fish and Game reports its annual limit of 118,000 tons has already been taken and the squid season is now closed until March 31. Marine biologists credit a rush of colder-than-normal water for the banner year; usually February is prime time.
At the same time, certain squid are booming thanks to a slight warming of sea temperatures, in places like Alaska and Siberia. Many squid, octopuses and other sucker-bearing members of the cephalopod family don't appear to be too troubled by the minor increase. In fact, when it's a little warmer, some thrive. The populations are thought to be exploding because of the overfishing of other fish that used to dine on young squid.
Warmer waters can help squid “balloon” in size because their enzymes work faster when warm. A young giant squid can grow from 2 millimeters to a meter in a single year, the equivalent of a human baby growing to the size of a whale in twelve months.
There’s also been a boom in Humboldt squid along the Pacific coastline ranging from Peru to California, now expanding northward to places they’ve never been seen before. The big tentacled variety can grow more than seven feet long and weigh more than one hundred pounds. A feisty fish, once on the line, the big squids can be slightly dangerous to haul into your boat. They have a nasty, pecking beak, like to spray black ink and have the ability to expel up to two gallons of water into the faces of unsuspecting fishermen (“like a giant squirt gun”).
A downside to the boom in giant squid is that they also have giant appetites, which means they are making a big hit on salmon, for example, thus reducing the amount of the pink fleshy fish for human tables.
The giant squid are also proving to be a menace to divers, being both aggressive and carnivorous, a mean combo when the tentacles of one of the rust-colored, six-foot long creatures latches onto your air tank, or leg.
Editor’s note: It’s typical for squid and other prey species to boom and bust in response to changing environmental conditions. Oceana is working to establish regulations that adapt fishing to this rollercoaster, fishing more during the boom and cutting back during lean times to protect food for whales. As an added complexity, cephalopods are seeing their numbers expand as the fishing industry captures more and more of the big predatory fish that eat squid, such as tuna.
- Stocks Show Signs of Recovery, But Still Work to Do Posted Fri, May 17, 2013
- What Do Historic CO2 Levels Mean for the Oceans? Posted Tue, May 14, 2013
- U.S. Coast Guard Captures Illegal Fishermen in Texas Posted Tue, May 14, 2013
- Victory! Delaware Becomes Seventh State in U.S. to Ban Shark Fin Trade! Posted Thu, May 16, 2013
- It's Endangered Species Day! Posted Fri, May 17, 2013

Climate change is the defining human development challenge of the 21st Century. Failure to respond to that challenge will stall and then reverse international efforts to reduce poverty. The poorest countries and most vulnerable citizens will suffer the earliest and most damaging setbacks, even though they have contributed least to the problem. Looking to the future, no country—however wealthy or powerful—will be immune to the impact of global warming.
Climate change is not just a future scenario. Increased exposure to droughts, floods and storms is already destroying opportunity and reinforcing inequality. Meanwhile, there is now overwhelming scientific evidence that the world is moving towards the point at which irreversible ecological catastrophe becomes unavoidable. Business-as-usual climate change points in a clear direction: unprecedented reversal in human development in our lifetime, and acute risks for our children and their grandchildren.
In a divided but ecologically interdependent world, it challenges all people to reflect upon how we manage the environment of the one thing that we share in common: planet Earth. It challenges us to reflect on social justice and human rights across countries and generations. It challenges political leaders and people in rich nations to acknowledge their historic responsibility for the problem, and to initiate deep and early cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. Above all, it challenges the entire human community to undertake prompt and strong collective action based on shared values and a shared vision.
The IPCC2000 report, based on the work of some 2,500 scientists in more than 130 countries, concluded that humans have caused all or most of the current planetary warming. Human-caused global warming is often called anthropogenic climate change.
Industrialization, deforestation, and pollution have greatly increased atmospheric concentrations of water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, all greenhouse gases that help trap heat near Earth’s surface. Humans are pouring carbon dioxide into the atmosphere much faster than can be absorbed by plants and oceans.
It is expected that environmentally friendly methods of electricity generation will help to lower the CO2 being produced during power generation. Some of this methods include solar and wind energy power generators.
THE SUN IS NOT TO BLAME
It’s global warming, it’s climate change, it’s our fault, no it’s volcanoes… wait, actually it’s the sun! Or maybe not.
The arguments about climate change have been raging for years. Some say that the warming is a natural occurrence, some blame humanity and then others simply say ‘what warming?’ One idea now at least can be put to rest – the sun is not to blame.
It has been very popular to cite that the planet goes through many warming and cooling periods as a direct result of changes in solar activity. It sounds fair enough, if the sun produces more heat we get warmer. And this was very much the idea put forward by Britain’s Channel 4 in their documentary called ‘The great global warming swindle.’ There is one main problem with blaming the sun – it’s just not true.
It is true that up until about 1980 all the information showed that solar activity was increasing. This is exactly what they showed on all of their graphs, and it looks both convincing and logical. The sun was outputting more energy, the planet was getting warmer, bingo, we have our culprit! But this is just not the case, the trend in solar activity changed.
“This paper is the final nail in the coffin for people who would like to make the sun responsible for present global warming,” Stefan Rahmstorf, a climate scientist at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research in Germany, told the journal Nature.
GLOBAL MEAN TEMPERATURES
Mike Lockwood, from Oxford’s Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory and Claus Fröhlich, from the World Radiation Centre in Switzerland recently published their paper in the UK’s Royal Society’s journal, stating clear evidence that the warming of the past two decades is not due to the sun – we need to look elsewhere.
Not only does the sun fail to explain any rise in temperature but it would actually suggest a cooling, as clearly stated in the abstract of the paper, “There is considerable evidence for solar influence on the Earth’s pre-industrial climate and the Sun may well have been a factor in post-industrial climate change in the first half of the last century. Here we show that over the past 20 years, all the trends in the Sun that could have had an influence on the Earth’s climate have been in the opposite direction to that required to explain the observed rise in global mean temperatures.”
COUNTERING GLOBAL WARMING
This study has compiled data about solar activity spanning the last one hundred years and have shown that solar activity peaked between 1985 and 1987.
“This is an important contribution to the scientific debate on climate change. At present there is a small minority which is seeking to deliberately confuse the public on the causes of climate change. They are often misrepresenting the science, when the reality is that the evidence is getting stronger every day. We have reached a point where a failure to take action to reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions would be irresponsible and dangerous,” said a representative of the Royal Society.
Even though one theory countering global warming has been overturned new ones will come up every day. People will continue to say that the whole idea of climate change is nothing but government propaganda and a dozen or so other conspiracy theories. Now more than ever it is important for the public to be properly educated about what is going on. There are far too many places citing ‘scientific’ reasons as to why global warming is nothing but a lie. And sadly, with the way the media and the internet works, this is unlikely to change. Let’s just hope the politicians listen to the scientists and not to members of the public who are being confused and misled by far too many sources.
SHEEP BLAME HUMANS
Two years after scientists concluded that a breed of wild sheep on a remote Scottish island was shrinking over time, a study released Thursday revealed why: milder winters tied to global warming.
Due to milder winters, lambs on the island of Hirta do not need to put on as much as weight in the first months of life to survive to their first year, according to the study in the peer-reviewed journal Science. As a result, even the slower-growing ones now have a chance of surviving.
“In the past, only the big, healthy sheep and large lambs that had piled on weight in their first summer could survive the harsh winters on Hirta,” lead author Tim Coulson, a researcher at Imperial College London, said in a statement.
“But now, due to climate change, grass for food is available for more months of the year, and survival conditions are not so challenging — even the slower growing sheep have a chance of making it, and this means smaller individuals are becoming increasingly prevalent in the population.”
EVOLUTIONARY THEORY UPENDED
The study upends the belief that natural selection is a dominant feature of evolution, noting that climate can trump that card.
“According to classic evolutionary theory,” Coulson added, the sheep “should have been getting bigger, because larger sheep tend to be more likely to survive and reproduce than smaller ones, and offspring tend to resemble their parents.”
The sheep on Hirta have been examined closely since 1985 and experts concluded in 2007 that average body size was shrinking. By this year, it had decreased by 5 percent since 1985.
Coulson’s team analyzed body-weight measurements and key life milestones for a selected group of female sheep. They then plugged the data into a computer model that predicts how body size will change over time due to natural selection and other factors.
The results suggest that the decrease in average size is primarily an ecological response to warming, the authors said, and that natural selection has contributed relatively little.

The election of Egypt’s president Muhammad Mursi momentarily threw a spotlight on the long-forgotten Palestinians exiled to Gaza after the Israelis’ infamous siege of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem in the West Bank 10 years ago.
Still kicking their heels in Gaza the exiles called on Mursi to continue efforts to end the squabble between political rivals Hamas in Gaza and Fatah in the West Bank. They were optimistic that the new Egyptian president would work towards easing Israel’s blockade on the Gaza Strip and press for Palestinians rights, including the right of exiles to return home.
It is expected Mursi will at least allow greater freedom to travel across Gaza’s Rafah crossing into Egypt, the besieged enclave’s only door to the outside world.
How did the exiles find themselves in the prison Gaza has become? In 2002 a young girl from a refugee camp triggered events that led to a 40-day siege of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem. This is probably the oldest Christian church in the world, built by Constantine the Great and dating from AD330. A member of the girl’s family had been killed by Israeli occupation troops. Grief-stricken, she took revenge by turning herself into a suicide bomber.
The Israelis responded by sending 250 tanks and armoured personnel carriers, F-16 fighter jets, Apache gunships and hundreds of soldiers into West Bank towns like Nablus, Jenin and Bethlehem late at night. In Bethlehem they cut the electricity supply and invaded the old township with helicopter gunships and occupied all key points around Manger Square. Many innocent Palestinians were killed by shelling and army snipers, and the market and some shops were set on fire as troops tried to hunt down suspected ‘fighters’. Civilians tried desperately to hide from the troops and a large number of people took refuge or arrived for other reasons at the Church and found themselves trapped, unable to leave.
A few years ago I interviewed one of the survivors, who recalled that “248 took refuge there. They included 1 Islamic Jihad, 28 Hamas, 50 to 60 Al-Aqsa Martyrs. The remainder were ordinary townsfolk and included 100 uniformed Palestinian Authority workers, also 26 children and 8 to10 women and girls. The Israeli soldiers would not allow them to leave, but they escaped in the first week by a back door.”
Priests and nuns – Armenian, Greek and Catholic – from the adjoining monasteries brought the number to over 300 at the beginning. “Some of them went back to the monasteries but some stayed with us every day for the 40 days.”
The Vatican was outraged. The Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem called on Christians worldwide to make the upcoming Sunday a “solidarity day” for the people in the Church and the Church itself, and urged immediate intervention to stop what it called the “inhuman measures against the people and the stone of the Church”.
The Israelis set up cranes on which were mounted robotic machine-guns under video control. According to eye-witnesses eight defenders, including the bell-ringer, were murdered, some by the armchair button-pushers playing with their video joysticks and some by regular snipers.
From the start, said my survivor, the Israeli troops used psychological warfare methods – for example, disorienting noise to deprive them of sleep, bright lights and concussion grenades. They paraded the families of the besieged in front of the Church to pressure them to surrender. They also used illegal dum-dum bullets which cause horrendous wounds and trauma. “Most of those who were killed… it was because of the dum-dums… so much bleeding, and it took so long to arrange to send them to a hospital.”
He said the soldiers fired tracer rounds into two of the monasteries and set the ancient fabric of the buildings alight.
15 days into the siege those inside managed to recharge their cellphones using the mains that supplied the Church towers and call for help. The Israelis had overlooked the fact that this was a separate supply coming from the Bethlehem municipality. Friends responded by sending food to the medical centre. From there it went by ambulance, along with authentic casualties, and was delivered to houses near the Church. At night young girls carried the food in plastic bags from house to house until supplies reached the dwellings nextdoor to the Church. The bags were then thrown from roof to roof. This went on for 6 days until one girl dropped a bag, which the soldiers found. The Israelis, now alerted, shot and paralysed another young man. It put an end to the food operation.
“Inside the Church we vowed not to harm the soldiers unless they actually broke in. When soldiers did gain access and killed one of the resisters, 4 of them were shot.”
Those trapped inside the Church were surprised to discover an old lady living within the complex. She had a small horde of olives and wheat, with which they made bread. So they managed to eke out the food for 28 days.
The Governor of Bethlehem and the Director of the Catholic Society were among those holding out in the Church. According to my survivor’s first-hand account, those inside only opened the door if someone died or was injured. He recalled watching through a peephole and seeing people approaching across the forecourt. “They were from the Peace Movement, 28 of them. By now the world media were watching. 17 were arrested but 11 took a big risk, managing to bluff their way in and bringing food in their rucksacks, which lasted another 4 days, and basic medicines.
The worst time, he said, was the final week – no food and only dirty water from the well. They resorted to boiling leaves and old chicken legs into a soup. He ate only lemons and salt for 5 or 6 days. “Many were so ill by this time that they were passing blood.”
Outside some 15 civilians had been indiscriminately shot in the street or in their homes. The Israelis refused to allow the dead in the Church to be removed for decent burial. “In the end, the Governor decided it was better to be in jail than die. So we opened the door and surrendered on the 40th day. 148 had survived. We were promptly arrested and interrogated.
“13 were exiled to the EU, 26 were exiled to Gaza, 26 were wounded, 26 had surrendered because they were under-age. 8 were killed inside the Church, and with Samir (the bellringer) makes 9. They shot Samir in front of the Church as he came out to surrender.”
The rest were allowed home, including my survivor. “The Israelis said to me, ‘Do you know why you are going home? Because America wants it’.” The adverse publicity had prodded the CIA and EU into taking a hand in deciding the fate of the survivors.
The whole disgraceful episode would no doubt have ended in more carnage if the world’s media hadn’t tuned in and ten international activists, including members of the International Solidarity Movement, hadn’t managed to enter the Church.
I hear that the exiles have not been allowed to work since or receive visits from their families. According to some reports they were not even allowed to say goodbye to their loved ones before being packed off.
What exactly were they guilty of? They may have been Palestinian gunmen but the last time I checked it was perfectly OK to put up armed resistance against an illegal military occupation. Israel’s gunmen happen to wear uniform and are equipped with the best weaponry American tax dollars can buy. They are fond of saying, “We have a right to defend ourselves.” So do the Palestinians. Obviously.
So why did America and the EU lend themselves to this shameful act of exiling… a helpful little boost to Israel’s ongoing programme of ethnic cleansing of the West Bank?
And having got their hands dirty isn’t it time, after 10 years, they cleaned up and insisted that these forgotten men be re-united with their families?
A few weeks ago the Israeli press was practising their usual distortions and telling readers that “the terrorists took shelter in the famous church, and used about 40 priests and nuns as a shield, knowing Israel would not take a chance on inadvertently hurting priests and nuns”.
But for Israel’s gunslingers it had been open season on bellringers and other innocents.
(Stuart Littlewood / www.eurasiareview.com / 30.06.2012)
Filed under: Terrorism | Tagged: Palestine, Revolution, Terrorism | Leave a Comment »

This following chronology looks back at the problem of xenophobia since South Africa’s first democratic elections in 1994.
The Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) threatens to take “physical action” if the government fails to respond to the perceived crisis of undocumented migrants in South Africa.
IFP leader and Minister of Home Affairs Mangosutho Buthelezi says in his first speech to parliament: “If we as South Africans are going to compete for scarce resources with millions of aliens who are pouring into South Africa, then we can bid goodbye to our Reconstruction and Development Programme.”
In December gangs of South Africans try to evict perceived “illegals” from Alexandra township, blaming them for increased crime, sexual attacks and unemployment. The campaign, lasting several weeks, is known as “Buyelekhaya” (Go back home).
A report by the Southern African Bishops’ Conference concludes: “There is no doubt that there is a very high level of xenophobia in our country … One of the main problems is that a variety of people have been lumped together under the title of ‘illegal immigrants’, and the whole situation of demonising immigrants is feeding the xenophobia phenomenon.”
Defence Minister Joe Modise links the issue of undocumented migration to increased crime in a newspaper interview.
In a speech to parliament, Home Affairs Minister Buthelezi claims “illegal aliens” cost South African taxpayers “billions of rands” each year.
A study co-authored by the Human Sciences Research Council and the Institute for Security Studies reports that 65 percent of South Africans support forced repatriation of undocumented migrants. White South Africans are found to be most hostile to migrants, with 93 percent expressing negative attitudes.
Local hawkers in central Johannesburg attack their foreign counterparts. The chairperson of the Inner Johannesburg Hawkers Committee is quoted as saying: “We are prepared to push them out of the city, come what may. My group is not prepared to let our government inherit a garbage city because of these leeches.”
A Southern African Migration Project (SAMP) survey of migrants in Lesotho, Mozambique and Zimbabwe shows that very few would wish to settle in South Africa. A related study of migrant entrepreneurs in Johannesburg finds that these street traders create an average of three jobs per business.
Three non-South Africans are killed by a mob on a train travelling between Pretoria and Johannesburg in what is described as a xenophobic attack.
In December The Roll Back Xenophobia Campaign is launched by a partnership of the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC), the National Consortium on Refugee Affairs and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The Department of Home Affairs reports that the majority of deportations are of Mozambicans (141,506) followed by Zimbabweans (28,548)
A report by the SAHRC notes that xenophobia underpins police action against foreigners. People are apprehended for being “too dark” or “walking like a black foreigner”. Police also regularly destroy documents of black non-South Africans.
Sudanese refugee James Diop is seriously injured after being thrown from a train in Pretoria by a group of armed men. Kenyan Roy Ndeti and his room mate are shot in their home. Both incidents are described as xenophobic attacks.
In Operation Crackdown, a joint police and army sweep, over 7,000 people are arrested on suspicion of being illegal immigrants. In contrast, only 14 people are arrested for serious crimes.
A SAHRC report on the Lindela deportation centre, a holding facility for undocumented migrants, lists a series of abuses at the facility, including assault and the systematic denial of basic rights. The report notes that 20 percent of detainees claimed South African citizenship or that they were in the country legally.
According to the 2001 census, out of South Africa’s population of 45 million, just under one million foreigners are legally resident in the country. However, the Department of Home Affairs estimates there are more than seven million undocumented migrants.
Protests erupt at Lindela over claims of beatings and inmate deaths, coinciding with hearings into xenophobia by SAHRC and parliament’s portfolio committee on foreign affairs.
Cape Town’s Somali community claim that 40 traders have been the victims of targeted killings between August and September.
Somali-owned businesses in the informal settlement of Diepsloot, outside Johannesburg, are repeatedly torched.
In March UNHCR notes its concern over the increase in the number of xenophobic attacks on Somalis. The Somali community claims 400 people have been killed in the past decade.
In May more than 20 people are arrested after shops belonging to Somalis and other foreign nationals are torched during anti-government protests in Khutsong township, a small mining town about 50km southwest of Johannesburg. According to the International Organisation of Migration, 177,514 Zimbabweans deported from South Africa pass through their reception centre across the border in Beitbridge since its opening in May 2006.
In March human rights organisations condemn a spate of xenophobic attacks around Pretoria that leave at least four people dead and hundreds homeless.
Sources include: IRIN, Human Rights Watch, SAMP, SAHRC, Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation

BRCA1 mutations account for only 5% of breast and ovarian cancers, but loss-of-function mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer up to an 82% risk of breast cancer and up to a 54% risk of ovarian cancer. Because BRCA1 is involved in DNA repair, loss of a functioning BRCA1 gene may make a cell more vulnerable to chemotherapy agents that damage DNA, such as platinum-based compounds. In addition, BRCA1 has also been shown to be involved in the regulation of cell division, and loss of the gene has been proposed to protect a cell against spindle poisons, a group of chemotherapy agents, such as taxanes and vinca alkaloids, that disrupt cell division.
To determine whether the level of BRCA1 function in a patient could be used to predict response to chemotherapy for breast and ovarian cancers, D. Paul Harkin, B.Sc., Ph.D., and Richard D. Kennedy, M.D., Ph.D., of The Queen's University of Belfast in Northern Ireland, and colleagues reviewed published preclinical and clinical evidence. Preclinical studies included research in both animal models and cell lines. Clinical studies were all retrospective in nature, because no prospective trials have been designed to study the role of BRCA1 in chemotherapy response.
The researchers found that BRCA1 inactivation through mutation appears to confer sensitivity to DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used to treat breast and ovarian cancers. However, preclinical evidence suggests that BRCA1 function is necessary for spindle poisons to work. The authors recommend that prospective studies be conducted to evaluate BRCA1 expression and chemotherapeutic res
Contact: Sarah L. Zielinski
Journal of the National Cancer Institute

Invalid Forensic Science Testimony and Wrongful Convictions
Flawed testimony by forensic experts contributed to the conviction of innocent defendants, according to a new study co-written by University of Virginia Law School professor Brandon Garrett.
The findings are featured in an article, "Invalid Forensic Science Testimony and Wrongful Convictions," published in the March, 2009 issue of the Virginia Law Review. Read the article in
Garrett and Peter Neufeld, co-director of the Innocence Project, studied the transcripts of 137 trials in which prosecution forensic analysts testified, and the defendants were exonerated years later by post-conviction DNA testing.
The pair found that in 60 percent of those wrongful conviction cases, forensic analysts gave "invalid testimony that overstated the evidence," Garrett said.
"What we mean by 'invalid' is simply that the testimony was unscientific or contrary to empirical data," he said. "Just because a wrong statistic was offered, does not mean that the testimony necessarily caused the wrongful conviction. However, these powerful examples support efforts to adopt and enforce scientific standards governing forensic reporting and testimony."
The flawed testimony uncovered by Garrett and Neufeld included erroneous or unsupported testimony about the accuracy and results of forensic techniques, including hair comparison, bite-mark comparison, fingerprint comparison and even DNA testing.
The study originated with a request to Garrett — who conducted previous research on wrongful convictions — from a National Academy of Sciences committee examining the needs of the forensic science community, asking him to present at one of the committee's public hearings.
Garrett and Neufeld then spent more than a year compiling and analyzing trial transcripts from the cases of people later exonerated by DNA evidence. Several scientists and forensic scientists also reviewed the categories used for analysis and examined transcripts in particular cases.
The majority of the cases were rape cases from the 1980s, and many included testimony about forensic techniques that are still used today, said Neufeld, co-founder of Innocence Project, a national litigation and public policy organization that uses DNA testing to exonerate wrongfully convicted people and seeks to reform the criminal justice system to prevent injustice.
The National Academy of Sciences report, "Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward," was released in February, and recommends the establishment of a national institute of forensic science, an independent scientific entity to adopt and enforce standards for forensic report writing and testimony.
"With the exception of nuclear DNA analysis ... no forensic method has been rigorously shown to have the capacity to consistently, and with a high degree of certainty, demonstrate a connection between evidence and a specific individual or source," the National Academy of Sciences report says.
In their study, Garrett and Neufeld found that forensic analysts often testified that a particular piece of evidence — such as a hair or a fingerprint — was closely connected to the innocent defendant, despite the fact that no scientific data permitted analysts to reach such conclusions.
For example, in one case an analyst told a jury that only 5 percent of the population had a certain type of hair pigment discovered at a crime scene, and that the defendant was among them. But there is no empirical data about the frequency of particular hair pigments, Garrett said.
"These trial transcripts were fascinating to read, because in retrospect we know that all of the defendants were innocent," he said. "Yet few have looked at these records. Even after these wrongful convictions came to light, crime laboratories rarely conducted audits or investigations to review the forensic evidence presented at the trial."
The study doesn't speak to the state of mind of analysts; it's impossible to tell from trial materials whether they were simply inexperienced or poorly supervised or acting in bad faith, Garrett said.
"Nor do we know how many cases involved concealment of forensic evidence," he said. "In 13 exonerees' cases it has since come to light that forensic evidence was concealed that would have helped to prove innocence. Similarly, we do not know from reading trial transcripts in how many cases errors were made in the laboratory, although in a few exonerees' cases in which the underlying evidence was re-examined, gross errors have come to light."
The study also notes that the criminal justice system is not well-suited to prevent unscientific testimony. Reasons include that the presentation of forensic evidence is almost entirely one-sided, Garrett said.
"Defense counsel rarely cross-examined analysts concerning invalid testimony and rarely retained experts, since courts routinely deny funding for defense experts." Only 19 of the eventual exonerees whose cases were examined had defense experts. "Prosecutors, moreover, presented erroneous accounts of the forensic evidence during closing arguments," Garrett said.
The study's authors agree with the National Academy of Sciences report's assessment that a set of national scientific standards should be established to ensure the valid presentation of forensic analysis. Neufeld called the report "a major breakthrough toward ensuring that so-called scientific evidence in criminal cases is solid, validated and reliable.""
||Truth in Justice

The island nation of Rhodes was an immensely successful commercial power of the Aegean. They strategically sided with Athens but, when in jeopardy, negotiated favorable surrenders to Sparta, Alexander the Great, and Demetrios Poliorketes, allowing them to sustain at least some degree of independence based on neutrality. Rhodes was named for the rose, depicted on the reverse of this coin. A portrait of Helios, the sun god, wearing a crown of rays graces the obverse. This image was based upon the head of the great statue of Helios, better known as the Colossus of Rhodes, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. The Colossus memorialized the war with Demetrios Poliorketes. He unsuccessfully attacked the city for over a year, around 305-304 B.C. Eventually, a settlement was negotiated and Poliorketes abandoned his siege towers constructed from valuable timbers that the Rhodeans in turn sold off for shipbuilding. The proceeds from this sale were invested in the huge (105 ft.) bronze statue of Helios standing at the entrance of the harbor. While the famous statue served as a reminder of the city's fortitude during the siege and became a tourist attraction, it only stood until 227 B.C. when it was toppled by an earthquake.
How many hands have touched a coin in your pocket or your purse? What eras and lands have the coin traversed on its journey into our possession? As we reach into our pockets to pull out some change, we rarely hesitate to think of who touched the coin before us, or where the coin will venture to after us. More than money, coins are a symbol of the state that struck them, of a specific time and place, whether currency in the age we live or an artifact of a long forgotten empire. This ancient coin is more than an artifact; it is a memorial to the glories of Rhodes passed from the hands of civilization to civilization, from generation to generation. - (C.7323)

- Cooking Time: 0
- Servings: 0
- Here are some recipes I have collected over the years and I am thrilled to share them with you.
- There are some dangerous dog treats which can be fatal to dogs.
- Even if you're creating your own healthy dog treats, you would like to look at out for sure ingredients. Here's an inventory of toxic foods you would like to avoid.
- Chocolate is one among a lot of renowned toxic human food a dog will eat. Here may be a list of different toxic foods.
- *Is Garlic Healthy or Toxic for Dogs?
- Naturaldoghealthremedies.com claims that garlic boosts immunities, fights infection, enhances liver perform, lowers blood fats, and repels ticks and fleas, nevertheless cautions that giant doses given to dogs on a daily basis will cause oxidative injury to red blood cells resulting in Heinz-body anemia and even death. They additionally caution that puppies below the age of eight weeks, dogs scheduled for surgery, and people with pre-existing anemia mustn't be given garlic.
- Dr's Foster and Smith of peteducation.com are in agreement that garlic causes a breakdown of red blood cells in dogs though they permit that garlic in terribly tiny amounts in some industrial pet foods has not been shown to cause any issues. Their web site states that a toxic dose is unknown which cats are a lot of sensitive to garlic than dogs are.
- Wikipedia says that green or un-ripened tomatoes should not be included in your dog's diet as a result they contain ptomaine, that is harmful to our pets; however red tomatoes are fine.
- It says that moldy food may also create dangerous dog treats.
- Small balls, toys, and chicken or turkey bones will be choked on by dogs. Cooked bones also are too brittle for a dog to eat safely - it's safer to stay to raw bones.
- If your dog eats an excessive amount of food, obesity can develop which may be fatal.
- If you're thinking that you pet has been poisoned by one among the on top of foods, then call your vet or the Emergency Vet - particularly if he's vomiting or showing signs of lethargy.
- How sick he could get can relies on the amount ingested. My pet has had tiny amounts of onion and garlic and it hasn't caused any issues. He once additionally stole an After-Eight! Mint, once more - this was simply a tiny low quantity of chocolate therefore he was fine. However it will pay to stay an eye fixed out - and keep the incorrect style of dangerous ingredients out of reach.
- As well as these dangerous foods, there are different ingredients that will not be terribly healthy for your pet. Dog food allergies will be caused by things like wheat or diary product. And similar to humans - an excessive amount of sugar can create an overweight pet.
- Grapes and Raisins
- Macadamia nuts
- Seeds (such as apple seeds)
- Turkey skin
- Green or sprouting potato skins
- Apricot – Stone
- Apple – Seeds
- Cherry – Seeds
- Peach Stone
- There are voluminous safe foods which will be used to create simple homemade dog treats. A few things, like pumpkin for dogs will truly be a super food.
- It is simple to keep your pet safe and healthy once you recognize what to avoid. Safe and nutritious treats, served up with love, can invariably be appreciated!

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
What Is It?
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disorder that causes a variety of symptoms, including:
- Abdominal pain
- Diarrhea and/or constipation
The severity of the disorder varies from person to person. Some people experience symptoms that come and go and are just mildly annoying. Others have such severe daily bowel problems that IBS affects their ability to work, sleep and enjoy life.
In addition, symptoms may change over time. A person may have severe symptoms for several weeks and then feel well for months or even years.
Most people are never cured of IBS. However, the disorder is not related to any other disease. It does not develop into colitis. People with IBS do not have an increased risk of colon cancer.
IBS usually starts in early adulthood. It affects twice as many women as men. Approximately 10% to 20% of the population has IBS. But half of all people with the condition never seek medical care for their symptoms.
No one knows what causes IBS. Some studies suggest that the nerves of the colon may be much more sensitive than usual in people with IBS. The normal movement of food and gas through the colon causes pain, intestinal spasms and an irregular pattern of bowel movements.
Stress does not cause IBS. But stress can increase the frequency and severity of symptoms.
IBS has been called irritable colon, spastic colon, mucous colitis and functional bowel disease.
People with IBS may have some or all of these symptoms:
- Mild or severe abdominal pain, discomfort or cramping that usually goes away after a bowel movement
- Periods of diarrhea or constipation, or alternating between these two symptoms
- Bloating, gassiness or a feeling of having a distended abdomen
- Mucus in bowel movements
- Feeling as though a bowel movement is incomplete
Although the symptoms of IBS often change over time, people tend to develop their own pattern. For example, some people have mostly diarrhea, some have mostly constipation and others have abdominal pain without a major change in bowel movements.
There is no test for IBS. Your doctor will diagnose IBS if you have the typical symptoms and have been tested for other disorders that can cause similar symptoms.
Your doctor will ask about your medical history and symptoms. Your doctor will examine you, testing your abdomen for tenderness and feeling to determine whether internal organs are larger than normal. The doctor will check for fever or weight loss. If you have any of these signs, you likely have something other than IBS.
Depending on your medical history, your doctor may do tests to eliminate other diseases that may cause similar symptoms. These tests might include:
- Blood tests
- Stool sample, to check for blood or evidence of infection
- Sigmoidoscopy, in which a flexible, lighted tube with a tiny camera on the end is inserted into the rectum and up the left side of the colon
- Colonoscopy, in which a longer tube examines the entire colon
Your doctor may suggest that you stop eating or drinking certain foods for up to three weeks to determine if your diet is contributing to your symptoms. For example, your doctor may ask you to eliminate milk products if he or she suspects lactose intolerance.
IBS symptoms may be a daily problem throughout a person's life. Symptoms may come and go, lasting a day, a week or a month before disappearing. Dietary changes with or without medication may help to reduce the frequency or severity of symptoms.
Because no one knows what causes IBS, it is impossible to prevent the disorder. Once diagnosed with IBS, a person may be able to reduce the frequency and severity of symptoms by reducing stress or changing the diet.
Changing your diet may improve symptoms dramatically. It often takes a long time to discover what works well for you. And you may need to alter your original program if symptoms flare.
Keep track of the different foods you eat throughout the day. See which foods seem to make your symptoms worse. After you discover your particular trigger foods, eliminate them from your diet. Some common IBS trigger foods include:
- Cabbage, broccoli, kale, legumes and other gas-producing foods
- Dairy products
- Fatty foods, including whole milk, cream, cheese, butter, oils, meats and avocados
- Raw fruits
- Foods, gums and beverages that contain sorbitol, an artificial sweetener
The way you eat may help to create IBS symptoms. Eating large meals can cause cramping and diarrhea, so eating smaller meals more often may help some people with IBS. Eating quickly can cause you to swallow air, which can cause belching or gas.
Adding fiber to your diet, especially if constipation is one of your main symptoms, often helps to regulate your bowel movements and reduce abdominal discomfort. At first, fiber will increase the amount of gas in your system, so add fiber gradually. Over time, the body adjusts to the effects of fiber and the gassiness will decrease. Fruits, vegetables and whole-grain breads and cereals are good food sources of fiber. Your doctor may recommend a fiber supplement. Some experts believe that the fiber methylcellulose creates the least amount of gas, and brands of this fiber are often recommended for people with IBS. Psyllium is also a good source of fiber.
If your symptoms are not relieved after you eliminate trigger foods and add fiber, your doctor may prescribe medications.
For people that have frequent loose stools (diarrhea-predominant IBS), medication options include:
- Antidiarrheals -- loperamide (Imodium), diphenoxylate (Lomotil and other brand names)
- Antispasmodics to reduce cramping -- dicyclomine (Bentyl)
- Pain-reducing agents -- amitriptyline (Elavil), desipramine (Norpramin)
- Alosetron (Lotronex) is approved only for women with severe diarrhea-predominant IBS who have very severe diarrhea and have not responded to other treatments. To receive this drug, you must sign a form stating that you are aware of life-threatening complications, such as a blocked, ruptured or damaged bowel.
For people with constipation-predominant IBS, fiber and plenty of fluids are the mainstays of therapy. If medication is needed, your doctor may prescribe an osmotic laxative such as lactulose. A newer drug approved for women with persistent constipation is lubiprostone (Amitiza). Lubiprostone acts on the cells that line the inside of the intestines. The drug promotes increased fluid secretion into the intestine, making stool passage easier.
When To Call a Professional
It is useful for anyone with irritable bowel symptoms to discuss their symptoms with a doctor, so that diet, fiber and drug treatment strategies can be planned.
After you have been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome, contact your doctor if you have:
- An episode of severe symptoms
- Unexplained weight loss or fever
- Blood in your stool
- Abdominal pain that is accompanied by vomiting, dizziness or fainting
- Abdominal pain or diarrhea that awakens you from sleep
There is no cure for IBS. But most people can lessen the symptoms by making dietary changes, reducing stress and, if necessary, taking medication.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disorders
Office of Communications and Public Liaison
Building 31, Room 9A06
31 Center Drive, MSC 2560
Bethesda, MD 20892-2560
American College of Gastroenterology (ACG)
P.O. Box 342260
Bethesda, MD 20827-2260
American Gastroenterological Association
4930 Del Ray Ave.
Bethesda, MD 20814

Given that this is the first U.S. presidential election since apps have made their way onto most electronic devices, you might think there would be dozens of worthwhile products available on the topic designed for students. Think again.
Sure, there are plenty of apps devoted to November’s election, there just aren’t that many that explain the process to those too young to cast a ballot. Those listed here should get the conversation rolling about how we elect a President and the men who have held that the office.
For older students look for apps produced by mainstream media outlets with a focus on election coverage. Start with the major newspapers. In addition to hourly news updates, The Washington Post’s W P Politics includes “campaign files,” an interactive polling map, and a fact checker that “accesses the veracity of candidates’ statements,” awarding “one to four Pinocchios” when deemed necessary. Viewers can also watch videos of candidate’s ads—these alone will generate some lively classroom conversations. It doesn’t get much better than this one, and it’s available for free.
The NY Times Election 2012 (The New York Times) app promises all readers access to a half dozen “top” news stories. However, only subscribers can view candidate pages and videos and photos from the campaign trail, read the latest polling news, and receive live election results. High school students who love politics are probably already following Mike Allen’s Politico Playbook (Politico) on their iPhones or iPads. Right now the daily news from this Washington insider is full of election-related coverage, and it’s all for free.
To drive home discussions about the Electoral College consider downloading the Electoral-Vote.com (Dubbele.com; Gr 9 Up; Free) app, which will bring users to the website. The site, which has been tracking elections for a number of years, includes detailed maps and commentary (sometimes snarky) on the presidential and senate races. It includes current poll results, graphs, and news features, and links to articles from a range of periodicals and blogs. The 2012 Map: The Presidential Election App is a better choice for younger students (Cory Renzella; Gr 5-9; $1.99), and it’s available in 12 languages. The projected electoral map is easy-to-read and there are daily updates and brief notes on where current presidential polls are in place. Users can create maps with their own Electoral College projections and share them with friends via Facebook, Twitter, and email. As they scroll through the archive of electoral maps from 1789 through 2008 they’ll see the borders of the country change, watch as third parties pop up, discover the shrunken map of 1864, and read the embedded notes on each election. For a simple Electoral College map that can be manipulated for classroom use Election Map 2012 (Teq; Gr 4 Up; $1.99) will also work. A look at the last four election maps is included.
Most of the apps for younger students feature lists of the men who have held the office of Chief Executive and provide a few facts about each of them. U.S. Presidents (Encyclopaedia Britannica/MEDL Mobile; Gr 3-6; $1.99) opens with a rendition of “Hail to the Chief” and a photo of President Barack Obama. Beyond this screen viewers can access a page of images of the presidents in chronological order. A tap to any portrait brings up information on the subject along with additional tabs leading to facts about that president’s vice president, First Lady, and birth date, and a bit of trivia. Information on national landmarks, and the lyrics of “Hail to the Chief” are also provided. After exploring the app viewers can take a quiz to test their knowledge of presidential facts answering such questions as “Who was the first U.S. president to be elected with no prior political experience?” and “Who was the only president to serve two terms that weren’t back to back?”
The “clear interface” of The American Presidents and First Ladies (Multieducator, Inc.; Gr 4-8; $.99) allows users to sort the lists of leaders and their spouses either alphabetically or chronologically. Each entry includes personal facts, along with a page of information on the president’s early years, family, election, “presidential promises.” The full text of each man’s inaugural text is also included. Information on the First Ladies includes the years before and after each woman’s spouse was in office. Highlights of the app are the embedded videos, which include photos and audio clips. Unfortunately, some out-of-date information and typos mar the overall presentation.
What Does the President Look Like? (Kane Miller; Gr 4-8; $2.99 ), based on the book by Jane Hampton Cook and illustrated by Adam Ziskie, takes a different approach to presidential history. It offers a visual survey of the men who have held that office, along the way providing “succinct history of visual media, from portrait making through digital imaging.” Here’s what our reviewer, Erin Sehorn, had to say about the app’s options: “The “timeline” chronicles major events in presidential history, as well as the technological evolution of photographs, movies, television, and the Internet. On each page, glowing stars allow users to learn more about the technological advances of presidential image making through pop-up pictures, early political cartoons, and newsreel footage. “Resources” links to the websites used as source material. There are a few glitches—for example, in the “Gallery” portraits appear only briefly, making it difficult to study an image. Overall, though, kids will enjoy this production.”
Our youngest students may not know the ins and outs of how someone makes it into the White House, but they do know that a visit to that famous abode is cause for excitement. While conversation of the election swirls around them, share Marc Brown’s Arthur Meets the President (ScrollMotion, Inc.; $2.99), based on the author’s picture book. In this story, the aardvark’s essay on “How I Can Help Make America Great” wins him and his classmates a trip to the White House to meet the president. En route the characters (and viewers) see and learn about a few other famous Washington, DC landmarks, and perhaps, take a moment to ponder what their contribution to our country might be.
Eds. note: After a brief hiatus during the transition to our new website, our app reviews are back. —moving from School Library Journal’s blog roll into a column, and pushing out in our Extra Helping enewsletter. Archived reviews can be found on the SLJ website under “Blogs and Columns.” However, to ensure you receive all of our postings, be sure to add “Touch and Go” to your RSS feed.
This article was featured in School Library Journal's Extra Helping enewsletter. Subscribe today to have more articles like this delivered to your inbox for free.

EAU CLAIRE, Wis. — David Ciresi, M.D., describes himself as a “safety fanatic.” The trauma surgeon at Mayo Clinic Health System in Eau Claire, a Level II Trauma Center, also is an avid bow hunter.
Because of his job, Dr. Ciresi and his colleagues will see about 10 patients a year with major injuries related to tree stands — head or spinal cord injury, broken bones or hypothermia.
“All these things are 100 percent preventable,” Dr. Ciresi said.
So, Dr. Ciresi filmed a tree stand safety video, posted on YouTube, to offer tips to hunters, www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bhg58pMNxLM.
The video follows Dr. Ciresi in the woods to show how to use a five-point harness, which holds hunters from below as well as from above, as opposed to using a strap across the chest.
“Don’t think it won’t happen to you,” Dr. Ciresi said of potential tree stand falls. “The only way to protect yourself is to prepare ahead of time.”
Besides using a harness, other hunter safety tips include:
• Tell someone where you’re going: Draw a map if you’re hunting somewhere unfamiliar to them.
• Carry global positioning system (GPS) navigation and a cell phone: Technology can be helpful to lost or injured hunters but may not always work in the woods. Injuries can limit hunters’ ability to use their arms or legs, so relying solely on a cell phone to call for help is not sufficient.
• Keep alert: Staying up late or drinking to excess the night before a hunt can lead to injury.
• Watch the weather: Be aware of conditions. A snow-covered tree stand, for example, can lead to a fall.
• Know your limitations: If you’re too heavy or too weak, a tree stand may not be appropriate for you. A ground blind can be as effective for hunting as a treestand.
With planning and precaution, hunters can enjoy their time outdoors, Dr. Ciresi said. “Have fun, be safe and good luck hunting.”
# # #
Mayo Clinic Health System consists of Mayo-owned clinics, hospitals and other health care facilities that serve the health care needs of people in 70 communities in Iowa, Minnesota and Wisconsin. The community-based providers, paired with the resources and expertise of Mayo Clinic, enable patients in the region to receive the highest-quality health care close to home.

|Born||15 Jun 1880|
|Died||5 Jan 1947|
Contributor: C. Peter Chen
Osami Nagano was born in 1880. As a naval officer, he established a strong record in administration. He studied in the United States during the 1910s and was naval attaché to the US between 1920 and 1923. In Dec 1935, he represented Japan as the chief delegate at the Second London Naval Conference. Between May 1936 and Jun 1937 he was the Navy Minister under Prime Minister Koki Hirota. In Dec 1937, he was named commander in chief of the First Fleet and the Combined Fleet. From Apr 1941 to Feb 1944, he was chief of the Navy General Staff. Although he was a proponent of a southward expansion, he was against a war against the United States; he deduced that if even Japan was to take over British and Dutch colonies in Asia, the isolationist United States still would not enter the war against Japan, leaving Japan to establish her empire without the interference from the industrial giant. However, like he had done so a number of times before, he entrusted too much of strategic planning to Isoroku Yamamoto and his staff officers, essentially giving away control of the entire navy to the Combined Fleet. Yamamoto, although not a supporter of a war against the United States either, dutifully accepted his orders and led the Japanese Navy into the great attack at Pearl Harbor that brought the US into war. Nagano essentially lost real control of the navy after Pearl Harbor; Yamamoto had, in effect, gone as far as to tell Nagano "not to interfere too much and thus set a bad precedent in the navy." From Feb 1944 to the end of the war, he was Emperor Showa's personal naval advisor.
After the war, Nagano was among the highest ranked officers interrogated by United States naval officers. He was described as "thoroughly cooperative", "keenly alert", "intelligent", and "anxious to develop American friendship". He was subsequently tried as a war criminal, but died in 1947 before the trial ended.
Sources: Interrogation of Japanese Officials, Nihon Kaigun, Shattered Sword.
Osami Nagano Timeline
|2 Feb 1937||Osami Nagano was named the commander-in-chief of the Japanese Navy Combined Fleet.|
» Third London Naval Conference
» Tokyo Trial and Other Trials Against Japan
» Interrogation Nav 80, Fleet Admiral Osami Nagano
Advertise on ww2db.com
- » 725 biographies
- » 302 events
- » 26816 timeline entries
- » 665 ships
- » 300 aircraft models
- » 163 vehicle models
- » 254 weapon models
- » 64 historical documents
- » 282 book reviews
- » 209 maps
- » 16063 photos, 1464 in color
George Patton, 31 May 1944

I am a newby taking my first Java class. I have to create an Applet of a working Calculator. So far, all I know how to do is create buttons and JTextArea. I don't know how to set up any functionality among the components. I don't even know which is better to use; JTextField or TextArea. If anyone out there can help, I will be happy to wash your car and maybe even do some free yard work if you could give me some pointers. Thanks.
Joined: Jan 29, 2003
Hi, welcome to the ranch!
This is a big subject area, but fortunately Sun has pretty good tutorials on almost everything Java. See if the Swing Tutorial covers the right kinds of things.
For adding functionality to the widgets, what you're looking for is probably in the EventListener and ActionListener family. You add these objects to your UI components and Swing calls them when interesting things like mouse clicks and keystrokes happen.
If this seems like the right direction, you might wander over to the Swing forum with further questions. [ July 05, 2007: Message edited by: Stan James ]
A good question is never answered. It is not a bolt to be tightened into place but a seed to be planted and to bear more seed toward the hope of greening the landscape of the idea. John Ciardi
Joined: Jun 04, 2007
Thanks for the help. I know how to set up the event handlers (sorry I didn't mention that). I guess I need to figure out which events to use. I have managed to get numbers to show up in the JTextArea, but I don't know how to get any results from the numbers.

- science (n.)
- c.1300, "knowledge (of something) acquired by study," also "a particular branch of knowledge," from Old French science, from Latin scientia "knowledge," from sciens (genitive scientis), present participle of scire "to know," probably originally "to separate one thing from another, to distinguish," related to scindere "to cut, divide," from PIE root *skei- (cf. Greek skhizein "to split, rend, cleave," Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan "to divide, separate;" see shed (v.)).
Science, since people must do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to "The Mismeasure of Man," 1981]
Modern sense of "non-arts studies" is attested from 1670s. The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for practical applications and art for applications of skill. Main modern (restricted) sense of "body of regular or methodical observations or propositions ... concerning any subject or speculation" is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was called philosophy. To blind (someone) with science "confuse by the use of big words or complex explanations" is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase from Australia and New Zealand.

(You can find in this post the answers to the Questions C-06, C-o7 and C-O8)
As discussed in a former post Polysaccharides are carbohydrates formed by more than 9 monosaccharides linked by glycosidic bonds.
When they are formed by the same kind of monosaccharides, they are called homopolysaccharides, like starch, glycogen and cellulose, formed each of them by hundreds of molecules of glucose linked by glycosidic linkages.
If the polysaccharides molecules are formed by different kinds of monosaccharides, they are considered heteropolysaccharides. Hyaluronic acid, formed by thousands of alternative units of N-acetyl glucosamine and glucuronic acid, is an example of heteropolysaccharide.
Cellulose is a linear polymer of D-glucose residues bonded by b(1, 4)-O-glycosidic linkages. It is the most abundant carbohydrate in nature.
It is formed by glucose units, linked by Beta-1, 4 O-glycosidic linkages. We can say then that, if we consider the kind of linkage, the repeating unit in cellulose is cellobiose, the disaccharide formed by two molecules of glucose linked by Beta-D-O glycosidic bonds, (that is why some text books say that the monomer in cellulose is cellobiose).
The long fibers of cellulose are held together by intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonding continues in the same plane with other chains as well as in planes above and below this plane to form strong, fibrous bundles. It made cellulose very appropriate for its structural function in plants
Since cellulose is formed by glucose molecules, it can be a source of energy for certain species. The lack in human beings of appropriate enzymes for digesting cellulose make this polysaccharide unsuitable for human nutrition (Have you though about how hunger in the world could disappear if we had enzymes for digesting cellulose?). Cellulose and derivatives are used as a component of laxatives for humans.
Starch is the second most abundant carbohydrate in nature.
The biological functions include, in plants, the main way of storage of sugar, and consequently, of energetic sources; in humans, the first supply of glucose on diet (Answer to C-O7)
Starch is not really a molecule, but a grain formed by two different kinds of molecules: Amylose and Amylopectin
Amylose is a linear molecule formed by glucose units linked by alpha-1, 4 O glycosidic linkages. Taking in account the kind of linkage we can say that the repeating unit in amylose is maltose. (It explains that some books indicate that the monomeric unit in amylose is maltose).
Amylose molecule is helicoidal
Amylopectin is the second type of molecule that forms starch. It is a branched molecule, formed also by glucose. Amylopectin contains D-glucose residues bonded together by a(1, 4)-O-glycosidic linkages with branching through a(1 6)-O-glycosidic linkages.
The disaccharides that can be obtained from the digestion of amylopectin are maltose and isomaltose.
Amylopectin shows a branch each 24-30 units of glucose,
The structure of glycogen is very similar to amylopectin but more branched, with one branch every 8 to 12 glucose unit
Glycogen is the way in which glucose is stored in animals. Glycogen is stored mainly in liver (to release glucose to blood when necessary) and in muscle, where it is used as a reserve of energy for muscular contraction (Answer to C-o8)
Heteropolysaccarides contain two or more different kind of monosaccharides. Usually they provide extracellular support for organisms of all kingdoms: the bacteria cell envelope, or the matrix that holds individual cells together in animal tissues, and provides protection, shape and support to cells, tissues and organs.
Heteropolysaccharides provide extracellular support to very different organisms, from bacteria to humans; together with fibrous proteins, like collagen, elastin, fibronectin, laminin and others, heteropolysaccharides are the most important components of the extracellular matrix. Hyaluronic acid, condroitin sulfates and dermatan sulfates are important heteropolysaccharides in the extracellular matrix. These heteropolysaccharides usually are formed by the repetition of a disaccharide unit of an aminosugar and an acid sugar.
A typical example
Other common constituents are sulfate groups linked to certain monosaccharides. Usually heteropolysaccharides are associated with proteins forming proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans or mucopolysaccharides (since they are abundant in mucous secretions). As a group, they perform diverse functions: structural, water metabolism regulation (as a reservoir of water), cellular cement, biological sieve, biological lubricant, docking sites for growth factors, among other functions.
Established specific functions of some glycosaminoglycans are:
Hyaluronic Acid (Hyaluronate): It is a lubricant in the synovial fluid of joints,
give consistency to vitreous humor, contributes to tensile strength and elasticity of cartilages and tendons (Answer to C-O6)
Chondroitin Sulfates: contributes to tensile strength and elasticity of cartilages, tendons, ligaments and walls of aorta.
Dermatan sulfate (former chondroitin sulfate B) is found mainly in skin, but also is in vessels, heart, lungs. It may be related to coagulation and vascular diseases and other conditions.
Keratan sulfate: Present in cornea, cartilage bone and a variety of other structures as nails and hair.
It is a potent natural anticoagulant produced in the Mast Cells that causes antithrombin bind to thrombin and produce inhibition of blood coagulation.
Glycosaminoglycans are synthesized in the ER and Golgi. They are degraded by lysosomal hydrolases. A deficiency of one of the hydrolases results in a mucopolysaccharidosis. These are hereditary disorders in which glycosaminoglycans accumulate in tissues, causing symptoms such as skeletal and extracellular matrix deformities, and mental retardation.
Examples of these genetic diseases are Hunter and Hurler syndromes.
These diseases, caused by different enzyme deficits, are characterized by physical deformities, mental retardation and disturbances in the degradation of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate.

Other Dairy Products
( Originally Published 1939 )
It has been known for a long time that babies fed with boiled milk thrived better than those fed with regular milk. It was supposed that this improved quality lay in the destruction of pathogenic organisms. Gradually a wealth of data has been accumulating which shows that boiling or other treatment of milk increases its digestibility. After Buckley had showed that the physical nature of the curd of milk is important in determining the food value of milk,' and Ladd had published some chemical data that showed that homogenized milk produced a soft curd in the infant's stomach and was similar to breast milk in this respect,' Washburn and Jones showed that homogenization of milk produced curds which were much more flocculent and friable than those of regular milk, although this property was not reflected in any improved nutrition of his experimental animals, young pigs. The recent work of Hill is credited with giving this subject of the digestive quality of milk an emphasis which has found important application in the commercial production of soft curd milk. Interest has been further stimulated competitively by reason of the inroads that the evaporated milk industry has made into the bottled trade, largely by reason of the superior properties of the canned product in infant feeding. This has led to laboratory activity directed toward devising processes for imparting soft curd properties and for measuring curd hardness rather than toward ascertaining to what extent, if any, these treatments actually improve the digestibility of the milk. The scientific literature leaves the subject in a very con-fused state. Whatever improved digestibility there is seems to result entirely from the speeding of the passage of the milk from the stomach and not from any increased food value or degree of assimilation.' The whole subject is excellently reviewed by Doan in the Journal of Dairy Science, 21, 739-756 (1938).
NATURAL SOFT-CURD MILK
Hill found that the milk of different cows possessed unequal digestibility, and that many infants could tolerate milk from certain cows but not that from others. In general, this improved tolerance was associated with milk of relatively low total solids content, al-though this relationship did not seem to be exclusively specific. Soft-curd milk was produced by cows of different breeds and was fairly uniform over the lactation period of a given cow. This property enabled herdsmen to select cows for the regular production of this kind of milk.
Soft-curd milk is more rapidly digested by humans, calves, and rats, and leaves the stomach more quickly than regular milks At the same time, soft-curd milk has a lower content of total solids and a smaller calorific value.
It has been observed that cows suffering with mastitis produce a soft-curd milk. This has led many persons to think that all soft-curd milk is pathologic. Such a belief is erroneous. Soft-curd milk is actually under more stringent control than regular milk because its production is mostly, if not entirely, limited to Grade A and certified herds. However, on account of the widespread prevalence of sub-clinical mastitis, it is recommended that the presence of udder infections be tested for when the curd tension is determined.
Elias- showed 10 that soft-curd milk gave curds in the stomach similar to those of boiled milk. Espe and Dye reported that doubling the curd tension increased the length of the digestive period from 30 to 65 percent, and that boiling markedly lowered the curd tension. Welch and Doan showed that curd tension was greater in milk of high casein content, and that equalization of casein content by dilution with water caused both the curd tension and differences in rates of digestion largely to disappear, although the casein content might exercise only a minor role in the rate of digestion if the curd is artificially softened by heating, homogenization, and other means.
ARTIFICIAL SOFT-CURD MILK
Soft-curd by homogenization. Softness of curd can be imparted to a milk by homogenizing it. This procedure consists in pumping milk under very great pressure through a special valve with small clearance so that the, butterfat globules are broken up and uniformly distributed. The homogenization of skimmed milk does not impart soft-curd properties; at least about 1 percent of butterfat or other oil must be present. Chocolate milk is a soft-curd milk. Therefore, it seems that the imparting of soft-curd properties by mechanical means is a function of the degree of dispersion of discrete particles whereby the curd is mechanically prevented from setting into a solid homogeneous mass. Feeding experiments on rats showed that this homogenized soft-curd milk was digested just about as quickly as boiled milk or natural soft-curd milk. Letters patent 12 have been issued to cover the production of soft-curd milk by homogenization, although the process seems to have been practiced by milk companies for many years previously to the granting of the patent.
The difficulty of controlling exactly the effectiveness of the homogenizing machine, together with the variability in the composition or physical nature of the milk, particularly the butterfat, precludes the determination of the most efficient temperatures and pressures. Experience has taught that the curd of a given milk cannot be softened beyond a certain point, regardless of the pressure used, and on the other hand, too light a pressure does not insure permanency to the imparted curd softness. In industrial practice, consistent results can be obtained when milk is homogenized at pressures of about 2500 to 3000 pounds per square inch at a temperature of about 145° F. This softens the curd to a tension of about 30 grams, or reduces the curd tension of average market milk about 50 percent.
The homogenization of milk must be carefully conducted if a satisfactory product is to be obtained. Trout and his associates found 13 that some milk upon homogenization developed rancidity within 15 minutes after treatment. This effect seemed to be caused by a lipolytic enzyme which could be inactivated at temperatures of pasteurization. Accordingly, this off-flavor can be prevented by pasteurizing the milk before or immediately after homogenization. The flavor of the finished product is generally considered to be slightly better if pasteurization precedes homogenization, but health officers are inclined to require pasteurization to come last.
Homogenized milk, unless the milk was initially of high quality, may exhibit a smudgy yellow or gray sediment in the bottom of the bottle. It is too finely divided to be revealed on a sediment disc. Babcock 14 reported that it consists largely of leucocytes, epithelial cells, and some finely divided dirt. Charles and Sommer 15 state that sediment may occur in milk of the highest sanitary quality and may come from a healthy udder. It is not seen in unhomogenized milk because the rising of the fat globules into the cream layer sweeps this light material upward. Clarification by centrifugal clarifying ma-chines will remove it.
Soft-curd properties, artificially imparted to milk by homogenization, were studied by Anthony on two adult males who possessed the unusual ability to regurgitate at will without distress. This enabled them to drink the milk, hold it in their stomachs for 30 minutes, and then return it without the aid of a stomach pump or an emetic. These experiments showed that the tests on curd strength made in vitro and determined with the curd knife reasonably evaluated the nature of the curd in the human stomach (except in the case of mineral modified milk). The curd particles of breast milk were minute and soft, and were so finely divided that they could not be separated from the accompanying juices with a 20-mesh screen. On cows' milk, when the curd tension (by laboratory curd-knife technic) was high, the regurgitation specimens of curd in every case were large and leathery. When the readings were low, the curd particles were small and soft. Breast milk registered 0 curd tension, natural cows' milk 50-100 grams, and homogenized milk (processed at 3500 pounds) 15 grams. The patients reported that the milk tasted better (because of the minute division of the milkfat globules) and gave less distress.
However, no digestive advantage is reported by some other investigators who worked on samples in vitro and on experimental animals. The latter work is not so impressive as clinical studies but may be better controlled. Much more fundamental and clinical re-search is necessary before the value of this processing is substantiated.
Soft curd by sonic vibration. A modification of the homogenizing process for the production of soft-curd milk has been developed by subjecting milk to intense sonic vibration. Electromagnetic oscillators, somewhat similar to those used in submarine communications, are constructed to allow the passage of milk in a thin film between the "anvil" and the vibrating diaphragm. Sonic vibration acts directly on the butterfat of the milk to cause a more complete dispersion. The reduction of curd tension is a function of the number of fat particles, and not of the actual fat concentration. A direct relationship seems to exist between the degree of fat dispersion-and the degree of curd-tension reduction. Inasmuch as only a small proportion of the total fat in milk need be finely subdivided to reduce the curd tension, it is possible to produce soft curd by vibration without destroying the cream volume (cream line).
Commercial homogenization. The practice of homogenizing market milk is gradually extending. It is quite general in parts of Canada, and is increasing irregularly in the United States. Fifteen states have no regulations for the control of homogenized milk, 19 states and the District of Columbia permit its sale if properly labeled, 2 states have taken no action but look upon it with disfavor, and 4 states prohibit its sale. It is a useful practice for the treatment of milk which is to be consumed in restaurants, institutions, or wherever the sale of bulk milk introduces the likelihood that the consumer may be served a portion from which a substantial part of the butterfat has separated. Tracy states that the unpopularity of homogenized milk in the past has been due largely to the emphasis placed on the cream line as a measure of the value of a milk, and to the unfriendly attitude of some regulatory officials who felt that homogenization might encourage fraudulent practices. About one-third of the milk-route customers of the University of Illinois changed to this milk for the following reasons: it looked and tasted better; no cream adhered to the bottle cap; no mixing was required; it tasted better for breakfast foods; it removed the temptation to abstract cream; it was easier to prepare for infant feeding; it did not allow rising of cream to top of glass in refrigerator; it made better milk drinks; it tasted better to children; it was more easily digested by infants; and it did not churn out on freezing.
Soft curd by base exchange. Hard waters are softened by the zeolite or base-exchange method, whereby the percolation of water through a bed of zeolite (a sodium-aluminum silicate) effects an ex-change of sodium and calcium. As applied to milk, sodium from the zeolite replaces soluble calcium from the milk. The milk is first acidified to about 0.3 percent as lactic acid (with a dilute nitric acid solution) and then percolated at 64° F. over a granular column of zeolite. During the process, the pH is adjusted to that of ordinary cows' milk (about 6.50), and the acidity is reduced to about 0.15 per-cent as lactic acid. This process is reported 22 to change the taste, appearance, and other qualities very little from those of regular milk. The cream line is practically the same as in pasteurized milk. Bacteria counts are said to be lowered by the filtering effect of the pass-age of the milk through the zeolite bed.
The Hill method cannot be used to measure the curd tension by this process because the Hill technic introduces about ten times as much soluble calcium into 100 milliliters of milk as is removed by the base-exchange treatment. Moreover, it is considered more desirable to use a method which more closely simulates gastric digestion. Such a method has been developed by Miller.
Hess, Poncher, and Woodward 24 studied the nutritional effects of such a milk on an infant on a metabolism frame. They report that, in spite of the decrease of the percentage content of total calcium and phosphorus, 100 milliliters of such milk per kilogram of body weight kept a normal growing infant in a positive calcium and phosphorus balance during the entire time of feeding.
Soft curd by enzymic action. Milk can be given soft-curd properties within a range of 20 to 30 grams by the addition of pancreatic extract, concentrated in the proportion of 1 part of the powder to 10,000 parts of milk. The milk containing the enzyme is heated at a temperature of 42° C. (108° F.) for 15 minutes, and then is pasteurized in the regular way. The preliminary heating brings about a partial digestion of the curd, and the pasteurization inactivates most of the enzyme. The mineral content, the protein, and the formol titration values remain substantially unchanged.
Standards of quality. The quality of curd is usually determined by the Hill test, or some modification of it. Although natural milks may give a range of reading on the scale from 15 to 200 grams of tension, the average of numerous milk supplies has been found to be about 60-70. The American Association of Medical Milk Commissions 27 specifies that a soft-curd milk must show a curd tension be-low 30 grams, determined at least twice at an interval of 1 to 5 days before it can be claimed to be a soft-curd milk, and that the test must be repeated at monthly intervals thereafter.
Determination of curd tension. Hill's method for determining the characteristics of milk curd is based on the measurement of the degree of toughness of the curd which is coagulated by pepsin in calcium chloride solution. The measurement is the indicated pull in grams necessary for a special knife to cut through the coagulated curd. The knife consists of several radial horizontal blades soldered at right angles to an upright slender rod. This knife is placed in a jar containing 100 milliliters of the milk to be tested. A coagulating solution of scale pepsin and calcium chloride is then added. This sets the curd around the knife. The knife is then hooked to a spring balance, and its pull as it cuts upward through the curd is read directly from the dial.
Caulfield and Riddell have shown that it is expedient to make each determination in triplicate, and that temperature of reaction and time interval between the addition of coagulant and cutting of the curd must be kept constant. Miller 23 has modified this method by substituting an acid pepsin solution for the pepsin-calcium chloride solution. The measurement of toughness of curd by this method substantially parallels the digestibility of the milk by animals. See also the method of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, and that of the American Dairy Science Association reported supra by Doan.
Determination of butterfat. Authorities are not in agreement as to the effect of homogenization on the accuracy of the butterfat de-termination by the Babcock method. Babcock found that in every case the homogenized milk averaged in fat about 0.1 percent lower than the same milk before it was homogenized. On the other hand, Tracy' states that homogenized milk can be tested satisfactorily by the Babcock method if both the acid and milk are at about 70° F., if the acid is added in small portions, if slightly less acid (1.5 milli-liters) is used, and if the solution is shaken well after each addition of acid.
Microbiological examination. Inasmuch as natural soft curd has been associated with mastitis, it is advisable in the interest of sanitation and wholesomeness to examine samples of natural soft-curd milk for the presence of mastitis organisms.
1. S. S. BucKLEY, Maryland Agr. Exp. Sta. Bul. 184, 1914.
2. M. LADD, Boston Med. and Surg. J., 173, 13 (1915).
3. R. M. WASHBURN and C. H. JONES, Vermont Agr. Exp. Bul. 195, 1916.
4. R. L. HILL, Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bul. 207, 1928; Circular 101, 1933.
5. Council on Foods, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 108, 2040, 2122 (1937).
6. F. J. DoAN and R. C. WELCH, Pennsylvania State College Agr. Exp. Sta. But. 312, 1934. See also F. J. DoAN and C. C. FLORA, ibid., 380, 1939.
7. H. C. HANSEN, D. R. THEOPHILUS, F. W. ATKESON, and E. M. GILDow,
J. Dairy Sci., 17, 257 (1934).
8. R. C. WELCH and F. J. DoAN, Milk Plant Monthly, 22 (11) 30 (1933).
9. W. V. HALVERSEN, V. A. CHERRINGTON, and H. C. HANSEN, J. Dairy Sci., 17, 281 (1934).
10. H. L. ELIAS, Am. J. Diseases Children, 44, 296 (1932).
11. D. L. EsPE and J. A. DYE, ibid., 43, 62 (1932).
12. R. FLUCKIOER, U. S. Patent 1,973,145, Sept. 11, 1934.
13. G. M. Tamil, C. P. HALLORAN, and I. GouLD, Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 145, 1935.
14. C. J. BARCOCK, U. S. Dept. Agr. Tech. Bul. 438, 1934.
15. D. A. CHARLES and H. H. SOMMER, Milk Plant Monthly, 24, 26, 32 (1935).
16. G. E. ANTHONY, The Bulletin (official publication of the Genesee County Medical Society), 9, March 4 (1936).
17. L. A. CHAMBERS, J. Dairy Sci., 19, 29 (1936).
18. Milk Dealer, 25, 36 (1936).
19. R. H. TRACY, Milk Plant Monthly, 24, 28 (1935).
20. U. S. Patent 1,954,769, assigned to M. & R. Dietetic Laboratories, Inc.
21. J. F. LYMAN, E. H. BROWNE, and H. E. OTTING, Ind. Eng. Chem., 25, 1297 (1933). Also see Milk Plant Monthly, January, 1934, p. 37.
22. H. E. OTTING and J. J. QuILLIGAN, Milk Dealer, 23, 36 (1934).
23. D. MILLER, J. Dairy Sci., 18, 259 (1935).
24. J. H. HESS, H. G. PONCHER, and H. WOODWARD, Am. J. Diseases Children, 48, 1058 (1934).
25. V. CONQUEST, A. W. TURNER, and H. J. REYNOLDS, J. Dairy Sci., 21, 361 (1938).
26. R. L. HILL, ibid., 6, 509 (1923).
27. Methods and Standards for the Production of Certified Milk, Am. Assoc. Med. Milk Commissions, New York, 1936.
28. W. J. CAULFIELD and W. H. RIDDELL, J. Dairy Sci., 17, 791 (1934).
29. Chief of Bureau of Dairy Industry, 1938, J. Milk Technol., 2, 48 (1939).
30. Curd Tension Committee. Rept. Annual Meeting Amer. Dairy Sci. Assoc.,
31. P. H. TRACY, Milk Dealer, 25, 30, 60 (1936).

- Health Library
- PetMD U
|8 Common Snacks That Will Prompt a Portly Pet||Overweight Pets: Addressing the Epidemic||How to Care for Senior Pets||10 Simple Ways to Help Your Overweight Dog|
|Six Signs it’s Time to Change Your Pet’s Food||Top 5 Common Pet Owner Mistakes||Pet Nutrition in People Terms: Weight Gain||How to Choose the Best Dog Food|
|8 Best Hiking Trails for Dogs||5 Ways to Get Your Cat with Mobility Issues Moving||5 Ways to Get Your Dog with Mobility Issues Moving||5 Exercise Tips for Arthritic Cats|
|Top Ten 'Small Breed' Dogs||Top Ten Dogs for Kids||If Your Pet Had Thumbs...||Top Five Pet Poisons in Your Purse|
|Ten Common Poisonous Plants for Cats||Does My Cat Have Ticks?||Top Ten Reasons to Hug your Cat||7 Ways Cats Are Not Small Dogs|
Selecting a dog food with the proper balance of necessary nutrients from healthy ingredients is important for your dog’s well being. As you will see while reviewing MyBowl, minerals are one essential class of nutrients that must be included in a healthy, balanced diet. Minerals are crucial for the proper development and function of your dog’s body. Specific minerals must be present in a dog food in the right amounts to provide optimal health.
Minerals work together to coordinate body functions and maintain normal activities. While not providing enough of certain minerals is a concern, oversupplementation can also cause problems. Pet food manufacturers keep a close eye on just how much of each and every mineral is used in a dog food. Minerals used must also be able to survive processing and storage and they must also be of good quality and easily absorbed by the dog.
Many essential minerals are provided by common fruits, vegetables, meats and whole grains. These ingredients are used in many high quality products on the shelves today. The bulk of the minerals used in pet foods typically come in pre-combined powdered mixes. It is not reasonable to source minerals only from raw ingredients because they are less likely to survive processing. This is why you will see many chemical names on a bag of dog food.
Macrominerals include calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, sodium, chloride, potassium and sulfur. Calcium and phosphorus are very important macrominerals. A deficiency in either of these minerals can lead to bone deformities or weakness. Fractures can easily result in animals with calcium and phosphorus deficiencies. In young animals, oversupplementation of these minerals can lead to abnormal growth and development, especially in large breed dogs. Calcium and phosphorus are also essential for blood coagulation, muscle growth and nervous system function.
Magnesium works in harmony with calcium and phosphorus. Sodium and chloride work together to control the balance of fluid in the body. Imbalances of sodium and/or chloride can result in hair loss, fatigue, dehydration and even paralysis. Potassium is similar to sodium and chloride. Without adequate potassium the heart will not be able to beat normally. Sulfur is important in maintenance of hair, skin and nails. It also assists wound healing and detoxifies the body.
Even though they are only needed in extremely small amounts, trace minerals are essential in a healthy, balanced dog food. Common trace minerals include iron, zinc, copper, iodine, magnesium and selenium. Iron is important for oxygenation of red blood cells, energy production and immune system maintenance. Zinc supports the immune system, skin and hair coat health and aids in digestion. Other trace minerals include nickel, molybdenum, aluminum, silicon, chromium, boron, cobalt and fluorine.

The Working Group III Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation (SRREN) presents an assessment of the literature on the scientific, technological, environmental, economic and social aspects of the contribution of six renewable energy (RE) sources to the mitigation of climate change. It is intended to provide policy relevant information to governments, intergovernmental processes and other interested parties. This Summary for Policymakers provides an overview of the SRREN, summarizing the essential findings. The SRREN consists of 11 chapters. Chapter 1 sets the context for RE and climate change; Chapters 2 through 7 provide information on six RE technologies, and Chapters 8 through 11 address integrative issues. References to chapters and sections are indicated with corresponding chapter and section numbers in square brackets. An explanation of terms, acronyms and chemical symbols used in this SPM can be found in the glossary of the SRREN (Annex I).Conventions and methodologies for determining costs, primary energy and other topics of analysis can be found in Annex II and Annex III. This report communicates uncertainty where relevant.
You are here
Residential Photovoltaic Energy Systems in California: The Effect on Home Sales Prices (2011)

Here: have at it with a Swedish nuclear power plant simulator. Raise and lower the control rods, turn pumps on and off, open and close valves, just make sure you don’t blowup anything.
Go look at the Chernobyl tour to see what happens when you mess up.
The original page includes this context:
The control-room operators of the Kärnobyl nuclear power plant are telecommuting and are running the plant through the Web. However, the mean time between failure for the components of Kärnobyl is not great. Try to keep the reactor stable when component failures occur!
tags: chernobyl, control rods, control room, control room operators, mean time between failure, nuclear power, nuclear power plant, nuclear power plant operator, nuclear power plant simulation, nuclear power plant simulator, operator, power plant, power plant operator, pumps, reactor, simulation, simulator, telecommuting

[Embargoed for release until 12 p.m. ET Thursday, August 5, 2004, to coincide with publication in the journal Cell.]
BAD NEWS FOR PATHOGENIC BACTERIA: SCIENTISTS FIND PROTEIN ESSENTIAL FOR BACTERIAL SURVIVAL
COLUMBUS, Ohio – Further investigation into how the common organism Escherichia coli regulates gene expression has given scientists new ideas for designing antibiotics that might drastically reduce a bacterium's ability to resist drugs.
The findings, reported in the current issue of the journal Cell, suggest that bacteria rely on a key protein in order to properly regulate gene expression -- a process fundamental to cell survival.
This protein, called DksA, coordinates the expression of numerous genes in response to environmental signals.
Figuring out how to block DksA production in harmful bacteria may help scientists develop antibiotics that these bacteria are less likely to resist, said Irina Artsimovitch, a study co-author and an assistant professor of microbiology at Ohio State University.
The current study suggests that DksA is the glue that holds together two key components of bacterial gene expression – a molecule called ppGpp and an enzyme called RNA polymerase. RNA polymerase carries out transcription, the first step in gene expression.
In recent work, Artsimovitch and her colleagues discovered that ppGpp regulates gene expression by controlling amino acid production in bacteria. A cell makes ppGpp when amino acid levels are low, and ppGpp tells a cell to go dormant until amino acid levels return to normal.
"But there was something missing from the ppGpp story," Artsimovitch said. "We knew that ppGpp had a dramatic effect on gene expression, but for some reason that effect was drastically decreased when we conducted experiments in the laboratory."
Work by other researchers had suggested a link between DksA and the ppGpp-initiated stress response in the cell. But scientists couldn't agree on what role, if any, DksA played in the effect of ppGpp on gene expression.
Working with a team of researchers led by Dmitry Vassylyev, a scientist with the RIKEN research institution in Japan, Artsimovitch and Ohio State microbiologist Vladimir Svetlov solved high-resolution crystal structures of DksA.
Solving this structure meant that the researchers could at last determine just how DksA helped ppGpp hold fast to its target, RNA polymerase.
DksA uses something scientists call the "backdoor of gene expression," a cavity on the RNA polymerase molecule called the secondary channel. DksA squeezes through this narrow tunnel toward the site where ppGpp binds to the enzyme. Once here, the protein helps ppGpp stay bound to RNA polymerase.
"The secondary channel seems to be the hotspot for many interactions," Artsimovitch said. "It leads straight to the active site, and presents a confined area where many proteins and antibiotics that control transcription may bind to carry out their business."
Knowing what roles ppGpp and DksA play in how bacteria respond to stress and other physiological stimuli may help scientists create new antibacterial drugs that target mechanisms specific and unique to harmful bacteria.
"Conventional antibiotics aimed at killing bacteria also put immense pressure on bacteria to survive, and to ultimately develop resistance to these drugs," Artsimovitch said. "Forcing harmful bacteria into a stationary state by controlling ppGpp levels may be the way to circumvent the rise in antibiotic resistance.
"ppGpp and DksA are found in all bacteria, including harmful ones," she continued. "Using ppGpp-based compounds to shut down gene expression in harmful bacteria could help curb the spread of infections."
Grants from the National Institutes of Health and from RIKEN supported this research.
Artsimovitch, Vassylyev and Svetlov conducted the study with Anna Perederina, Marina Vassylyeva, Tahir Tahirov and Shigeyuki Yokoyama, all with RIKEN.

In employment, a young person is someone who is over the compulsory school age but under the age of 18. In England and Wales, a person is no longer of compulsory school age after the last Friday of June of the school year in which their 16th birthday occurs. In Scotland, pupils whose 16th birthday falls between 1 March and 30 September may not leave before the 31 May of that year. Pupils aged 16 on or between 1 October and the last day of February may not leave until the start of the Christmas holidays in that school year. In Northern Ireland, a person is no longer of compulsory school age after the 30th June of the school year in which their 16th birthday occurs.
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 (or Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2000) requires you to undertake a risk assessment before a young person starts work or work experience.
Try to look at your workplace from an adolescent's viewpoint. What dangers will they recognise? They may not be fully grown - will they find the workplace awkward and the tools too big?
In particular you should look at:
- How the workplace is laid out (and the particular site where they will work)
- What type of work equipment will be used and how it will be used
- How the work is organised
- The need to provide health and safety training
- The nature of any physical, biological and chemical agents they may be exposed to, for how long and to what extent
- The risks from certain work hazards.
Work they cannot do because of their age
You must not allow a young person to carry out activities when you find that a significant risk remains in spite of your best efforts to take all reasonable steps to control it.
You must protect your young employees and work experience students from the risks of accidents or ill health which they are unlikely to recognise because:
- They are inexperienced
- They have not been trained
- They may not pay enough attention to safety.
The overall rule is that young people under 18 years old must not be allowed to do work which:
- Cannot be adapted to meet any physical or mental limitations they may have
- Exposes them to substances which are toxic or cause cancer
- Exposes them to radiation
- Involves extreme heat, noise or vibration.
Young people who are over the minimum school leaving age can do this work under special circumstances which are:
- The work is necessary for their training
- The work is properly supervised by a competent person
- The risks are reduced to the lowest level, so far as is reasonably practicable.
Children below the minimum school leaving age must never do work involving these risks whether they are employed or under the following special circumstances.
Work activities permitted for children and young persons
At 13 years of age the following work activities are permitted (14 years in Scotland, but local education authority bylaws are likely to permit children aged 13 to do the following):
- Delivering newspapers
- Shop work
- Office work
- Working in hairdressing salons
- Washing cars by hand
- Work in a cafe/restaurant cleaning tables (not in a kitchen)
- Light work in riding stables
- Domestic work in hotels
- Light agricultural/gardening work (not using machinery)
There are also very detailed restrictions on the number of hours a child can work which are greatly restricted in term time and on Sundays.
Whilst of compulsory school age the following work activities are not permitted:
- Selling/delivering alcohol
- Delivering milk
- Delivering fuel
- Working in a kitchen including: use/cleaning of food slicers, mixers, food processors, potato chippers; cleaning/draining and use of fat fryers; de-boning meat
- Use of chemicals including corrosive cleaning materials, e.g. oven and beer line cleaners
- Collection/sorting of refuse including use of waste compactors
- Work in telephone sales
- Work more than 1 metre above ground (on ladders)
- Work in a cinema/nightclub
- Work as an attendant/assistant in a fairground/amusement arcade
- Work as a personal care assistant of residents in a nursing home

Causes of Cancer
Cancers can develop from a variety of sources and causes. A major source is a group of chemicals known as carcinogens, which have been found in industrial pollutants, cigarette smoke and some food additives and pesticides. People exposed to carcinogens are more susceptible to cancer, but not everyone exposed to these carcinogens develops cancer.
Other causes of cancer include obesity, excessive consumption of alcohol, a sedentary lifestyle, exposure to large amounts of radiation and too much sunlight. Certain viruses can also cause cancers, such as cervical cancer or liver cancer.
Cancer is also linked to heredity. If you have a strong family history of cancer, you may be more likely to develop cancer. Your parents can pass a gene to you that makes you more susceptible to cancer, or a genetic mutation can be passed to you through your father’s sperm or your mother’s egg that makes cancer more likely.
Many scientists believe that the combination of a hereditary susceptibility to cancer and an environmental trigger, such as exposure to a carcinogen or being obese, puts individuals at risk of developing cancer, especially at an earlier adult age.

Write a program that uses a loop to display the characters for each ASCII code 32 through 127. Display 16 characters on each line with one space between characters.
We are using the Starting out with C++ Early Objects 6th edition. I really don't know how to start this program, I'm not sure if it wants me to display ever character, or if I have to do get the user to input numbers and give me the characters that it should be or the other way around. If you can please help me that would be great.

Our Fifth Grade students have just held their Invention Convention, a culminating experience for a library research unit. In addition to learning about famous inventors and the invention process using books and online resources, each student had the opportunity to design an invention. Working individually or with partners, the students developed original ideas for new products, some of which help to solve everyday problems.
This creative group of students worked enthusiastically, brainstorming for ideas, developing models and prototypes, and creating ads to market their inventions. Some groups even wrote “commercials” to go along with their inventions. The students presented their inventions to an appreciative audience at school, and all were impressed with the level of creative enthusiasm.
The video below highlights the students talking about their inventions and features some of their commercials. Enjoy watching and please feel free to leave a comment on this post!

When Edgar Degas painted his friend Henri Michel-Levy in 1878, he included a lay figure sprawled on the ground below him.
How did lay figures hold a pose? As we saw in the final illustration yesterday, lay figures could be held up with ropes attached to the extremities. But some of them also had adjustable screws in the joints.
For standing poses, the figure generally also had a support attached to the pelvis from behind. This wood and metal skeleton has many points of articulation, even separate radius and ulna “bones” in the arm.
In this one, the arms also pronate, and the knees can rotate outward. All the joints can be tightened with screws. It has sort of a pre-Steampunk (“wood-punk?”) mech vibe to it. Imagine an army of these guys with crossbows.
This full size lay figure had sufficient bulk and volume to support the shape of the clothes. But such mannikins never looked completely natural, and artists were often embarrassed to use them, regarding them as a poor substitute for a live model.
For this reason, lay figures were not often discussed, or if so, they tended to be disparaged. The Journal of the Society of the Arts in 1854 said that under pressing financial circumstances, a painter with a “mercantile spirit” might use a lay figure that “answers for both the male and female form,” which could lead to a disharmonious and incongruous figure.
Check out the robot blog where I'm a guest contributor: "Nuthin' But Mech."
Read the full GurneyJourney series on lay figures:Part 2

(Student produced study guide from Foss, Foss, and Trapp )
characterized by the use of the scientific method and based on the presumption that we (people) can know objectively and comprehend the objects around us. (146)
forms of understanding from which reality is to be deduced. (146)
refers to the philosophical movement and is not based on the problem of existence, but deals with the problem of words, and the ways of rhetorically thinking and speaking that were perfected as a way of philosophizing in the 15th Century. (147)
deals with scientific objectivity, universality, and rational deduction over other ways of knowing the world. (148) Cogito ergo sum: "I think; therefore I am." This is a self- evident axiom and is based on the human power to apprehend reality by means of reason. (146)
what in essence, separates the human being from the animal. (149)
ability to make adjustments in nature simply because we are humans. (149)
the basic process by which humans gain control over nature; refers to a basic capacity to grasp what is common or similar in ideas or experiences. (151)
"It leads to light because it stems from the need to see: that which is not obvious...is to be transferred," (154) and provides the connection between rhetorical and rational speech. (158)
fundamental or original principle upon which philosophical arguments are based. (155)
illuminates historical fact, making a situation concrete, relevant and understandable using metaphor and imagery. (157)
deductive in nature and achieving its effect through logical demonstration. (157)
a "system" of signs whose elements receive meaning through and within this system. Morse code is an example. (159)
superficial and mistaken definition of rhetoric, as a technical art of persuasion, that acts on emotions to form beliefs. (159)
practice, or doing. Reality is manifested in concrete situations.
coming to terms with things by studying words individually.
choosing what perspective to take in a situation; the unveiling of an essential meaning.
approaches in research which are concerned with human's role in constructing rhetorical knowledge rather than with the possibility of objective knowledge (165)
A. Grassi's education was the product of two opposing philosophic traditions: German Idealism and Italian Humanism.
1. Grassi's background of Italian Humanism was challenged at the University of Freiburg, where German philosophy dominated.
2. The dissonance of the two views led Grassi to examine his own beliefs more carefully, from which he determined that rhetoric constitutes the foundation of human thought.
B. Two people were especially influential in differentiating the two philosophies for Grassi.
1. Bertando Spaventa's (Italian philosopher of the late nineteenth century), following statement left an impression on Grassi. "The development of German thought is natural, free, and independent, in a word, it is critical. The development of Italian thought is unsteady, hindered, and dogmatic. This is the great difference." (p.145)
2. Martin Heidegger, a German philosopher who worked with Grassi for ten years in Freiburg, held a strongly negative attitude towards Italian philosophy. Heidegger's attitude was influential in causing Grassi to seriously consider the value of both German philosophy and Italian philosophy.
A. In order to understand Grassi's approach to rhetoric, more precise definitions are needed for the Scientific Tradition and Italian Humanism.
1. Scientific Tradition is based on objective knowledge.
a. Rational deduction is at the core of the scientific method and involves starting from the premises and deriving the inferences already inherent in them.
b. Grassi lists three limitations of this scientific paradigm, which he believes constrain what is studied as philosophy.
i. The scientific method examines first principles, but not their sources.
ii. The scientific method focuses on quantification.
iii Scientific thought is concerned only with universals.
2. Grassi's Italian Humanism refers to a philosophical movement.
a. Grassi's Humanism is Platonic and Aristotelian in orientation.
b. Grassi's Humanism is concerned with "the problem of words, metaphorical thought, and rhetorical thinking."
c. Grassi's Humanists sought to understand ways in which humans respond to a set of demands from the world and, by their linguistic choices, reveal the way they view this world around them.
B. The Scientific Approach was in direct opposition to Grassi's Humanist Approach. (p.147)
1. The Scientific approach deals with objectivity while the Humanist approach deals with distinctions and contextual variations.
2. The Scientific Approach came to dominate philosophy, while the Humanists were seen as searching for and moving toward this position.
3. Grassi believed that the Scientific Method was one tool for understanding, while Humanism dealt with broader areas and combined the areas of rhetoric and philosophy.
A. Grassi believed Vico represents the thought of Italian Humanism most fully.
1. Vico considered the rise of human history to be the basic problem of philosophy.
2. History is what differentiates humans from animals.
B. Grassi's support for Humanist thought is based in Vico's conception of the humanization of nature. (p.150)
1. Grassi has a term called "meeting the claims or demands of life."
a. All living beings experience the world using their senses, and inherently organize their environment to meet their basic needs.
b. Animals rely on instinct to function.
2. The human process is very complex.
a. Humans can choose and aren't limited to actions of instinct.
b. Humans can define images through language and therefore can interpret the world in different ways.
3. Humanization or historication of nature occurs when:
a. Humans become aware of these capabilities.
b. They begin to make adjustments in nature, or "direct their own destinies."
4. Humans must take sensory level meanings and translate them into an intellectual level.
5. The clearing of forests and the cultivating of land is the first unfolding of human consciousness. (p.151)
6. This feeling of control over nature wasn't a sudden change: there were three developing stages.
a. In the Cultural Age, humans felt they were a part of the cultural world.
b. In the Age of Heros, combination of heros and gods (superhuman benefactors) were seen as helping humans by introducing social institutions and laws.
c. In the Age of Humanity, humans realized that they could control nature.
C. Humans gain control over nature using the Ingenium, which is the process of humanization. (p.151)
1. Ingenium transfers meaning from the sensory world to a higher human one.
2. Ingenium frees humans by allowing them to see relationships and making connections in experience which are needed to think new thoughts.
D. There are three basic ways in which Ingenium is manifest to create the humans world. (p.152)
1. Imagination functions to grasp control of reality into two ways.
a. Imagination allows humans to realize that they are not bound to nature in the same way that animals are bound. (152)
b. Imagination allows humans to explain the world around them. It allows us to select certain interpretations of what we sense and allows us to define and order.
2. Work allows us to make and interpret connections of the sensory phenomena. Work allows us to act upon those interpretations made by our imagination. (p.153)
3. Language allows us to name and assign meanings to things in the world. By naming something we create a reality apart from the world.
E. Humanists sought to understand things in the context of practical human action.
1. Praxis is action: the application of abstract philosophical concepts into concrete situations. (p.153)
2. Grammarians examine words and interpret the abstract human condition in combination with individual action. (p.154)
A. Grassi refers to Aristotle and Cicero to define the metaphor.
1. Aristotle: "[The metaphor allows us] to see the similarity between what is actually the most widely separated."
2. Cicero's definition of metaphor said it was like a "light" which gives insight into a "relationship."
B. Metaphor transfers insight on several levels. (p.154)
1. At the most basic level, the metaphor allows us to grasp similarities between two unrelated things.
a. The metaphor operationalizes ingenium by allowing the human to connect himself/herself to the world of senses.
b. We relate to nature in human terms.
2. Language works metaphorically, transferring insight.
a. Language is symbolic because it helps us relate two dissimilar things.
b. Language helps us interpret and connect to our world and experiences.
3. The process of philosophizing is metaphoric.
a. A philosophical argument cannot be made without understanding the first principle.
b. First principles are nonrational and "experienced" as an "urge."
c. Philosophical systems are constructed with a first principle as the base.
d. The similarities we make between "urges" to understand philosophical problem and the actual logical arguments we use are metaphorical.
A. Grassi discusses the superiority of rhetorical language over rational speech.
1. Rhetorical language adapts various uses of imagery to illuminate historical fact and make it concrete, while rational speech is deductive and achieves effect through logical demonstration.
2. Rhetorical language deals with concrete particulars of life, while rational speech is universal and abstract.
3. Rhetorical language is like dialogue because it takes the world into account, while rational speech is monologic and has no need to interact.
4. Rhetorical language concentrates in images, symbols and metaphors, while rational speech is grounded in logical events and chronology.
5. Rhetorical language goes beyond a formal system, while rational speech is set in a "code" and can only move through the use of metaphor, which is indicative of rhetorical speech.
B. A third form of speech identified by Grassi is "external rhetorical speech."
1. This is the superficial and mistaken definition of rhetoric as a technical art of persuasion.
2. This is "false speech" because images do not stem directly from metaphors or nature, but a limited understanding of nature and its images.
A. Many feel that rhetoric is only the form of a message, while philosophy supplies factual content.
B. Humanists see rhetoric in a positive light, as a way to make logical reasoning palatable to an audience.
C. Grassi sees no separation of passion from logic.
1. The power of a message derives from its starting point in images that inspire wonder, admiration, engagement and passion.
2. Rhetoric, rather than logical deduction, is the true philosophy since it undertakes questions about the process by which "humans know, interpret, and create their world."
D. The emphasis on science in the Western world has resulted in this separation of content from form, and contrasts with the World View of the humanists. (p.161)
1. Without scientific proof, an idea will not be believed.
2. We have forgotten that we need to study the insights upon which these calculations are based.
E. There are many consequences for society that over-values the rational paradigm.
1. Those who believe in the "primacy of logic" and the ability for technology to deal with all problems tend to have an attitude of superiority.
a. Humans see their rationality as giving them a dominance over all things.
b. This actually limits humans' capability to fully interpret all things.
2. This affects our relationships with other cultures who do not share this attitude.
a. We see these cultures as being underdeveloped.
b. This view makes it impossible to fully understand them and constricts our interactions with them.
3. Logical thought has become synonymous with the domination of humans. (p.162)
4. The dawning of the atomic age is the ultimate example of humans' need to dominate nature.
F. The rational approach which has dominated Western culture has been detrimental to philosophy.
A. Renaissance Humanism defined folly as speaking irrationally without reason.
B. Grassi studied literature for examples of folly, defining it instead as the ability, using language, to choose the perspective to take on a situation to unveil something's essence. (p.163)
1. Folly is an engagement of ingenium
2. Folly is the fundamental process by which humans move from the nonhuman to the human realm.
3. Folly, as an extension of ingenium, allows humans to imagine themselves in new situation and to deal with these situations effectively.
A. Grassi's ideas of rhetoric are not well known among communication scholars.
1. Grassi has published in English only in Philosophy and Rhetoric and there are few essays or discussions on his work.
2. Grassi asserts the contributions of Italian Humanism to rhetoric and philosophy rather than with fully developing the contemporary implications of the philosophic perspective.
B. Grassi made several important contributions to rhetoric from the Humanistic perspective.
1. Grassi asserts that rhetoric and philosophy are necessarily connected, since rhetoric is the starting point of philosophy.
2. Grassi preference of thought, speech, and action made from connections with nature (ingenium) rather than from logical reasoning is similar to the "new paradigm."
3. Grassi's notion of folly allows humans choices in how they perceive the world they live in.
4. Grassi's work generated renewed interest in Renaissance Humanism.
5. Grassi gives new significance to rhetorical speech and asks us to reconceptualize our definition of rhetoric.
Grassi, Ernesto "Italian Humanism and Heidegger's Thesis of the End of Philosophy," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 13 (Spring 1980), 83. In this article, Grassi points to the parallelism between Heidegger's German Idealistic thought and the Italian Humanist tradition in order to create a historical framework in which to make evident the problems of Humanism in relation to present day. This article, separated into ten major ideas, begins with the End of Metaphysics and ends with Heidegger's Theory of the Brutality of the Being. In between these two major points, as Grassi explains Heidegger's Twofold thesis, the Traditional Model of Scientific Thought, the basic problem of Italian Humanism, The Question of the Veil of the Poetic Word, and the "clearing" of the Primordial Forest.
Grassi, Ernesto Die Macht des Bildes, 221, cited in Walter Veit, "The Potency of Imagery - the Impotence of Rational Language: Ernesto Grassi's Contribution to Modern Epistemology," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 17 (1984), 235. Veit gives analysis to some of Grassi's theories in this article. Grassi once again confronts the separation of logical reasoning and rhetoric. Many of Grassi's ideas have literally reconstructed the philosophical dimension of rhetoric in the eyes of contemporary Italian Humanists. Much of this article is similar to the subjects covered in FFT, and it even helps in the understanding since it gives different explanations and examples to similar material. Emphasis is placed on some of the ideals of eighteenth century philosopher Giambattista Vico, who Grassi found as a source for some of his rhetorical ideas. Once again, it is stated that Grassi believed that the philosophical revolution began with the Italian Humanists, who showed that philosophy gains insight into the principles "through the creativity of the image."
Grassi, Ernesto "Humanistic Rhetorical Philosophizing: Giovanni Pontano's Theory of the Unity of Poetry, Rhetoric, and History," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 17 (1984), 146. This article is simply Grassi's analysis and reaction to Potano's theories. It gives the reader some idea of the process of critical thinking that Grassi goes through in regards to the ideas of others. It is standard to differentiate between logic and rhetoric. The premises resulting from a rational process as exemplified by traditional metaphysics are necessary and universally valued. Rhetoric is bound by time and place, and it must use metaphor and images in order to be effective. In order for metaphor to be effective, there must be a common viewpoint shared between source and receiver which permits the audience to see the relationship of the metaphor. The unity of poetry, rhetoric, and history has a philosophical significance. All three are rooted in directive language. Potano's ideas are that the traditional thoughts need to be revised. A new kind of philosophy starts with the Humanists and the turn to rhetoric, away from rational argument.
Grassi, Ernesto "Remarks on German Idealism, Humanism and the Philosophical Function of Rhetoric," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 19 (1986), 125. Grassi discusses his blending of Vico's Italian Humanism and German Idealism. The entire system of thoughts is summarized as follows: "The faculty that is crucial to the making of metaphors is ingenium, which allows us to see the world. The power of language is beyond logic and rational thinking. To think rationally involves assuming some presuppositions and drawing inferences from them." This text is simply and expansion of the work in Foss, et al. and provides a historical context for Grassi's work.
Grassi, Ernesto "The Ordinary Quality of the Poetic and Rhetorical Word: Heidegger, Ungaretti, and Neruda," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 20 (1987), 248. This article is divided into three sections. The first section concentrates on making clear the philosophical function of poetical and rhetorical language, by looking at statements of philosopher Martin Heidegger and of two poets Ungaretti and Neruda. The poetic world, according to Heidegger, receives not only priority over the rational world, but also has a philosophical function comparing it to the ideas of philosopher Giambattista Vico. Second, it deals with the idea that reality cannot be revealed through a rational process. Next it deals with the philosophical function of poetry, showing that every beginning of a historical era is announced with a poetic expression, showing connection of poetry, rhetoric and history. Imagery is poetry. The third part shows what can happen when rational word becomes superior to rhetorical word, using the stories of Prometheus and Ulyssses. The fire Prometheus brought is considered metaphoric, but the fact that his liver is being destroyed keeps him historical and not eternal. Dante condemns Ulysses when he wishes to go beyond Hercules' pillars.
Grassi, Ernesto "Why Rhetoric is Philosophy," Philosophy and Rhetoric, 20 (1987), 75. Traditional philosophy arrives at an important admission: rational language cannot reach "passions." What is "true" language? The model provided by German romantic thought recognizes an essentially literary character. In Monologne, Noralis, language is a game; language does not occur for the determination of beings. Tongue speaks for itself alone. An object has its own destiny and at the same time it doesn't in that each appears in its merry through the code which is revealed in the history. Rhetorical, historical language is shown to be the true philosophical language because it is by means of it that we "uncover" the various world by "playing" with our "orders" at stake.
Verene, Donald Phillip, rev. of Die Macht der Phantasie and Rhetoric
as Philosophy, by Ernesto Grassi, Philosophy and Rhetoric, 13 (Fall
1980), 281. This article summarizes Grassi's ideas in Rhetoric as Philosophy:
The Humanist Tradition and in Die Macht der Phantasie. Zur Geschitchte
abenlandischen Denkens. According to Verene, these books are "treasure
houses of an understanding of the nature of rhetoric and its relationship
to philosophy that is absent in contemporary thought." Grassi's thesis
is that rhetoric is at the basis of philosophy. Considering this relationship,
Grassi asks his readers to understand the power of
language by choosing Humanism over science.
Verene, Donald Phillip, "Response
to Grassi," Philosophy
and Rhetoric, 19 (1986), 135. Verene is delighted to be discussing Grassi's
work. He admits skepticism to the blending of Italian Humanism and German
Idealism. The most important element of Grassi's thought is the metaphor
because metaphors embody the starting pints for thought. It is essentially
a recovery of ancient ideas that Verene feels is long overdue.
back to lecture note index

Combating AIDS Around the Globe
Lead story from the February Centerpoint
In November 2004, just prior to World AIDS Day, the Woodrow Wilson Center and UNAIDS, the joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, held two high-level briefings as part of a three-part series to expand awareness of the global AIDS agenda outside of the health community, particularly within foreign policy and development circles.
World AIDS Day became an annual event in 1988 when some 5 million people were living with the disease. Since then, AIDS has killed more than 20 million people around the world and, this year, 40 million people are living with HIV/AIDS. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, more than 25 million people are living with HIV/AIDS. In the Caribbean, the region second-hardest hit by the disease, at least 1 in 50 adults across five nations already are infected.
A November 10 seminar featuring Dr. Kathleen Cravero, deputy executive director of UNAIDS, and Ambassador George Moose, former assistant secretary of state for African affairs, shed light on the disproportionate impact HIV/AIDS has had on women in developed and developing countries. The second briefing on November 30— featuring UNAIDS Executive Director Dr. Peter Piot and U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator Ambassador Randall Tobias—explored the aggressive U.S. emergency plan to combat AIDS and the dangerously fast spread of HIV/AIDS in East Europe and East Asia. A third upcoming seminar will delve into the effects of AIDS on security.
Every day around the world, 8,000 people die from AIDS, many of them young people in their productive years, many of them mothers and caretakers. It is a humanitarian crisis that poses serious social, economic, and security threats—one that requires a sustained, collective effort to overcome.
The Emerging Pandemic: East Europe, Asia
UNAIDS reported at the end of 2004 that nearly a half-million people died from AIDS in South and Southeast Asia and more than 7 million people are living with HIV/AIDS, while in East Asia more than 1 million people are HIV-positive. In addition, nearly 1 million Russians are living with HIV/AIDS, about triple the official statistics, according to Wilson Center Senior Scholar Murray Feshbach and Research Associate Cristina Galvin in a recently released report underwritten by the U.S. Agency for International Development.
"The situation we face in China, India, and Russia bears alarming similarities to the situation we faced 20 years ago in Africa," said Dr. Piot in his November 30 address. Piot said these countries are nearing "a tipping point," much like Africa had experienced. In South Africa, he explained, prevalence rates rose from .5 to 1 percent in five years but then in seven years, the rate leapt from 1 to 20 percent.
Piot said, "I am calling for intensified attention on these next wave countries-not at the expense of Africa, but also on behalf of Africa." If the epidemic spreads, he said, global resources for Africa could decrease or disappear. "If we don't prevent this breakout, and full-blown epidemics take hold in these large, populous states, there will be dire consequences not only for these countries, but for each of our own."
Well over half the world's population resides in Asian-Pacific countries, where HIV/AIDS-related income losses totaled more than $7 billion in 2001 alone. India and China, two of the world's most populous countries, have rapidly growing economies which would be devastated by the stunted growth that AIDS has caused elsewhere as would their global trading partners. AIDS threatens a nation's security and stability, and national defense can be compromised by the growing rates of AIDS in military ranks.
In Russia, incidents of HIV among potential military conscripts are estimated to be 25 times the level of five years earlier, according to the Feshbach/Galvin report. The report also noted that while HIV is on the rise, testing has dropped dramatically, in a society that stigmatizes those with the virus. In Asia, increasing populations help offset the AIDS mortality levels, but Russia has a declining population. Furthermore, the report noted, AIDS disproportionately impacts Russia's young people; more than 80 percent of HIV-positive Russians are under 30 years old.
"We can pay now for prevention," said Piot, "we can wait a bit longer and pay for treatment; or we can wait even longer and pay the price of losing tens of hundreds of millions of productive citizens. Early investment is everything...the price rises every minute we wait."
Women and AIDS
World AIDS Day, commemorated on December 1, focused special attention this year on the growing AIDS epidemic among women and girls. In sub-Saharan Africa, 60 percent of all HIV-positive people and 75 percent of infected young people, 15 to 24 years old, are female. Some of the steepest increases are occurring in East Asia, East Europe, and Central Asia. In Russia, the Russian Federal AIDS Center reported in 2003 that 38 percent of people living with HIV were women, compared with 24 percent in 2001. In Brazil, new AIDS cases among women increased by 75 percent in the late 1990s, compared to just 10 percent among men. And, in the United States, AIDS is the leading cause of death among African American women, ages 35-44.
"The disproportionate infection of millions of poor women isn't merely an injustice; it's a socioeconomic disaster," said Dr. Cravero, at the November 10 seminar, "Confronting the Crisis: Women and AIDS." Cravero said AIDS among women is on the rise in these countries because "women lack control over their bodies and their daily lives, and the tools, resources and support needed to change their situation."
Ambassador Moose discussed the debate within the U.S. government. He said while the U.S. government has recognized the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS threat and has made advances developing affordable antiretroviral treatments for developing nations, it has yet to address the challenge of women and AIDS.
"It's one thing to bring policymakers and politicians to an acceptance that HIV/AIDS represents a threat to national and international security interests," he said, "but it's quite another, I would argue, to convince them that the place where that battle will have to be fought and won is in the bedrooms and bordellos of every society around the world."
Piot also discussed the rise of AIDS among women and said that solely insisting on abstinence is unrealistic. "The scientists, the doctors, the activists, the churches, and all of us should come together and agree on a broad philosophy of prevention that takes cultural and religious differences into account, but embraces a common principle-that the highest moral ideal is to save lives."
Piot said developing countries must encourage educational and economic opportunities for women, pass and enforce laws that deter domestic violence, and promote access to the female condom and microbicides that women can use to protect themselves.
Said Cravero, "For women who can't choose when and with whom to have sex, for women whose partners will not use condoms or be faithful, and for women who are too beaten up or beaten down to ask, methods that they control...will make all the difference."
The U.S. Relief Plan
On November 30, Ambassador Randall Tobias presented the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, which commits $15 billion over a five-year period toward combating the disease in more than 100 countries. The plan, which promotes integrated prevention, treatment, and care, is the largest commitment ever by a single nation toward an international health initiative.
With special emphasis on 15 focus nations in Africa, the Caribbean, and Asia, where half the world's infections occur, this plan aims to treat 2 million HIV-infected people, prevent 7 million new infections, and care for 10 million people, including orphans and vulnerable children.
The emergency plan "strives to bring donors, stakeholders on the ground, and national leadership onto the same page," said Tobias, adding that emphasis will be placed on monitoring and evaluating results. "If this HIV/AIDS challenge is to be met, we in the developed world will have to meet it. If we fail to rise to the occasion, there's really no Plan B." He underscored the importance of such organizations as UNAIDS remaining engaged in the fight. Such groups, he said, "offer other donors a vehicle to sharply increase their commitment, as America has done."

Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
The mission of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is to assure that every U.S. worker goes home whole and healthy every day. Toward that end, the agency sets and enforces workplace safety and health standards, encourages voluntary compliance through consultation and partnerships, and promotes safety training and education for workers and employers. Since Congress passed the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH Act), which created OSHA as an agency within the U.S. Department of Labor, workplace fatalities have been cut in half and occupational injury and illness rates have declined 40 percent. At the same time, U.S. employment has nearly doubled.
Under the OSH Act, employers are responsible for providing a safe and healthful work environment in line with standards set by OSHA. Protecting workers against workplace hazards requires every employer and every worker to make safety and health a top priority. OSHA's charge is to offer leadership and encouragement to workers and employers in carrying out this responsibility. OSHA has a staff of about 2,250, including about 1,250 inspectors in 67 field offices. Sharing the responsibility for oversight of workplace safety and health are twenty-five states that run their own OSHA programs with about 2,800 employees, including about 1,250 inspectors.
Early OSHA standards focused primarily on safety and establishing precise safety requirements, such as the specific height for guardrails on stairs. Newer standards take a performance or program approach, identifying a safety or health objective and providing a framework for employers to use in achieving that goal. OSHA standards cover the gamut of workplace safety and health issues, including machine guarding, fall protection, chemical-hazard communication, and protection against blood-borne pathogens such as HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and hepatitis B.
OSHA's enforcement program has changed dramatically over the years. The agency has continually attempted to target its resources toward the most hazardous worksites, as well as respond to worker complaints and investigate fatal accidents. Initially, OSHA focused on sites in industries with high injury rates. More recently, OSHA has obtained site-specific injury and illness data and has been able to concentrate on individual sites with poor safety and health records. The agency conducts about 35,000 inspections each year; states running their own OSHA programs inspect an additional 55,000 workplaces. To foster voluntary compliance with OSHA standards and assist employers in setting up ongoing safety and health programs, OSHA offers free consultations and seeks to establish partnerships with individual workplaces and with trade groups and unions.
The OSHA consultation program, designed for smaller employers, provides free assistance to employers who request help with safety and health programs and specific problems. Employers agree in advance to correct serious hazards identified by the consultant. The consultation program is administered by state authorities and is completely separate from the enforcement effort. OSHA's premier partnership is the Voluntary Protection
To further assist employers and workers, OSHA maintains an extensive web site (http://www.osha.gov) that includes the agency's standards, publications, training materials, interactive software covering specific standards and hazards, small business information, an online complaint filing system for workers, and links to many other sources of information on job safety and health. The agency also offers safety and health training at its Chicagoarea training institute and through twelve educational centers located at community colleges and universities around the country. OSHA is developing satellite-delivered and web-based training programs to make its training available to a wider audience. Through its New Directions grants, OSHA encourages nonprofit organizations such as unions and trade associations to develop additional training materials and offer training courses.
Improving work environments is a long-term proposition that requires daily diligence and ongoing commitment in the face of competing priorities for time, energy, and resources. OSHA's mandate is to aid employers and employees to make this commitment and continually pursue excellence in job safety and health.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. All About OSHA. (OSHA 2056). Available at http://www.osha.gov.

"Nofollow" provides a way for webmasters to tell search engines "Don't follow links on this page" or "Don't follow this specific link."
nofollow attribute appeared in the page-level meta tag, and instructed search engines not to follow (i.e., crawl) any outgoing links on the page. For example:
<meta name="robots" content="nofollow" />
nofollow was used on individual links, preventing robots from following individual links on a page required a great deal of effort (for example, redirecting the link to a URL blocked in robots.txt). That's why the
nofollow attribute value of the
rel attribute was created. This gives webmasters more granular control: instead of telling search engines and bots not to follow any links on the page, it lets you easily instruct robots not to crawl a specific link. For example:
<a href="signin.php" rel="nofollow">sign in</a>
How does Google handle nofollowed links?
In general, we don't follow them. This means that Google does not transfer PageRank or anchor text across these links. Essentially, using
nofollow causes us to drop the target links from our overall graph of the web. However, the target pages may still appear in our index if other sites link to them without using
nofollow, or if the URLs are submitted to Google in a Sitemap. Also, it's important to note that other search engines may handle
nofollow in slightly different ways.
What are Google's policies and some specific examples of nofollow usage?
Here are some cases in which you might want to consider using
- Untrusted content: If you can't or don't want to vouch for the content of pages you link to from your site — for example, untrusted user comments or guestbook entries — you should nofollow those links. This can discourage spammers from targeting your site, and will help keep your site from inadvertently passing PageRank to bad neighborhoods on the web. In particular, comment spammers may decide not to target a specific content management system or blog service if they can see that untrusted links in that service are nofollowed. If you want to recognize and reward trustworthy contributors, you could decide to automatically or manually remove the
nofollowattribute on links posted by members or users who have consistently made high-quality contributions over time.
- Paid links: A site's ranking in Google search results is partly based on analysis of those sites that link to it. In order to prevent paid links from influencing search results and negatively impacting users, we urge webmasters use
nofollowon such links. Search engine guidelines require machine-readable disclosure of paid links in the same way that consumers online and offline appreciate disclosure of paid relationships (for example, a full-page newspaper ad may be headed by the word "Advertisement"). More information on Google's stance on paid links.
- Crawl prioritization: Search engine robots can't sign in or register as a member on your forum, so there's no reason to invite Googlebot to follow "register here" or "sign in" links. Using
nofollowon these links enables Googlebot to crawl other pages you'd prefer to see in Google's index. However, a solid information architecture — intuitive navigation, user- and search-engine-friendly URLs, and so on — is likely to be a far more productive use of resources than focusing on crawl prioritization via nofollowed links.
How does nofollow work with the Social Graph API (rel="nofollow me")?
If you host user profiles and allow users to link to other profiles on the web, we encourage you to mark those links with the rel="me" microformat so that they can be made available through the Social Graph API. For example:
<a href="http://blog.example.com" rel="me">My blog</a>
However, because these links are user-generated and may sometimes point to untrusted pages, we recommend that these links be marked with nofollow. For example:
<a href="http://blog.example.com" rel="me nofollow">My blog</a>
rel="me nofollow", Google will continue to treat the
rel="nofollow" as expected for search purposes, such as not transferring PageRank. However, for the Social Graph API, we will count the
rel="me" link even when included with a
To prevent crawling of a rel="me nofollow" URL, you can use robots.txt. Standard robots.txt exclusion rules are respected by both Googlebot and the Social Graph API.

Luckily, Music Theory for Dummies shows you the fun and easy way to understanding the concepts needed to compose, deconstruct, and comprehend music. This helpful guide will give you a great grasp of:
- Note value and counting notes
- Treble and bass clefs
- Time signatures and measures
- Naturalizing the rhythm
- Tempo and dynamic
- Tone, color, and harmonics
- Half steps and whole steps
- Harmonic and melodic intervals
- Key signatures and circles of fifths
- Scales, chords, and their progressions
- Elements of form
- Music theory’s fascinating history
This friendly guide not only explores these concepts, it provides examples of music to compliment them so you can hear how they sound firsthand. With a bonus CD that demonstrates these ideas with musical excerpts on guitar and piano, this hands-on resource will prove to you that music theory is as enjoyable as it is useful. Don’t get discouraged by the seemingly complicated written structure. With Music Theory for Dummies, understanding music has never been easier!
Note: CD-ROM/DVD and other supplementary materials are not included as part of eBook file.

Family: Corvidae, Crows, Magpies, Jays view all from this family
Description ADULT Has a pale gray-brown back, but otherwise mostly dark blue upperparts; note, however, the dark cheeks and eyeline and pale forecrown, extending back as faint supercilium. Throat is whitish and streaked, with discrete demarcation from otherwise grubby pinkish gray underparts. JUVENILE Similar, but dull gray on head, back, and wing coverts, with blue flight feathers and tail.
Dimensions Length: 11" (28 cm)
Endangered Status The Florida Scrub-Jay is on the U.S. Endangered Species List. It is classified as threatened throughout its range in Florida. Like many other Florida wildlife species, the scrub-jay has declined as its habitat has succumbed to development. Remaining habitat has been fragmented and degraded, and existing populations are small and isolated. This makes them vulnerable to any change to their environment, as an entire population can be wiped out at once. In some areas the rate of mortality appears to exceed the rate at which the populations is reproducing. A long-term problem for this species could be rising sea levels caused by global warming, as their remaining habitat could easily become inundated.
Habitat Common and widespread resident of scrubby woodland and overgrown suburban lots. Has declined markedly due to habitat loss and degradation
Observation Tips Easy to see and often indifferent to people.
Voice Utters a harsh, nasal cheerp, cheerp, cheerpÖ and other chattering calls.
Similar Species Western Scrub-jay A. californica (L 11-12 in) is bluer on head but otherwise similar; a mainly western species, resident in Texas.
Discussion Florida endemic with slim body, long tail, and stout, but rather slender bill. An opportunistic feeder with an omnivorous diet that includes berries, fruits, insects, and the eggs and young of songbirds. Usually seen in family groups. Sexes are similar.

You can help keep your heart and blood vessels healthy by taking steps toward a healthier lifestyle. These healthy habits include not smoking, eating right, exercising regularly, staying at a healthy weight, and getting the screening tests you need.
A heart-healthy lifestyle is important for everyone, not just for people with existing health problems. It can help you keep your heart and blood vessels healthy. If you already have heart or blood vessel problems, such as high cholesterol or high blood pressure, a healthy lifestyle can help you manage those problems.
If you have children, you can be their healthy role model. If your habits are healthy, your children are more likely to build those habits in their own lives.
Everyone who uses tobacco would benefit from quitting. When you quit smoking—no matter how old you are—you will decrease your risk of heart attack, stroke, and many other health problems. For help with quitting smoking, see these topics:
Eating healthy foods is one of the best things you can do to prevent and control many health problems, including heart and blood vessel disease. For help with healthy eating, see these topics:
Improving your fitness is good for your heart and blood vessels, as well as the rest of your body. Being active helps lower your risk of health problems. And it helps you feel good. For more information about being active, see these topics:
Staying at a healthy weight is also part of a heart-healthy lifestyle. Read more in these topics about reaching and staying at a healthy weight:
Seeing your doctor regularly and getting screening tests is important. The sooner your doctor diagnoses a disease, the more likely it can be cured or managed. To reduce your risk of heart and blood vessel problems, be sure to keep an eye on your cholesterol and blood pressure. The tests you might have to check your risk for heart and blood vessel problems depend on your age, health, gender, and risk factors. Talk to your doctor to find out which tests are right for you.
Other Works Consulted
- Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents (2011). Expert panel on integrated guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents: Summary report. Pediatrics, 128(Supplement 5): S213–S256.
- Redberg RF, et al. (2009). ACCF/AHA 2009 Performance measures for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures. Circulation, 120(13): 1296–1336.
|Primary Medical Reviewer||Rakesh K. Pai, MD, FACC - Cardiology, Electrophysiology|
|Specialist Medical Reviewer||Robert A. Kloner, MD, PhD - Cardiology|
|Last Revised||April 6, 2012|
Last Revised: April 6, 2012
Author: Healthwise Staff
To learn more visit Healthwise.org
© 1995-2012 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.

Bipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, is a brain disorder that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day tasks. Symptoms of bipolar disorder are severe. They are different from the normal ups and downs that everyone goes through from time to time. Bipolar disorder symptoms can result in damaged relationships, poor job or school performance, and even suicide. But bipolar disorder can be treated, and people with this illness can lead full and productive lives. Bipolar disorder often develops in a person's late teens or early adult years. At least half of all cases start before age 25. Some people have their first symptoms during childhood, while others may develop symptoms late in life. Bipolar disorder is not easy to spot when it starts. The symptoms may seem like separate problems, not recognized as parts of a larger problem. Some people suffer for years before they are properly diagnosed and treated. Like diabetes or heart disease, bipolar disorder is a long-term illness that must be carefully managed throughout a person's life.

UNESCO describes the Site Piedmont and Lombardy Sacred Mounts as follows: The nine northern Italy’s Sacred Mounts
are composed of groups of chapels and other architectural elements built within the end of XV and the end of XVII century and dedicated
to different aspects of Christian Faith. In addition to their symbolic religious meanings, these places are characterized by a
remarkable beauty thanks to the careful integration of architectural elements into the surrounding natural landscapes: hills, woods
and lakes. Furthermore they boast very important works of art like frescos and statues.
UNESCO World Heritage Committee has put the Site on its List for the following reasons:
The realization of an architectural and sacred art’s work into a natural landscape for didactic and religious aims, finds its
highest expression in northern Italy Sacred Mounts and it has deeply influenced following developments of this phenomenon in the
rest of Europe.
Sacred Mounts of northern Italy represent the successful integration into a landscape of remarkable beauty of architecture
and fine arts realized for religious aims during a critical period of Catholic Church history.
UNESCO Site’s Sacred Mounts are mainly located in the Alpine arc, close to lakes or at the bottom of valleys crossed by river Po’s
tributaries and by important old routes. The complexes’ panoramic and prominent locations on hills or mountains and their subdivisions
into chapels, let them become territorial reference points easy to identify; we don’t have to forget that creating sort of territorial
reference points was probably one of the aims for such locations, considering that sacred mountains strategical position marks the
northern limit of the Po valley, which was, at that time, symbolically protected by them, that is by the Christianity itself.
There is an important thread ideally binding these nine Sacred Mounts: the first crib of Greccio, made by Saint Francis of Assisi,
the Holy Representations, the protection of the Holy Land, the Sacred Mounts foundations (first by gerosolimitani then by
counter-reformists) and the Viae Crucis, almost all the above stories in fact tell us about Franciscan fathers who had been
fundamental for all complexes’ building. Some had been the inventors, like Bernardino Caimi in Varallo, Tommaso of Firenze in
Montaione and Michelangelo of Montiglio in Belmonte; some the designers, like Cleto of Castelletto Ticino in Orta, or the preachers
like Giovan Battista Aguggiari in Varese, Fedele of San Germano in Oropa, Gioacchino of Cassano and Andrea of Rho in Domodossola.
More we remeber that between 1731 and 1751 it was again the Franciscan Leonardo of Porto Maurizio who built five hundred and
seventy-two Viae Crucis throughout Italy; we owe nineteenth-century-restoration and renewal of Crea’s Sacred Mount to Franciscan
fathers Costantino Cerri and Giuseppe Latini. Observants or Capuchins, that are disciples of the poor of Assisi, are the
most sensitive and active champions of the theatre-, sculpture- and painting-representations.
Dedications and histories told in each complexe remind both of
pre-existent local devotions and of religious and cultural foundation times. Therefore in Varallo prevails the representation of Jesus
Christs’ life, in Orta of Saint Francis of Assisi, in Oropa of the Virgin Mary, while in Varese and in Ossuccio they represent the Marian
Rosary prayer with its fifteen Misteries. Wishing to follow again the steps of Christ’s Passion, like the Jesus’s Via Dolorosa in
Jerusalem (that is ‘Very Painful Viae’), they modified the Sacred Mount of Crea and built the Sacred Mounts Calvaries of Domodossola
and Belmonte. In Ghiffa instead Holy Trinity’s devotion resulted so difficult and abstract to represent that, in the end, they went back
in part to a much usual and immediate issue: the Via Crucis.

How lego does it today.
I found little information about Autodesk Maya being the 3D modeling software being used.
Here`s a blurb about their current design process :
Primary concept and development work takes place at the Billund
headquarters, where the company employs approximately 120 designers.
The company also has smaller design offices in the UK, Spain, Germany,
and Japan, which are tasked with developing products aimed
specifically at these markets. The average development period for a
new product is around twelve months, in three stages. The first stage
is to identify market trends and developments, including contact by
the designers directly with the market; some are stationed in toy
shops close to holiday periods, while others interview children. The
second stage is the design and development of the product based upon
the results of the first stage. As of September 2008 the design teams
use 3D modeling software to generate CAD drawings from initial design
sketches. The designs are then prototyped using an in-house
stereolithography machine. These are presented to the entire project
team for comment and for testing by parents and children during the
"validation" process. Designs may then be altered in accordance with
the results from the focus groups. Virtual models of completed Lego
products are built concurrently with the writing of the user
instructions. Completed CAD models are also used in the wider
organization, such as for marketing and packaging.
source : wikipedia
How lego used to do it
do you know?
How people do it themselves
Lego provide software that does just that. Check for "Lego digital designer" which allows to create a model, save a building manuals and buy the lego parts online.
Also check up this related question :"Do any programs exist that allow you to build own LEGO plans?"
For more information on how to create high quality computer images of lego models, check this question : "How can I create synthetic imagery (rendering) of lego models?"

The continuing Texas drought has taken an enormous and growing toll on trees, killing as many as half a billion – 10 percent of the state’s 4.9 billion trees – this year alone, the Texas Forest Service estimates.
That calculation did not include trees claimed by this year’s deadly and extensive wildfires, even if they were drought-related, Burl Carraway, who heads the agency’s Sustainable Forestry Department, told Texas Climate News.
(Previously, the Forest Service estimated that about 1.5 million trees were lost on 34,000 charred acres in the Bastrop County fire, most destructive in Texas history. In another damage assessment, the agency said more than 2,000 fires in East Texas had charred more than 200,000 acres. Texas has about 63 million acres of forestlands.)
The estimate that up to half a billion trees have been lost to drought in 2011 was issued Monday by the Forest Service. It was based on statistics tabulated by agency foresters after they canvassed local forestry professionals in their regions, developed estimated percentages of drought-killed trees, and applied them to regional tree inventories.
The resulting estimate was that 100 million to 500 million trees with a diameter of at least five inches had perished because of the drought – two to 10 percent of the nearly five billion trees of that size in the state.
In 2011, Texas experienced an exceptional drought, prolonged high winds and record-setting temperatures. Together, those conditions took a severe toll on trees across the state. Large numbers of trees in both urban communities and rural forests have died or are struggling to survive. The impacts are numerous and widespread.
The agency found that trees in three areas appeared to be hurt the most by the drought:
- An area in West Texas including Sutton, Crockett, western Kimble and eastern Pecos counties, with extensive death of Ashe junipers.
- An area in Southeast Texas including Harris, Montgomery, Grimes, Madison and Leon counties, where many loblolly pines succumbed.
- An area southeast of Austin, including western Bastrop and eastern Caldwell counties as well as neighboring areas, which had widespread mortality among cedars and post oaks.
Also, the agency said, “localized pockets of heavy mortality were reported for many other areas.
The Forest Service plans to use aerial imagery in a more detailed analysis next spring, when trees that entered early dormancy because of the drought may start to recover. In addition, the agency said, “a more scientific, long-term study” of tree losses will be carried out through its Forest Inventory and Analysis program’s census of the state’s trees. Carraway said Forest Service officials “fully expect mortality percentages to increase if the drought continues.”
Texas state climatologist John Nielsen-Gammon has said that a second year of drought in 2012 is “likely,” perhaps with more dry conditions following that.
Nielsen-Gammon has estimated that about a tenth of the excess heat this past summer was attributable to manmade climate change. He and other climate experts have said hotter, drier conditions are expected to increase in Texas in decades ahead as concentrations of human-created greenhouse gases accumulate in the atmosphere.
What the warming average temperature of the planet could mean for forests and other ecosystems was the focus of research findings announced last week by NASA.
The study, carried out by researchers from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the California Institute of Technology, used a computer model that projected massive changes in plant communities across nearly half of the earth’s land surface, with “the conversion of nearly 40 percent of land-based ecosystems from one major ecological community type – such as forest, grassland or tundra – toward another.”
The NASA announcement added:
The model projections paint a portrait of increasing ecological change and stress in Earth’s biosphere, with many plant and animal species facing increasing competition for survival, as well as significant species turnover, as some species invade areas occupied by other species. Most of Earth’s land that is not covered by ice or desert is projected to undergo at least a 30 percent change in plant cover – changes that will require humans and animals to adapt and often relocate.
In addition to altering plant communities, the study predicts climate change will disrupt the ecological balance between interdependent and often endangered plant and animal species, reduce biodiversity and adversely affect Earth’s water, energy, carbon and other element cycles.
“For more than 25 years, scientists have warned of the dangers of human-induced climate change,” said Jon Bergengren, a scientist who led the study while a postdoctoral scholar at Caltech. “Our study introduces a new view of climate change, exploring the ecological implications of a few degrees of global warming. While warnings of melting glaciers, rising sea levels and other environmental changes are illustrative and important, ultimately, it’s the ecological consequences that matter most.”
When faced with climate change, plant species often must “migrate” over multiple generations, as they can only survive, compete and reproduce within the range of climates to which they are evolutionarily and physiologically adapted. While Earth’s plants and animals have evolved to migrate in response to seasonal environmental changes and to even larger transitions, such as the end of the last ice age, they often are not equipped to keep up with the rapidity of modern climate changes that are currently taking place. Human activities, such as agriculture and urbanization, are increasingly destroying Earth’s natural habitats, and frequently block plants and animals from successfully migrating.
– Bill Dawson
Image credits: Photos – Texas Forest Service; Map – NASA

Girl Scout Preserves Florida's Wildlife
March 23, 2012 – Miami, Fla. – Senior Girl Scout Caitlin Kaloostian earned the Gold Award, the highest award a Girl Scout can receive, by completing a new butterfly garden and wildlife themed mural for The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).
The FWC works with community and youth organizations to demonstrate the importance of safeguarding Florida’s Natural resources and to encourage the next generation of conservationists. To further this mission, Kaloostian held fundraisers such as garage sales and solicited help from fellow high school students to raise funds necessary to complete the project. With the help of her troop, Girl Scout Troop 305, Kaloostian painted a mural at the FWC’s Division of Law Enforcement Office which featured native fish and wildlife including a Florida panther, a manatee, an alligator, fish and many other animals. The butterfly garden uses native plants to attract butterflies and birds. Both the mural and the butterfly garden will help to preserve Florida’s future.

CMS Web Guide (University of Michigan-Flint)
What is a CMS and how can it be used?
A CMS (content management system) is a piece of software used to effectively organize and manage large amounts of digital content. Content, in reference to the university's CMS, includes all web pages, documents, and other files made available via the university web site. The CMS makes it possible for almost anyone to easily manage web content, without needing to know how to write HTML (hyper-text mark-up language, the typical method for creating web pages). By using a CMS the university will also have an easy way to implement version control.
Once in place and properly utilized, the CMS will improve the overall quality of content (by reducing broken links, content redundancy, human error, and providing a more uniform appearance for ease of navigation).

Commercially-pressed CD's and CD-R or CD-RW disks are fundamentally different technologies, which is why a commercial CD will continue to be readable long after a CD-R has become unusable.
A CD drive uses a focused laser beam that is reflected from the media surface in the CD disc. The beam is reflected onto a sensor that detects changes in the amount of energy that is reflected. The original (commercial) process used perforated aluminum as the media surface. When you use the term "pressed" you are using an old vinyl record term, but the production process is pretty much the same. There is a "master" disk that is put into a press which is filled with polycarbonate. The master disk has little pins sticking up everywhere there is to be a hole in the aluminum. The disk is cooled, and liquid aluminum is spun onto it. This results in an aluminum layer with holes in it.
When the disc is played, the laser reflects strongly from the shiny aluminum or less strongly (or not at all) from the holes. The reflection/non-reflection is translated into the ones and zeros of the binary data stored on the disk.
Over time the aluminum can oxidize or there can be other changes in the plastic and other materials that make the disc unusable. These are long term effects and the ultimate statistical life of a commercial CD is often debated, without conclusion, by the experts.
The CD-R and CD-RW do not use an aluminum media surface. Instead, they use a dye. When the disc is written, a high-powered laser causes spots on the disk to turn dark (hence the term "burning"). When played back, the sensor in the player sees the difference in reflectivity of the dark and not-so-dark spots as the binary data.
Unfortunately, because the dye is a light-sensitive chemical, over time it will fade. This can happen from the heat of the reading laser, from ambient light, and from chemical degradation in the dye and support media.
CD-R/RW media is safe for backup, and for creating alternate media (copying music files to play in your car so that if they are damaged from heat or wear out you can make another one, and preserve your originals elsewhere), and similar purposes. However, they are not safe for archival storage because they are not stable enough for that purpose.
Side note: when burning CD's for use in a car, for best results get "music CD's" which are designed for that application, or slow your burning speed down to 12x or 16x to get a darker spot from your high speed burner. The car will read the disc more reliably.
Insofar as tape storage is concerned, tape is also not a good archival choice of media. It's generally better than CD-R, although I haven't seen any comparative studies.
Major data centers who use tape storage refresh the storage periodically. Their Tape Management System (TMS) remembers the date the tape was recorded, and will call it up to be copied periodically. The old tape is then erased and reused until it reaches end of life (sometimes a fixed usage or time interval, sometimes when the number of recoverable errors reaches a threshold) at which time it is scrapped.
The whole issue of long term archive is complex, and goes beyond media. For media, if a data center stored its files on a 9 track magnetic tape twenty years ago, how would it retrieve that data today (you cannot find working 9 track drives). What if it had used an early Magneto-Optical (MO) drive? Small businesses have trouble when their tape drive fails, and they can't buy another drive in that old format.
File formats are another problem. I have word processing documents that deceased family members created years ago. I no longer have word processing software that will import some of those formats. I can (sometimes) extract the raw text and then try to reformat it in a current program, but if I don't have a printed original I don't know how it was intended to be formatted.
The only archival format that has stood the test of time is paper.
Submitted by: Kevin G. of Dallas, TX
Well, Carl, that so-called expert sure has stirred the waters and a LOT of people are wondering about the same question. However, your friendly Federal Government has studied the problem even longer.
To be specific, the National Archives and Records Administration, in charge of all of the record archiving of the government, has no standard on media storage, and requested NIST, that's National Institute of Standards and Technology, to write a new standard on media durability.
If you never heard of NIST, you're not alone, as NIST is more of a background organization, but suffice to say, they're the ones who creates the standards, references, and accuracy tests for all industries, from DNA to Time accuracy (in fact, if NIST operates one of the Internet "clocks" you can calibrate your PC to). NIST DNA reference material improves forensic DNA test accuracy. NIST also invented closed captioning and many other technology, but enough about NIST.
A gentleman by the name of Fred Byers spent a whole year testing various media, and wrote a guide for NIST to librarians who need to archive information on how to care for optical media such as CD-R and DVD-R's and such. In the guide, he basically stated that with proper handling (store in low humidity, no scratching, stored vertically, etc.) a DVD-R should last 30 years with no fear of losing any information. However, that is NOT an absolute number as it is dependent on a LARGE NUMBER OF FACTORS, some of which in your control, and some not:
Factors that affect disc life expectancy include the following:
type -- as recordable media is more durable than rewritable media manufacturing quality -- you get what you pay for condition of the disc before recording -- obvious quality of the disc recording -- garbage in, garbage out handling and maintenance -- scratches are bad for any discs environmental conditions -- humidity and temperature can warp disc, ruining the reflective layer in the media. light, esp. UV light can destroy the dye used in recordable media, etc.
Let us discuss each factor in a bit more detail
All types of media can be damaged through warpage (disc bending), scratches, and reflective layer breakdown due to oxygen leakage.
Recordable media, in addition, is susceptible to UV rays, which affects the dye used in the process.
Rewritable media, with phase-change recording, is even more susceptible to UV ray and temperature.
It is generally acknowledged that certain brands of media are better than others, and often the stuff on sale is not the stuff you may want to buy and keep around.
What you may not know is that there are only like 16 media manufacturers in the world. They make the media for all the brands that you see in the market, and some brands / factories are known to make high grade media (i.e. they tested best for maintaining data integrity, even when the media was subject to aging tests). While few independent labs did comprehensives tests, a test in Europe a while back for CD-R's revealed that Taiyo Yuden (Verbatim), Kodak (Kodak), and TDK (TDK) kept the most data intact.
Condition of the disc before recording
A disc should be brand new when used. While shelf live of a media is up to 5 years, why take chances? Buy them as you need tem.
Handling and maintenance
Scratches are bad for any discs, as it breaks open the substrate layer and allows air to tarnish the inside silver reflective layer inside.
Scratches also can make information on the media unreadable by interrupting the laser's path.
Environmental conditions -- humidity and temperature can warp the media, and exposure to UV light can destroy the dye used in CD-R's and DVD-R's.
Hope that answers your questions.
Submitted by: Kasey C. of San Francisco, CA
In the '80's, the CD was introduced in the market and portrayed as "THE" solution to the vinyl records.
The CD could be thrown in a mud pool, step on it, scratch it, nothing would harm he CD.
Now we all know that CD's has a lower lifetime as their vinyl counterparts and are more susceptible to errors than them. This is also true for the CD as a media to record software.
The early CD's, were recorded at maximum 640 MB. Mostly not even 640 MB but something like 528 MB. This made them less susceptible to scratches.
But as the CD technology was in a constant evolution, overburning a CD to 800 MB and more became common use. Also the DVD was introduced, offering 4/9GB on a wafer of the size of a CD.
It is obvious the the tracks are becoming so small that the finest scratch, the smallest fault, can ruin the CD/DVD forever.
Answering your question, there is no miracle solution to keep CD/DVD from deterioration trough age. But with a little bit of care, you can have many years of pleasure of your recordings.
1. Buy only CD/DVD from a good brand.
Buying low priced CD/DVD will mostly result in very disappointing experiences.
2. Dont overburn a CD/DVD.
While the overburn technique is now widely accepted by most software, it is still not fully reliable and mostly dont approved by the CD manufacturers.
3. Put every CD back in the jewel case after use, clean them as prescribed by the manufacturer, and avoid as much as possible touching the reading surface of the CD.
As a final remark, CD/DVD are nowadays not expensive and if you can make a backup of them, make a backup and store it in a safe place.
I use an external harddisk of 250GB (<300 CD's) to store a backup of the CD's/DVD's I have. Price of the harddisk is about 100$.
I have been able many times to rescue recordings which were otherwise lost forever by this harddisk.
Hope this helps,
Submitted by: Carlos
You have just discovered what most people don't discover until they actually lose data: commercial CDs and home-burned CDs are not the same. While a commercial premade CD will last a very long time if it is cared for properly, a home-burned CD will begin to deteriorate. The reason is that the home-burned version uses dyes to accomplish what the premade CD does by having it built into the disk. This is, of course, an oversimplified explanation, but it will suffice.
There are a few ways to maximize the amount of time a CD will last. First of all, buy good quality CDs to begin with. Stick with brand names that you are familiar with and have used successfully in the past.
Do not assume that just because a blank CD is made by a well-known company that it will be high quality.
Test them out by actually using them. One of the best ways to do this is to use them for your regular system backups. Be sure to actually restore from those backups periodically (easier if you have another computer handy that you can wipe out data on) or else use a backup program that allows you to mount the backup as a "virtual drive" and retrieve data from it.
This lets you know if there is a problem with a brand deteriorating unusually fast.
Second, never use labels on CDs. I found this out the hard way. Labels cause the CD to deteriorate much more rapidly than it otherwise would. Certain inks used in pens have been reported to do the same, but I have never encountered this problem, so it shouldn't be too severe. Do be certain, however, that you are gentle when marking CDs. Use a felt tip and do not press hard.
Third, put a note somewhere on the CD that tells you when you made it. This lets you monitor how long it has been since the CD was burned. If the data is irreplaceable, burn it to a new CD every 2 years.
As for the recommendation to use magnetic tapes, that has its own set of problems. Magnetic tapes also deteriorate, and they are subject to some damage that CDs are immune to, notably damage from electrical or magnetic fields.
In short, CDs are good for long term storage-- but don't assume that "long term" means forever. Check them regularly and burn them to new media when problems develop or even before if you can't replace what's on them.
As for storage, that is pretty much common sense. Keep the CDs in a case or an envelope if they are not actually being used. Avoid temperature extremes and handle gently. I also recommend making two copies of every important CD. This practice just saved my data when I discovered that the labels on my CDs had wiped out some irreplaceable family photos. It costs twice as much, but if the data is important to you then it isn't really very expensive, is it?
Submitted by: Denise R. of Lebanon, Missouri
Hi Carl N,
Your question has been set by a lot of people over the last 10 years. I've burned CD in 100s over the years and only found 2 discs with missing information. Lifetime of CDs is not limited due to one parameters only, more issues are setting the limit of lifetime. One is related conditions of storage and how you handle the discs. In other word, how careless or careful you are as the user. Then the material used in the CDs - how cheap a blank CD did you buy. And lastly your burning equipment, that is the laser diode.
When pressed CDs were introduced in beginning of the 80s lovers of vinyl records claimed, that CDs would last for 2 years only. But as you have experienced CDs from this period can still be played. I remember one report from about 1990, which claimed a lifetime of only 3-4 years. Looking into the report, it turned out that the condition of storage was -30C (some -25F) and reading/playing equipment had a worn laser diode. Most of us can only say: I don't store my CDs in the freezer and todays laser diodes doesn't wear out as they used to.
Turning towards recordable CDs, the whole issue is a matter of having a whole bunch of clear holes placed in circles in a foil. Readability of these holes are depending on a number of issues. How clear are the holes? Is edge of the hole clear? Is the reflectivity of the materials sufficient? Is the laser still as effective as it was? or has the surface become matte? For the early CD-burners this was jeopardized by increasing burning speed and some blank CD had doubtful foil material. Adding, to this some CD-burners were even sold with writing speeds beyond its capability. Many blank CDs were rejected in this period due to bad burners rather than bad discs. It is my conclusion, that this interim period has given us some doubtful discs.
You have to be careful with your CDs and also a little bit extra careful with your own. They don't like heat, bright light, bending, and writing with aggressive writing pens is also nasty. Especially pens with unknown chemicals may etch the CDs, it is just like burning, but this time controlled by the chemicals.
In case you wanna increase the lifetime of your recordings, you may buy CDs which is claimed to 300+ years lifetime. These CDs are referred to as GOLD-CD. These CDs has a special layer which include some 24ct gold. The advantages of these CDs are the ability to create clear holes into it with reduced oxidation or corrosion over time. Amazing almost also unbelievable 300 year. Just 100 years could be great for me. In 10-20 years everything would be transferred to new media type anyway. I saw a report on the 300 years at
Price of these GOLD CDs is 10-20x times the usual ones.
You have been suggested to use magnetic tape. Nor tapes does not last forever. As matter of fact the sound quality decays over time; frequency range is decreased by each use. This loss you can not be restored as with a digital media. Only digital storage keeps its audio frequency range over time and use. Like R&R;DIGITAL media is here to stay. You may call it CD, DVD, MPx, Blu-ray or whatever, but it's digital.
I believe that todays discs and equipment can provide a disc with sufficient lifetime for most of us and may even restore your more doubtful discs from the early burning time with success. Even discs which are registered as 'No disc' may be restored by copying it today. In case you wanna assure yourselves; let the PC verify the burned disc, this option is normally disabled by default.
What shall I do with my precious discs from the early days? My best recommendation would be to make a new copy, while the old is still readable. This is easy and cheap to most of us today as having two drives in your PC is not uncommon. Lastly, the quality and lifetime of recorded discs is today likely to most depended on your own care.
Submitted by: Leif M. of Helsingor, Denmark
Regarding problems developing over time with recordable CD-R media, I've run into some of this myself, but I also have quite a few discs that were made back when the very first 1x CD burners were made available to the public, and they still read just fine for me.
I suspect that there are several factors involved here.
1. I'm certain there's a difference in quality between brands of CD-R media. A number of my really old CD-Rs that still read flawlessly today were Kodak branded, and were considered expensive "premium quality" discs at the time. They're even physically a little bit thicker than most other media I've handled. By contrast, some of the generic media I purchased because of the low price on 100-pack spindles has actually developed "bubbles" where you can see the dye that's sandwiched between the layers of plastic is disintegrating. (Of course it won't read if small spots are completely gone!) There were/are several different types of dye used for CD-R media, as well, and I wouldn't be surprised if it's turning out that some types have better longevity than others. For example, Verbatim was known for using their trademark blue-tinted dye, while others were shades of green or gold.
2. From what I've read and observed, handling makes a big difference too. Leaving your CD-R's exposed to sunlight (as folks tend to do with music CDs used in their cars or trucks) probably shaves years off of their lifespan. Putting them in some type of jewel-case or sleeve when not in use is a very good idea. Boxes of empty jewel-cases can be purchased fairly inexpensively at most office supply and electronics chain stores.
3. A CD-R holding computer data is inherently more "fragile" and subject to data loss than a CD-R recorded as an audio disc. The standard used for recording audio CDs incorporates quite a bit of error correction information to handle small scuffs and scratches on the media, but besides that, audio data is spread out over a much larger portion of the CD-R. If you have a .ZIP file stored on a CD-R, for example, a pinhole-sized mark someplace on the disc where that .ZIP file is stored can easily be enough to prevent the whole archive from extracting properly. By contrast, the same sized mark might only cause a very brief "stutter" at one point of a song on a music disc (or not pose a discernable problem at all, due to the error correction).
If your audio discs are already deteriorating to the point where players are rejecting them as "unreadable" or they're skipping badly, it sounds to me like things have gotten pretty bad. The only recommendation I'd have is to re-record your music to fresh, good-quality CD-R media and throw out the old ones - and in the future, make a habit of transferring your music to fresh discs every few years or so.
Luckily, in the case of computer software backups, they tend to become so outdated, you no longer really need to keep them by the time the media they're recorded on starts failing. But for those trying to preserve digital photos and the like, I'd recommend this same procedure. Make a fresh set of backups every so often and discard the old media - before it fails on you and you lose something priceless!
Submitted by: Tom W.
CD burned media fails after time.
I am a practicing technician and this is not a new complaint. It is my firm belief that most consumers burn their media at the fastest speed possible for both their software and the media they use. This is fine but there may well be a trade-off in doing this.
What most consumers do not perhaps understand is that commercially produced CD's have actual pits pressed into them that represent the digital data of the original sound data. A burned CD on the other hand is made by fabricating a photo sensitive layer to mimic the pits found in pressed media.
I have found three major causes for this consumers problem they are as
1. A slower burn makes a stronger image representation in the photo
sensitive layer of a burned CD. A faster burn while successful may not impress the photo sensitive layer as effectively as a slow burn. Over time the burn fails as the photo sensitive layer deteriorates.
2. Sunlight and other forms of intense light can effect a burned CD
because it can cause a distortion in the burned media's photo sensitive layer.
3. Scratches by far are more evident on burned media and more easily
caused than on pressed media. Most consumers seem to ignore the manufactures warning and suggestions. Handling of the disc in a careful manner as advised by the manufacturer is the best policy here. I use a camera lens cloth to clean surface of all my media. A camera lens cloth will not scratch the disc surface. Paper and regular household cloths will cause scratches.
Observe the above and I do believe you will have better results.
One more thing always use the media recommended by the burner manufacturer. It is endorsed and guaranteed to work, many of the cheap non name discs out there are just not up to par. Its just like the old cassette tape days.
Most audiophiles went for tapes like Maxell, JVC, Sony etc. but as everyone knows there were a lot of bogus brands out there for the un-informed to purchase.
Submitted by: Peter K.
> I recently read an article by a data storage expert who claimed that
> burned CD-Rs and CD-RWs can be expected to last only two to five years
> and not a whole lot more. I personally have commercially pressed CDs
> from the 1980s that still play fine, but I have begun to notice that
> some of my burned CD-Rs are beginning to skip
you mention that there are basically two types of CDs: Those that are created with all information in place and those you can buy and write on.
The first type is quite robust as the information has been "engraved" into the surface just below the reflector. The most critical part of such a CD is the reflector, most often a very thin layer of aluminum.
The second type of CD works a bit differently: There is a dye layer below the reflector and the information is written onto the CD-R(W) by "burning"
and thereby locally changing the optical properties of the dye. The most critical part is the dye, besides the reflector as above. If the dye degrades the CD easily gets unreadable. The dye of CD-RW is even more critical as it must be "resetable" - another constraint.
> The expert suggests that for secure long-term storage, high -quality
> magnetic tape is the way to go.
This solution is quite expensive as you need a tape drive and enough tape cartridges, but has the advantage of a much larger storage capacity. If the manufacturers say their tape cartridges are reliable for a very long time they have one advantage above CD-R: This type of storage device has been around long enough to prove it. CD-R has been on the market for no more than 10 years.
The best strategy for the private user is: Have a good archive strategy, save often and store the media carefully in a dry, dark, cool place. If you store every file more than once you have a better chance to retrieve it.
There is no real alternatives to CD-R. Use high-quality ones. Do not use any DVD variety as their reliability is much less. DVD may be used for an image backup of your boot drive so you can restore your present configuration for the months to come.
Submitted by: Alexander V.
Unlike pressed original CDs, burned CDs have a relatively short life span of between two to five years, depending on the quality of the CD. There are a few things you can do to extend the life of a burned CD, like keeping the disc in a cool, dark space, but not a whole lot more.
The problem is material degradation. Optical discs commonly used for burning, such as CD-R and CD-RW, have a recording surface consisting of a layer of dye that can be modified by heat to store data. The degradation process can result in the data "shifting" on the surface and thus becoming unreadable to the laser beam.
Many of the cheap burnable CDs available at discount stores have a life span of around two years, In fact, there are some of the better-quality discs offer a longer life span, of a maximum of five years. Distinguishing high-quality burnable CDs from low-quality discs is difficult, I think because few vendors use life span as a selling point.
I've had good luck with Verbatim media, and bad results with TDK. Playback with the TDK discs I used degraded steadily over time, in spite of very little use, and not much in the way of scratches or other blemishes on the disc. On the other hand, the Verbatim discs I've used have held up well over time, and under more use than the TDK ones I used.
Opinions vary on how to preserve data on digital storage media, such as optical CDs and DVDs. I have my own view: To overcome the preservation limitations of burnable CDs, Im suggesting using magnetic tapes, which, as I read, can have a life span of 30 years to 100 years, depending on their quality. Even if magnetic tapes are also subject to degradation, they're still the superior storage media.
But I want to point out that no storage medium lasts forever and, consequently, consumers and business alike need to have a migration plan to new storage technologies.
A Good Question to get in this subject is Does Burning Speed makes difference in quality of CDs? Someone told me that the burning speed makes a difference in the quality of the records. The lower it is, the deeper it burns and therefore the better the quality is. I heard that there are some audio technicians decide to burn masters at 2x and copies at 4x due to getting digital noise from higher burn rates. Might just depend on the burner quality and the burning program...
Hoping you get the Point of my explanation.
Submitted by: Sameer T.
Everyone who owns a business is always trying to be enticed by the security and the longevity of magnetic tape. And although I'm apt to agree with them on its durability, I don't use it to back up important data in my business. I have two problems with magnetic tape vs. CD or DVD. The first problem is hardware. Data backed up on a CD or DVD can be loaded into any computer with a drive capable of handling the media. The same can be said about tape backup, however you are more likely to find a computer off the shelf with a compatible CD or DVD drive vs a magnetic tape drive. The other problem is the need for long term storage.
As a business owner, I'm backing up my important data every one to three days. I've been using CD-RW media to do this for years. If a disk gets corrupt, you can reformat it using your burning software, then use it again. If you are concerned about your CD becoming corrupt, simply burn two or three. The cost of three CD or even DVD media is much more reasonable than the cost of one of those tapes. And if my server dies, I can buy any computer at any store, and load the data onto the new computer right away and I'm back in the game. I have several people trying to convince me of the benefit of a paper backup system. I find it easier (and cheaper) to have multiple electronic backups. My business server has a RAID 1 card and two hard drives which mirror each other. I have the CD backup, and I then take this data and save it to a secure partition on another machine in a separate location.
The likelihood of all of these systems failing at one time is highly unlikely. And if it does, I'm taking the day off, because that's just real bad luck. As far as long term storage (like music), I've noticed that CD-RW can lose the data in the long haul, but haven't had any problems with CD-R media. I have some that skip, but not for a reason I didn't know about. I buy the large spools of CD-R which don't come with jewel cases. So these disks get abused. If you know you are going to keep something for a really long time, I would make sure the disks you buy have jewel cases. And you can apply the multiple disk system with this as well. The media is easy on the wallet, and the more backups you have, the lower the risk you will actually lose the data.
I don't think I answered all the questions, but that's my take.
Submitted by: Dave K.

Nature Magazine reports that the European Commission has awarded up to €1 billion in research funding for the Human Brain Project led by neuroscientist Henry Markram. And while the official announcement is not expected until January 28, part of the project will be dedicated to the development of a exaflop supercomputer that will be used for the simulation of the brain model.
Brain researchers are generating 60,000 papers per year,” said Markram as he explained the concept in Bern. “They’re all beautiful, fantastic studies — but all focused on their one little corner: this molecule, this brain region, this function, this map.” The HBP would integrate these discoveries, he said, and create models to explore how neural circuits are organized, and how they give rise to behaviour and cognition — among the deepest mysteries in neuroscience. Ultimately, said Markram, the HBP would even help researchers to grapple with disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease. “If we don’t have an integrated view, we won’t understand these diseases,” he declared.
The Human Brain Project is one of the two winner projects of the Future and Emerging Technologies Flagship competition launched by the European Commission, the other one being the “Graphene” project led by Swedish theoretical physicist Jari Kinaret.

Gramsci and education
Antonio Gramsci is one of the major social and political theorists of the 20th century whose work has had an enormous influence on several fields, including educational theory and practice. Gramsci and Education demonstrates the relevance of Antonio Gramsci’s thought for contemporary educational debates. The essays are written by scholars located in different parts of the world, a number of whom are well known internationally for their contributions to Gramscian scholarship and/or educational research. The collection deals with a broad range of topics, including schooling, adult education in general, popular education, workers’ education, cultural studies, critical pedagogy, multicultural education, and the role of intellectuals in contemporary society.

Charlotte Planners: John Nolen
Excerpted from Neighborhoods: Charlotte's Neighborhood Planning Tradition
by Dr. Thomas W. Hanchett
Photo from Mary Norton Kratt and Thomas W. Hanchett, Legacy: The Myers Park Story (Myers Park Foundation, 1986).
Three of the most important city planning firms in the United States helped shape Charlotte. They were the Olmsted Brothers, John Nolen, and Earle Draper. All worked in the city during the boom years of the 1910s and 1920s. They gave the city new ideals in urban design which are still followed today. In addition, Nolen and Draper took lessons learned in Charlotte's neighborhoods and applied them in hundreds of cities throughout the nation, giving Charlotte's early planning efforts special importance.
When Charlotte's original hundred acre tract was laid off in house lots in the 1770s the city fathers chose a gridiron street pattern. A surveyor, either hired by the village or supplied by the colonial government, laid out the streets at right angles to each other. Many cities of the era were not planned at all, with streets growing up from trails and cowpaths running in every direction. The grid was the most popular alternative because it was orderly and easy to understand, and its straight lines meant that it could be created quickly and broken up into lots easily. Charlotte's reliance on the grid continued throughout the nineteenth century.
In the 1910s Charlotte's New South leaders, as part of their drive to make Charlotte a modern city, hired John Nolen, the Olmsted Brothers, and Earle Sumner Draper who turned the city forever from the grid pattern. The very idea of having a landscape architect/city planner design streets was unusual. In progressive Dilworth, Latta had hired Joseph Forsyth Johnston, a landscape architect from New York City, to create Latta Park and evidently also asked him for suggestions on the surrounding street pattern. Most areas, though, were laid out methodically by surveyors or civil engineers.
Nolen, the Olmsteds, and Draper were part of a generation with a strong appreciation for nature. America's first National Parks were established in the era and the conservation movement blossomed, extending even to President Theodore Roosevelt (1901-09). Landscape architects sought to bring this consciousness to city planning.
John Nolen's first job in Charlotte was the design of Independence Park in June of 1905. 7 Independence was the city's first public park, and it was also Nolen's first public commission after his graduation from Harvard University's School of Landscape Architecture. Nolen went on to become one of the nation's top city planners, designing more than 400 projects across the nation and helping to found the first city planning professional organization. 1
Nolen was part of a movement in the decades around the turn of the century that sought social reform in America's cities, a movement that included such well-known figures as social worker Jane Addams and muckraker Lincoln Steffens. Born in lower-middle-class circumstances in Philadelphia in 1869, Nolen graduated from the University of Pennsylvania's prestigious Wharton School majoring in economics and public administration. 2 He spent ten years as executive secretary of the American Society for the Extension of University Teaching, a "people's university" which brought college-level night classes to the urban working class.
By 1903, after visits to Europe's "Garden City" experiments, he became convinced that the new profession of city planning was more effective way for him to improve urban conditions. 3 The Garden City idea, begun in England in the 1890s, proposed medium-sized new towns surrounded by greenbelts. The new communities were to be carefully planned by professional designers to include the best features of both city and country, and to be self-sustaining with commercial and industrial areas as well as residences. No university in the United States yet offered a city planning degree, so Nolen enrolled in Harvard's School of Landscape Architecture and graduated in 1905 at age thirty-six. 4
It is not known how Nolen came to be engaged by the Charlotte Park and Tree Commission to design Independence Park. The job proved quite fortuitous to Nolen's career. While he was in town a young real estate developer named George Stephens commissioned him to design the grounds of Stephens' own residence. 5 Evidently the result greatly impressed Stephens, and he became Nolen's patron for a substantial number of projects all over North Carolina. 6
In 1909 Nolen drew plans for Stephens' Kanuga Lake resort colony Hendersonville, North Carolina, now a religious retreat for the Episcopal Church. 7 In the early teens, possibly as a result of Stephens' influence, he planned Greensboro's country-club suburb of Irving Park in Guilford County near where Stephens had been born. 8 Nolen did the 1918 plan for the expansion of the campus of Stephens' alma mater, UNC Chapel Hill. 9 In the 1920s he prepared a city plan for Stephens' adoptive home town of Asheville, North Carolina, a document that received national attention as one of the first thorough small city plans in the Southeast. 10 Later projects included a new town development called Penderlea in Pender County, North Carolina, for the U. S. Farm Service Administration, and a western North Carolina regional plan undertaken in connection with Stephens' advocacy of the proposed Blue Ridge Parkway. 11
At the same time, John Nolen continued his activities in Charlotte. Between 1905 and 1907 he designed grounds for private residences of Stephens' partner F. C. Abbott, Chamber of Commerce leader Wade Harris, E. R. Russell, P. M. Brown, A. J. Crowell, W.B. Rodman. L.A. Dodsworth, R.A.Dunn, F.O. Hawley, and O. A. Robbins. 12 In April 1907 Nolen visited the city and gave a slide lecture on "Parks and Playgrounds" illustrated with stereoptican slides. 13 That June, the Park and Tree Commission hired him once again, to provide designs for the area around the city Post Office, known as Vance Square, and for the old cemetery behind First Presbyterian Church, then known as Cemetery Square and now called Settlers Cemetery. 14
In 1911 John Nolen returned to Charlotte at George Stephens' behest, to work on his greatest project in the city, the suburb of Myers Park. 15 Stephens spared little expense, and gave Nolen free rein to plan a state-of-the-art "unified suburban design." Myers Park gave the city curving tree-lined avenues, grand boulevards with landscaped medians, and the beginnings of a system of greenway parks along creek banks. The results will be discussed in a later section of this report, but suffice it to say here that Myers Park has proved to be Charlotte's most lastingly successful suburb, and a model for similar developments across the South.
Nolen's final job in Charlotte was preparation of preliminary studies for what would have been the city's first master plan. The Charlotte Chamber of Commerce hired him in 1917 to gather and map data on existing land use, population densities, racial patterns, industrial location, transportation corridors, land values, water and sewer lines, and parks. 16 The resulting Civic Survey is an extremely comprehensive and meticulous picture of this Southern city at the beginning of the twentieth century.
The Civic Survey was intended to lead to preparation of a full scale plan. Such a plan was vital to Charlotte's orderly growth; Charlotteans had given up the old grid city with its easy understandability and it was necessary now that some other form or organization be developed to tie together all the new suburbs. At the end of the Civic Survey field supervisor Earle Draper sketched an indication of what the plan might look like. He extended Nolen's Independence Park and Edgehill Road Park into a city-wide network of greenways along stream beds. Boulevards radiated from the center of the city to carry commuters, and a belt road ringed the old urban core to provide easy cross-town travel.
The Chamber never appropriated the money to allow Nolen to turn his data into a master plan. Nolen watched sadly as potential greenways were cut up into residential backyards, and as expanding development made the possibility of new radial and belt roads more and more expensive. He wrote Chamber official Clarence Quester in 1924, "I think Charlotte is slipping so far as city planning goes. There are examples in the city of errors that are costly and more or less irremediable. Other errors will follow without a city plan." 16
Charlotte remained without a coherent development scheme throughout its early twentieth century boom years. No comprehensive plan was adopted until 1960. 18 Ironically, its proposals were very similar to Nolen and Draper's in concept. During the 1970s the city finally completed a belt road, dubbed "Charlotte 4", and in the 1980s is struggling to buy up floodplain greenways.
John Nolen's work in Charlotte and North Carolina in the 1900s through 1920s was only part of his growing national practice. From his start in Independence Park, Nolen went on to be one of the nation's busiest planners, with projects ranging from private estates to some of America's first regional plans. By the time he began Myers Park he had already had private commissions all over the East Coast from Bar Harbor, Maine, to Havana, Cuba. 19 In the teens and twenties he became sought after by municipalities. He delighted in drawing city plans to guide small Charlotte-sized places with great growth potential. His designs for such places as Wisconsin's capital city of Madison, and California's capital of Sacramento and port of San Diego, among many others, are important factors in the shape those cities retain to this day.
In addition to his planning work, Nolen was a major leader in the creation of a network of professional planning organizations. In 1917, just as he was completing Charlotte's Civic Survey, he helped found the American Institute of City Planners (later the American Institute of Planners). 20 He also participated in creation of the American Society of Planning Officials and the National Housing Association, and was the first American president of the International Federation of Housing and Town Planning. 21 The honors underscored the fact that Nolen was considered a leader of his profession. When he died in 1937 the New York Times praised him as an "internationally known architect and pioneer in modern city and regional planning." 22
Along with the Olmsted Brothers and a handful of other early twentieth century practitioners, John Nolen helped transform American city planning. 23 Frederick Law Olmsted, Sr., had developed the principles of sensitive urban design in the nineteenth century, but it was Nolen's generation that created "city planning" as a full-fledged profession to carry out those principles, with its own educational background and professional organizations. John Nolen helped set up planning schools at major universities including Harvard and M.I.T. and his six books, dozens of articles, and thousands of speeches aided in "spreading the gospel" of city planning. By the end of his life, cities no longer saw planning as a rich man's luxury, but as an integral part of municipal growth, and many large places had their own planning departments. John Nolen's far-ranging impact as a city planning pioneer makes his early Charlotte work of special interest to students of urban development.
1 John L. Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record of Achievement (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University, Program in Urban and Regional Studies, 1976), pp. 13-17. See also Scott, p. 738.
2 Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record. . ., pp. 15-16. John L. Hancock, "John Nolen and the American City Planning Movement: A History of Cultural Change and Community Response, 1900-1940" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1964), pp. 1-20.
3. Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record. . ., p. 16. Hancock, "John Nolen and the American City Planning Movement. . .", pp. 21-37.
4 Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record..., p. 16.
5 "Draft of Preliminary Finding Guide: Papers of John Nolen, Sr., 1869-1937," collection 2903, Cornell University Department of Manuscripts and Archives, Ithaca, New York. The "Finding Guide" includes a copy of Nolen's "job book" listing all his projects chronologically.
6 Hancock, "John Nolen and the American City Planning Movement. . .," p. 42.
7Charlotte Observer, December 15, 1943.
8 Stephens' connection with the Greensboro project needs to be explored. Plans for the street layout and gates are in the Nolen collection at Cornell. It has not been possible to determine exactly when Nolen created the streetplan. A draft essay by Ray Manieri of Greensboro, "From City Beautiful to City Useful: the Development of Civic Improvement Activities in Greensboro, North Carolina, 1900-1923," April, 1982, places the design in 1911, based on an undated promotional booklet. One large scale street plan in the Nolen papers is undated, but the rest of the documents were produced in 1915 and 1916.
9 Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record. . ., p. 20.
10 Ibid., pp. 26, 30, 64.
11 Ibid., pp. 14, 66.
12 "Draft of Preliminary Finding Guide. . .," job list.
13 Charlotte Daily Observer, April 20, 1907.
14 "Draft of Preliminary Finding Guide. . .," job list. According to Kathleen Jacklin at the Cornell archives, Nolen's office discarded all material from these earliest designs.
16 John Nolen, "Civic Survey, Charlotte, North Carolina: Report to the Chamber of Commerce" (Cambridge, Massachusetts: typescript, 1917). The only known surviving copy of this document is in John Nolen's papers at Cornell.
17 John Nolen, letter to Clarence Kuester, March, 1924, in Nolen collection at Cornell.
18 Charlotte Mecklenburg Planning Commission, "The Charlotte Mecklenburg Comprehensive Plan (draft)" (Charlotte: Charlotte Mecklenburg Planning Commission, 1973), p. 4.
19 "Draft of Preliminary Finding Guide. . ," job list.
20 Scott, p. 164.
21 Hancock, John Nolen: a Bibliographical Record. . ., p. 16.
22 New York Times, February 19, 1937.
For more information...
Neighborhoods: Charlotte's Neighborhood Planning Tradition

Wednesday, March 11, 2009
rothbard on the utility of quantitative easing
Economist Murray Rothbard ("America‟s Great Depression", Ludwig von Mises Institute 2000) made extensive analysis of why the inflationary policies of the US Federal Reserve failed during the Great Depression. Those policies proved to be counterproductive:“American citizens lost confidence in the banks and demanded cash.. for their deposits.. while foreigners lost confidence in the dollar and demanded gold.. The more that.. the Fed tried to inflate, the more worried the.. public became about the dollar, the more gold flowed out of the banks, and the more deposits were redeemed for cash.. The Fed purchase of government securities was a purely artificial attempt to dope the inflation horse..”
this has to be a core concern of every briton at the moment, with the bank of england having entered the gilt market to monetize government debt. the grand experiment intends to goose economic activity at the expense of the real value of the already-slashed pound, with some sincerely icelandic tail risk.
in normal conditions, a devalued currency could be expected to assist exporters as well. as mentioned by the financial times, there is considerable doubt as to the efficacy of that pathway amid a global demand collapse. so the primary intention is to increase the currency in circulation in the hopes that more on hand will mean more spending and (critically) more borrowing.
this clearly did not work well in the 1930s to the extent it was undertaken as banks chose to hoard cash (much as today). of course, the united states also experienced a series of devastating bank runs which reinforced that tendency. today, with the FDIC, bank runs are a much smaller problem. aren't they?
the hard answer is that "it depends". much of the catastrophe of 2008 can be seen as a run on the shadow banking system -- that is, the uninsured and off-balance-sheet extensions of the financial system. the contraction of that massive credit generator is analogous in its effect to a systemic bank run that has resulted in failed "banks", boggling capital losses and widespread (and justifiable) paranoia.
that run has at times extended to more visible elements of the banking system, forcing insurance to be put into place on an ad hoc basis -- such as the commercial paper and money market fund backstops put in place following the collapse of lehman brothers, which were hoped to be able to forstall a systemic run on those markets which was actually underway.
beyond that there is the question of the fate of crossborder deposits -- international depositors in american banks have heretofore been well treated by the FDIC, but their accounts are not legally protected. these accounts are a massive part of the deposits in money-center banks such as C or JPM. crossborder runs have already become a reality in some parts of the world during this crisis.
and there is finally the question of the FDIC itself. michael panzner forecast in his sometimes-eerily-prescient "financial armageddon" (and has repeated elsewhere) that eventually deposit insurance (along with many overpromised government-backed obligations) will likely have to be diluted or perhaps even eliminated in the crisis now underway as the fiscal position of government may not allow it to backstop all failed banks as the debt unwind progresses and the losses being assumed by the government through the FDIC and other pathways become overwhelming. the mere anticipation of that development could reintroduce the bank run to american society after a long absence, which is probably why sheila bair recently approached congress for a $500bn line to the treasury, a move many see as preparatory of the resolution of a money-center bank. this comes on top of a draconian assessment levied across all banks, leaving many smaller community bankers incensed at what some term "confiscating the capital of the industry" on the part of the government in service of the majors.
and this is not to mention hoarding in anticipation of runs on other elements of the financial system -- most notably of late the insurance sector, which rolfe winkler delves into today.
beyond simply engendering some healthy skepticism of the value of government insurance in a real crisis, the two-pronged point here is
- that quantitative easing may not work to promote economic activity through increased lending in part because the value of assurances against losses are, even and perpahs particularly where comprehensive, questionable;
- that quantitative easing, or rather monetization, may be the only resort to which government could really appeal in the case of multiple large-scale bank resolutions.
it is impossible to know how this would work out in detail -- but should we witness a real spate of dollar weakness in forex markets as things go along, government may be faced with some very stark choices about what it can really afford to backstop.

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, or immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), is a complex disease in which hemolysis occurs because
of antierythrocyte antibody production. This article explores the pathophysiology of primary and secondary IMHA and diagnostic
and treatment options, as well as prognosis in dogs and cats. Our review of the recent literature regarding IMHA in veterinary
patients reveals a focus on individual cases and a lack of controlled clinical studies, which makes a detailed review of
IMHA triggers and treatment options difficult.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA VS. IMHA
Many causes of anemia exist in dogs and cats, so a clear distinction should be drawn between hemolytic anemia and IMHA.
Hemolytic anemias are conditions in which red blood cells (RBCs) are destroyed at an accelerated rate and a normal regenerative
response is seen in the bone marrow. In these non-immune-mediated conditions, RBCs can be destroyed as a result of inherited
membrane and enzyme defects, increased fragility from oxidative damage, or metabolic causes such as hypophosphatemia or water
intoxication.1 Traditional immune-mediated mechanisms (immunoglobulins, complement) do not mediate lysis in hemolytic anemia. Instead,
destruction occurs because of factors such as increased osmotic fragility, decreased RBC function in an alkalemic environment,
or increased clearance from oxidative damage.1 Unlike the treatment of immune-mediated anemia, immunosuppression is generally not used to treat hemolytic anemias. Thus,
it is imperative to investigate whether an anemia has an underlying cause before assuming it is immune-mediated.
Below we discuss some of the common causes of hemolytic anemia. A more exhaustive list can be found in Table 1.
Table 1: Selected Causes of Canine and Feline Non-immune-mediated Hemolytic Anemia
Zinc and copper toxicosis. One of the most common causes of hemolytic anemia in dogs is zinc toxicosis from the ingestion of zinc-containing objects.
High zinc concentrations can be found in pennies minted since 1983, board game pieces, zippers, zinc oxide ointment, and various
other sources. Zinc toxicosis can cause a severe intravascular hemolysis that is associated with small amounts of Heinz body
and spherocyte formation. Hemolysis from zinc toxicosis can be easily mistaken for IMHA if a survey abdominal radiographic
examination is not performed. Treatment consists of removing the foreign object and providing supportive care. Copper toxicosis
can also result in a marked intravascular hemolysis and methemoglobinemia.1
Heinz body anemia. Heinz bodies are dark-staining refractile material that indicate irreversibly denatured and precipitated hemoglobin in RBCs
and can occur from oxidative damage in animals that have ingested onions or received drugs such as methylene blue, dl-methionine,
or vitamin K3.1 In some cases of hemolytic anemia, eccentrocytes—cells in which the damaged hemoglobin is clustered together and shifted
to one side of the RBC membrane, leaving a clear crescent-shaped region—are also present. Eccentrocytes and cells containing
Heinz bodies have less deformability and more rigidity, making them more likely to be lysed or removed from the circulation
by the spleen.
Feline RBCs are especially sensitive to oxidative damage because of a high number of sulfhydryl groups in their hemogloblin.
In addition, feline spleens, because of their nonsinusal conformation, are less effective at removing Heinz bodies than are
canine sinusal spleens. Thus, Heinz body anemia is more commonly seen in cats and can be present during toxicosis as well
as in a variety of other diseases such as hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and lymphoma.1
Hypophosphatemia. Hypophosphatemia can also cause hemolytic anemia in patients being treated for diabetes mellitus, hepatic lipidosis, starvation,
and other conditions.1 In these cases, it is thought that an abrupt drop in plasma phosphate concentrations can cause a concurrent depletion of
RBC adenosine triphosphate, diphosphoglycerate, and reduced glutathione. These depletions lead to less deformability, more
osmotic fragility, and more susceptibility to oxidative injury in erythrocytes. A rapid drop in packed cell volume and a mild
Heinz body anemia can be seen in animals with hypophosphatemia. Treatment consists of phosphate supplementation (intravenous
in cases of severe depletion, oral in mild cases).1

'Old Earth Scientists'... I've never heard that before ... You aren't suggesting that there are 'new earth scientists' are you ?
Well sort of, there are commonly two types of scientists - old earth (who believe that the earth is billions of years old) and then young earth who believe that the earth is around 6,000 years old.As far as Science is concerned the big bang occured between approx 14 - 18 billion years ago
As stated above, there are both old earth scientists and young earth scientists. Old earth scientists believe in the big bang theory and that the age of the earth is in the order of billions of years. Having said that perhaps the above statement should read "As far as old earth scientists believe, the big bang occurred between approx 14 - 18 billion years ago." Furthermore, when you say "concerned" it makes the assumption that the big bang actually did happen. The big bang is a theory and unless scientists can replicate it, it will forever remain a theory.thats not a theory formed by 'old earth scientists' that is calculated using every method we have at our disposal
Unfortunately your statement falls short from the beginning - remember, the big bang theory is just that, a theory.measuring the expansion rate of the universe, measuring light from distant stars etc..there are too many to mention.
The Bible also confirms that the universe is expanding. Isaiah 40:22 teaches that God “stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.” This verse was written thousands of years before secular scientists accepted an expanding universe. It was until more recently that scientists changed their mind from the universe being constant to actually expanding.
There are a few theories floating around with respect to the apparent red shift of stellar objects. old earth scientists believe it to be a result of bodies moving away from earth. As such, they have suggested that there should be no fully formed stellar bodies further away than about 8 billion light years. Astronomers have pointed telescopes into supposed redshift deserts (I.E. locations in space where there should be no fully formed bodies) and they found a sky full of fully formed galaxies.
Measuring light from distant stars relies on the assumption that light has always moved at a constant rate, which unfortunately has not been proven.1. The moon moves away from the earth at around 4cm per year. If the earth was billions of years old, the moon could not be as close to the earth as it is.
That suggests that the moon has always been in orbit around the earth for the 4.5 billion years...it hasn't
Unfortunately this is not what old earth scientists believe. They believe that the earth and moon have been around for over 4 billion years.2. Oil deposits in the earth are under extreme pressure. If the earth was billions of years old this pressure would have caused the oil to have seeped through the rock layers and eventually the pressure would all be gone - I.E. there would be no oil under pressure today
The oil deposits aren't 4.5 billion years old either... they are from rotting animal/vegetable sources from much later .. millions of years not billions
I should have written this statement differently I.E. millions of years. The problem still stands however that if oil has was around millions of years ago, then it could not be under pressure today.3. The sun is shrinking at a rate of five feet per hour. this means that the sun would have been touching the earth a mere 11million years ago (let alone billions of years ago)
No, that asssumes a constant state universe...the universe is very far from constant...its expanding and has been since the beginning. Nobody has ever suggested that the earth - moon - sun position has been in existance let alone constant since the big bang.
Don't old earth scientists make assumptions also? If you look above, old earth scientists make the assumption that the speed of light is constant. Furthermore they still hold to the assumption that the earth, moon and sun have been around for over 4 billion years.4. Helium is added to the atmosphere everyday. Basically there is not enough helium in the atmosphere to support billions of years.
Helium hasn't been added for 4.5 billion years ... again the earth wouldn't have had an atmosphere until recently ( recent related to its 4.5 billion age )
According to old earth scientists. The oxygen enriched atmosphere (basically as we know it today) was formed around 2.7 billion years ago. The amount of helium contained within our atmosphere today is only enough to support thousands of years, certainly not billions.5. Comets lose mass over time, there would be no comets left if the universe was billions of years old. (because comets were apparently a by product of the big bang)
Thats misleading. The origin and time of origin of comets is not claimed to be the big bang. Thats a straw man.
(I am guessing that a straw is another way of saying clutching at straws?)
Again with this one I should not have just skimmed over it but should have elaborated. Comets have long been a good evidence due to their fragile nature and life expectancy. Comets are commonly huge chunks of ice traveling at tremendous speeds through space, when they come close to a star, they begin to melt and so form a trail of moisture. This can't last forever and it will eventually disintegrate. Here in-lies a problem for old earth scientists because there should be no comets left - they should all have been disintegrated by now (giving the billions of years). And if we are talking about clutching at straws - here's a good one for you.
Old earth scientists have come up with another theory to try and explain why we still have comets today. So in comes the Oort Cloud. The Oort Cloud is a hypothetical spherical cloud of comets which may lie roughly 1 light year away from our sun. Apparently, these comets become dislodged from the Oort Cloud by the gravitational pull of passing stars and the milky way itself (due to it apparently being at the outer edges of our milky way) These comets are then free to move about and disintegrate (which is how we see comets today) Now this Oort Cloud has not been detected or seen it is another theory - it is just a hypothetical cloud to try and fit in with the mold of an old universe.6. The earths magnetic field decays by approximately 5% every century, this means that a mere 10,000 years ago, the earths magnetic field would have been so strong that the heat it would have produced would have made life on earth impossible.
No doubt taken from Barnes's magnetic field argument 1973. The decay rate he stated has been debunked and stated as flawed.
How has it been debunked?7. fossilized dinosaur bones - these bones have been found and it is impossible for them to have lasted for millions of years.
Why not ? They have
The evidence available suggests an asteroid hit the earth approx 65 million years ago leading to a catastrpohic global event. There is a layer of iridium in the earths stratography that supports this theory.
Speaking of clutching at straws - "Why not? they have" This goes against what old earth scientists have been telling us for years! Blood cells decay at a much faster rate than the rate at which bones can fossilize. How then can you have a fossilized dinosaur bone which contain blood cells?
If we are talking about debunking theories or practices - radio carbon dating techniques have terrible flaws and rely on many assumptions. Therefor how can you be sure that your 65 million years is accurate?8. Salt is added everyday to the dead sea by inflows. Since it has no outlet - the salt content continues to grow. The amount of salt contained within it is not enough to support billions of years.
The dead Sea didn't spring into existance billions of years ago. Its a result of millions of years of constant change on the earth by volcanic, tectonic, atmospheric activity. The dead sea is a baby compared the age of the earth
I would have thought that you would line up the forming of the seas as we know them now with the catastrophic global event that wiped out the dinosaurs. If not that, then what are you basing your idea that the dead sea is a baby compared to the age of the earth? are we talking thousands of years, hundreds of thousands, millions or perhaps billions?9. The earths population doubles every 50 years (approx) it would take around about 4,000 years to reach the number of people that are on earth today (Lines up nicely with the world wide flood of Noah's day) if we use this figure for millions of years - the earth could not contain the amount of people.
Also that matches for the evolution model. The expansion in the earths population is also linked to the expansion of civilisation .. .not just the existance of humans and their descendants.
Could you expand on which evolution model you're referring to?10. Spiral galaxies appear this way due to their 'rotation' this rotation would eventually cause them to straighten out I.E. lose their spiral. There should be no spiral galaxies if the universe was actually billions of years old.
That again is a straw man. The big bang theory doesn't suggest spiral galaxies popping into existance at the moment of the big bang. They are formed over many millions of years
Why not? The big bang suggests that everything else popped into existence at the moment of the big bang. If this is not the case - then how did they form?The earth, the universe and everything in it was brought about in creation week. It was a divine event brought about by a supernatural creator.
No it wasn't ( that which can be asserted without evidence can also be dismissed without evidence )
We have just been discussing a page full of evidences!And faith .....
Would you build an electronic project based on faith ? would you cross the road by faith ?
But you yourself are obviously a man of great faith. You believe that the universe and all it contains was brought about by a supposed big bang. To put it lightly - 'Nothing became something and the something exploded'
Where did this matter come from in the first place? doesn't the big bang go against the law of conservation of mass and energy?
If you are dismissing faith, then you must have proof of the big bang. You obviously weren't there when the supposed big bang took place so therefor it would stand to reason that you can replicate the big bang - after all, we are dismissing faith here.If I am sick I see a Doctor, If I have trouble seeing I go to an optician etc etc. Faith would not heal me or make me see. Rather countless selfless individuals who over thousands of years have devoted their lives to bettering mankind.
Yes indeed! Isn't it interesting how even though we apparently all stemmed from a common singularity we are all unique and have our own special gifts and talents? If we look to God's word though, we find that we all have been given these unique gifts and talents - some to be doctors, some to be opticians, some to make super pong tables and some to be astronauts!
But back on topic, isn't there an underlying reason that you go to a doctor? You go specifically to a doctor because you have faith in him. If you didn't have faith in him and all his years of training then you would just go to anyone wouldn't you?Its just not the case at all. For a start evolution doesn't need a set of ready to be assembled parts lying around. Its a process beginning with the smallest building blocks at chemical level and taking millions and millions of years to progress.
Fair enough, Let's walk though this one step at a time starting from the beginning - how did the very first building block get here?
Also a 747 ( or an LED pong table ) isn't carrying about obselete parts of earlier less successful aircraft in its frame like we are.
Could you list these supposed obsolete parts and explain why they are not required (I think you'll find that every part of our body plays it's own important role)
You say that you have faith in fellow humans. Why is that? If we are just a result of random chemical reactions then why do you trust in them?
On that note, why does anyone have morals? why do we have laws and rules? if we are the by product of natural selection in that it is survival of the fittest, who is to say that I can't go out and kill someone - after all this is how we supposedly came to be!
Do you feel sorrow when a family member or close friend dies? I am guessing that you would, but hold on a second - why on earth would you get sad if this is simply what you are arguing for in motion? To expand, If we are brought about by the strongest cells living on and the weaker ones dying off, isn't it good that your family member or friend has died because it means that the strong have survived and the weak are now dead? you should be sitting there giving hi five's to everyone shouting "Way to go natural selection!"
And finally, Why on earth would scientists use evidence from the past to predict the future? If the universe came about by disorder and random chemical reactions then how on earth could we use this information to reliably predict the future. Uniformity does not make any sense in a universe created by random chance and disorder.
Of course this is not the case, we find that the universes history is very much ordered because God designed it that way.

Problem: Tall buildings risky in high seismic zones; Status: Hill-stations are getting concretised and growing vertically; Challenge: Use local construction material; regulate traffic
Evam Piljain, an 80-year-old Toda who's spent all her life in Ooty, feels distraught at the sight of her hometown. "I cannot sit in the verandah anymore," she says. She moves to her drawing room and gazes wistfully at a photograph of Ooty taken in the early part of the twentieth century -- green, picturesque. But outside, hill after hill is chock-a-bloc with concrete buildings.
Other Indian hill-stations are no different. Roller-compacted concrete (RCC) has taken over from wood and mud and is now synonymous with construction. Reminisces B P Rai, secretary, Federation of Societies for Environmental Protection, a Darjeeling-based NGO, "Earlier, there were only small wooden houses. But with increased population, the need was felt to construct RCC multi-storey buildings, which can take a load of 7-8 storeys. This has spelt disaster."
Centre for Science and Environment’s Sustainable Buildings Programme is organizing 5 day training on Green buildings. The programme aims to enable participants to adopt a common sense approach to green buildings, one that blends traditional wisdom with modern science.

The marriage of artificial and bio-materials to create cyborg insects and rats is still a bleeding-edge field with fascinating possibilities for human applications. That sometimes controversial vision of the future just took a dramatic turn towards blurring the man-versus-machine lines with the debut of a 3D-printed robot that uses heart cells to walk.
Scientists at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign created the tiny biological robots, or biobots, using a 3D printer to fabricate a flexible gel scaffold, and then injected the structures with heart cells from rats. Once powered by a form of liquid food, the heart cells beat and worked to give the biobot movement, traveling at roughly 236 micrometers per second.
According to the scientists, future versions of the biobot will use more controllable skeletal muscle cells for movement, neurons that will give the devices the ability to sense toxins, and a two-legged structure that will offer more freedom of movement. Extrapolate this development forward about 50-80 years and you have the makings of what could turn out to be real-life Replicants.
You can see the slow, creepy, but nonetheless groundbreaking crawl of the biobot in the video below.

This archived Web page remains online for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. This page will not be altered or updated. Web pages that are archived on the Internet are not subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government of Canada, you can request alternate formats of this page on the Contact Us page.
To help you get a clearer picture of British North America's territorial evolution, this section provides a series of maps that recount important moments in Canada's history. These maps cover the period from the French colonial era of the seventeenth century to the creation of Nunavut in 1999.
The map descriptions provided below have been reproduced from the original maps.
First successful French settlements in North America: Port Royal (1606), and Québec (1609). English settlements in Virginia begins (1606-07). French and English territorial claims overlap Acadia. Acadia is recognized as French possession by the Treaty of Breda (1667). A Royal Charter (1670) grants sole trading rights in Hudson Bay drainage basin to the Hudson's Bay Co.
By the Treaty of Paris (1763), eastern North America becomes British territory except St-Pierre and Miquelon Islands (France). British colonial governments for Quebec, Newfoundland (with Île d'Anticosti and Îles de la Madeleine), Nova Scotia (including present-day N.B. and P.E.I.). Hudson's Bay Co. still administers Rupert's Land. Louisiana is ceded to Spain by France.
Following the Constitutional Act, Quebec is divided into Upper and Lower Canada (1791). Spain cedes Louisiana back to France (1800). U.S.A. purchases Louisiana (1803).
The Province of Canada is formed by uniting Upper and Lower Canada (1840). The international boundary from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific is described by the Oregon Treaty (1846). The northern portion of the Oregon Territory is called New Caledonia, a name used by Simon Fraser in 1806. The Hudson's Bay Co. is granted Vancouver's Island to develop a colony (1849).
New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Canada are united in a federal state, the Dominion of Canada, by the British North America Act (July 1, 1867). The province of Canada is divided into Ontario and Quebec. The United States of America proclaims the purchase of Alaska from Russia (June 20).
The North-West Territories (Rupert's Land and the North-Western Territory) are acquired by Canada by the Hudson's Bay Company. From part of them Manitoba is created as the fifth province.
British Columbia joins the Dominion of Canada as the sixth province.
Prince Edward Island enters Confederation as the seventh province.
Boundaries are changed in the Districts of Mackenzie, Keewatin, Ungava, Franklin and Yukon (1897). The District of Yukon becomes a Territory separate from the North-West Territories (1898). Quebec boundaries are extended north.
Alberta and Saskatchewan are created as provinces to make a total of nine provinces in the Dominion of Canada (1905). The district of Keewatin is transferred back to the Northwest Territories. Due to changes in adjoining areas the boundaries of the Northwest Territories are redefined (1906).
At its own request, after a plebiscite, Newfoundland enters the Confederation as the tenth and most recent province of the Dominion of Canada.
Nunavut became Canada's third territory April 1, 1999. For the first time since the entry of Newfoundland into Confederation fifty years ago, the internal boundaries of Canada have changed.

Weevils are actually defined as any beetle from the Curculionoidea super-family. With that said, there are over 60,000 species of weevils, however, keep in mind that although there are some types of beetles that include “weevil” in their common name, they may not actually be a part of the weevil super-family. Weevils, also commonly known as snout beetles, are usually best characterized by the shape of their heads because they elongate out into a snout. This characteristic is usually common amongst all weevil species. Weevils are actually so broad in the variety of species that they can infest a variety of areas. Some species are considered pantry pests while others are wood-attacking insects. Furthermore, some may just be an occasional invader and a nuisance inside the home with they enter to overwinter. Weevils are found all throughout the United States and even in Canada.>> Read More
Depending on the species, the size of weevils varies from about 3 to 11 mm long. Their bodies have an elongated shape or can be almost oval in shape. Their heads protrude out into a snout shape with mandibles for feeding at the end. The color will also vary widely depending on the species of weevil. They can range from almost all colors. Some species will have a uniform color whereas others will have a significant design or pattern on their shells.
There are several common weevil species that will invade your home. In the United States, there are several different representative species. By identifying the species, a homeowner can better adjust the control method according to where they are infesting and how they are invading your home.
Since weevil larvae burrow underground and remain they reach maturity, they are rarely seen. Also, adult weevils are nocturnal and since most of their activity is done during the night, they are also not often spotted. They will remain hidden on the plant that they are infesting or in leaf litter and soil during the daytime. If the plant is disturbed, they can be noticed dropping to the soil and scurrying off into the litter or debris around the plant. Most gardeners will notice the presence of adult weevils by the plant aesthetics. The tips of the leaves will seem chewed off and the surface looks spotted.
All species of weevils will enter structures when outdoor conditions have been too adverse or unfavorable. Usually, it will be towards the end of the season when plants die off.
The key to proper removal is identification. Because different species will attack or infest different plants or locations around your home, it is the most important to identify the weevil before control methods are applied. Also, exclusion is an important method to get rid of weevils in your house. Exclusion will involve sealing cracks and crevices around the structure. Screens to windows and doors should be tight fitted and in good condition. Exclusion methods should be applied either before or after they enter the home.
Treatment to outdoor ornamental gardens with an appropriately labeled pesticide will also discourage infestation. Use appropriately labeled insecticides when notching of plant leaves first begin to appear. This is usually going to be in late June to early July. For indoor control, apply an appropriately labeled insecticide in areas like the attic, wall void, near the baseboard area, window sills, door frames, and etc. Keep in mind that all product labels must be thoroughly reviewed before any applications and treated areas must be left alone to dry before you can come in contact with those areas again.
Do You Have a Question about this Product? Ask Our Experts!
For us to ship it to you, it will cost $32.77 for the pint size:Talstar pro 1 pintWe do have larger sizes available and all orders include shipping

Insomnia Might Boost Heart Failure Risk
WEDNESDAY, March 6 (HealthDay News) -- Insomnia may triple the risk of developing heart failure, a large new study from Norway suggests.
Heart problems definitely lead to sleep problems, said lead researcher Dr. Lars Laugsand, but his team tried to determine whether the reverse might also be true.
"Insomnia is a frequent and easily recognized, potentially manageable and treatable condition," said Laugsand, a postdoctoral fellow in the department of public health at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, in Trondheim.
Laugsand added that the researchers found an association between insomnia and heart failure, not that insomnia actually causes heart failure.
"We still do not know whether heart failure is really caused by insomnia, and it is still unclear why insomnia is linked to higher heart failure risk," he said.
Heart failure is a chronic condition in which the heart does not pump blood efficiently enough to meet the body's needs.
There are some indications that a biological cause might explain an insomnia-heart failure connection, Laugsand said. "One possible mechanism could be that insomnia activates stress responses in the body that might negatively affect heart function," he explained.
"If our results are confirmed by others and there is a real causal association, evaluation of insomnia symptoms might have consequences for cardiovascular prevention," Laugsand added.
The report was published March 6 in the online edition of the European Heart Journal.
To measure the effect of insomnia on the risk of heart failure, Laugsand's team collected data on more than 54,000 men and women who took part in a Norwegian study on public health factors between 1995 and 1997. None of the participants had heart failure at the start of the study.
As part of the study, researchers asked about the quality of the participants' sleep and if they had difficulty going to sleep and staying asleep.
After 11 years of follow-up, more than 1,400 participants had developed heart failure, Laugsand's group found. People who had multiple insomnia symptoms had a threefold increased risk of developing heart failure, compared to people who slept well. When depression and anxiety were accounted for, the risk was slightly more than fourfold.
Specifically, having difficulties going to sleep and staying asleep almost every night, and feeling tired in the morning more than once a week, were associated with an increased risk of heart failure, compared to people who never or rarely suffered from these symptoms.
These findings remained even after the researchers took age, sex, marital status, education, shift work, blood pressure, cholesterol, diabetes, weight, physical activity, smoking, alcohol use and previous heart attacks into account.
Dr. Gregg Fonarow, professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said,"Heart failure results in substantial [illness], mortality and health care expenditures."
Insomnia has been associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular events and death, and two earlier studies have suggested that insomnia may also be associated with the risk of heart failure, he noted.
Insomnia can increase the body's inflammatory and stress responses, said Fonarow, who's also a spokesman for the American Heart Association.
"Activation of these systems, as well as other mechanisms, may link insomnia to an increased risk of developing heart failure and other cardiovascular disease," he said. "However, whether preventing or treating insomnia would lower the risk of developing heart failure requires further study."
To learn more about insomnia, visit the National Sleep Foundation.
SOURCES: Lars Laugsand, M.D., postdoctoral fellow, department of public health, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim; Gregg Fonarow, M.D., spokesman, American Heart Association, and professor, cardiology, University of California, Los Angeles; March 6, 2013, European Heart Journal, onlineRelated Articles
- Underactive Thyroid and Heart Failure a Bad Combination: Study
May 22, 2013
- Having Both Migraines, Depression May Mean Smaller Brain
May 22, 2013
Learn More About Sharp
Sharp HealthCare is San Diego's health care leader with seven hospitals, two medical groups and a health plan. Learn more about our San Diego hospitals, choose a Sharp-affiliated San Diego doctor or browse our comprehensive medical services.
Copyright ©2012 HealthDay. All rights reserved.

Object-oriented editing means the ability to edit and/or process individual objects, such as a MIDI or audio clip — whether they last the entire length of a song or only a few milliseconds. This is a different way of thinking than linear-style track editing, where you (for example) insert a plug-in into a virtual mixer that processes a track, or apply an automation curve to control a parameter for the duration of a track.
The word 'object' is essentially interchangeable with 'clip', but for clarity when working with Sonar, we'll define an object as a 'sub-set' of a clip with its own characteristics. Amongst other advantages, object-oriented editing can simplify the automation process compared to drawing track envelopes, and make it easier to do 'microsurgery'-type editing.
At first glance it might seem that this adds another level of tedium to the editing process, as working with little pieces of audio seems more involved than working with tracks. But that's not always the case; for some applications, object-oriented editing can be far more efficient. As one example, consider plug-ins. If you load a plug-in into a track insert, it's active for the entire length of the song — and drawing CPU power. But if the effect is needed in only a few places, you can create individual objects that are processed with that effect. The effect only draws power from the CPU when these particular objects are being processed.
Of all current DAW programs, I feel that Samplitude has taken object-oriented editing the furthest, as the program allows you to open up a clip and access a huge number of clip-related parameters. Sonar, on the other hand, was not designed with object-oriented editing in mind, and takes a bit more of an ad hoc approach, so you'll find different object-editing options in different places. This is a bit less convenient, but you can still get the benefits of object-oriented editing.
This is perhaps the most important use of object-oriented editing. Sonar can apply MIDI effects (MFX) to MIDI objects, and audio processing plug-ins to audio objects. For example, suppose you want to add delay to the last word of a vocal, so that the word trails off into silence. Here's how you'd do it:
1. Do a track split at the beginning and end of the word, to isolate it as a separate object. The easiest way to do this is to click at the beginning of the word and type 'S', then click at the end of the word and type 'S'.
2. Right-click on this object and select Open Clip Effects Bin (keyboard shortcut: Ctrl+B).
3. An effects bin opens up that's a miniature version of the track effects bin you'll see in the Track view of the Console window.
4. Right-click on a blank part of the effects bin and select the desired audio effect from the pop-up menu.
5. The effect will now appear in the bin. As in the standard effects bin, there's a small tick-box to the left of the effect name; when this is green, the effect is enabled. When it's grey, the effect is disabled.
6. You can insert more effects, if desired. As soon as you click anywhere other than the effects bin, the object's effects bin shrinks to a small box marked 'FX'. This lets you know that there's an effects bin in the object. To open an effects bin again, just click on that box.
One very significant aspect of inserting an effect into an object is that any effect comes to a complete halt at the end of the object. In other words, if there's a reverb tail or delay decay caused by feedback, it will not extend past the object. Fortunately, there's a workaround.
1. Place the Now time just past the end of the object.
2. Put the track containing the object into record mode, but turn down the level of any signal feeding into the track, so you can record silence.
3. Click on the transport Record button.
4. To make sure this clip is truly silent, click on it and go Process / Audio / Gain. Set all Gain levels to minimum, then click on OK.
5. Click on the object you're processing, then Control-click on the clip containing silence, so that they're both selected.
6. Go Edit / Bounce to Clip(s).
7. The object will now be extended by the amount of silence you added, and any delay or reverb can spill over into it.
Note that the process of bouncing clips removes any effects bins inserted in those clips. So in this example you would need to re-insert delay, reverb or whatever into the new, longer clip.
Now that we know how to add effects to objects, here are some ideas on how to use this editing option.
Emphasise a guitar solo. In a guitar track, split the guitar solo into a separate object, and add slight EQ boost around 2-3.5kHz. This will make the guitar more prominent.
Avoid 'stepping on' vocals with a background instrument part. Suppose you have piano as a prominent track behind a singer. Split the piano track wherever the vocal occurs and scoop out some of the mid-range (whatever falls in the same range as the vocalist). If used subtly, this can give a better effect than simply lowering the volume. What's more, you could automate just that section, as we'll describe shortly.
Compress particular sections of a track. Bearing in mind the growing backlash against excessive use of compression, one good application of object-oriented editing is to compress the lead vocalist when singing solo, but if background vocalists are present, remove compression from the lead to allow more dynamics and interplay with the background singers.
Distort individual drum hits. Do you ever find you want the snare drum to really crack when it hits on the fourth beat of a measure just before the transition to a new chorus or verse? Raising level might not be enough, so separate that hit into a separate object and add a hint of distortion!
If you've been using Sonar for a while, you probably know that you can right-click on a clip, select Envelopes, choose Create Clip Envelope and add either a Gain or Pan envelope to the clip. However, if there's an effect inserted in the object effects bin, you can also create envelopes within the object itself for the effects. To do this, proceed as you normally would to select a Gain or Pan envelope and you'll see automatable effect(s) listed below the Pan Envelope option.
This allows an exceptional amount of control within very short audio events, if desired. Furthermore, you can insert track effects that kind of act as 'master' effects. One example would be to add a fairly standard delay (such as a quarter-note or half-note) to a track, then add delay with a dotted value (for example, a dotted half-note) within individual objects.
You can't drag the effects bin itself from one object to another. However, you can drag an effect, whether from another object's effects bin or from the track effects bin, into an object's effects bin. Here are the rules for dragging effects:
Control-drag an effect from a standard track effects bin or an open object effects bin into an object: this creates an object effects bin and inserts a copy of the effect you dragged. The effect that was copied remains in its original location as well.
Drag an effect from a standard track effects bin or an open object effects bin into an object: this creates an effects bin, inserts the effect you dragged, and removes the effect from the track effects bin.
Control-Drag an effect from a standard track effects bin or an open object effects bin into a closed object effects bin: this inserts a copy of the effect you dragged. If there's already an effect in the bin, the effect you dragged in will be added at the end of the list of effects. The effect you copied remains in its original location.
Drag an effect from a standard track effects bin or an open object effects bin into a closed object effects bin. The effect you dragged is removed from its original location and placed in the object effects bin.
Note that the same rules apply when going in the other direction — ie. dragging from an object effects bin into a track effects bin or another object effects bin.
Here's a shortcut you can use if you need the same effect (or a variation on a particular effect) in several small, sequential objects. For example, suppose you want to apply a rhythmic 'sample and hold' filter effect to a sustained guitar power chord, where the filter's cutoff frequency changes every eighth note:
1. Split the power chord off as a separate object.
2. Open an object effects bin in this object, then insert a filter.
3. Adjust the filter as desired for the first step. Typically, you'd set a relatively high resonance.
4. Split the power chord at every eighth note. The filter will appear in each split of the object.
5. Set the filter in each split to the desired cutoff frequency.
You can open an object's effects bin when it's just a small square marked 'FX' by right-clicking on it and choosing Open Clip Effects Bin (for which the keyboard shortcut is Control + B).
Once it's open, you can bypass the bin and all its effects by clicking anywhere within the bin and selecting Bypass Bin; rearrange the order of effects within the bin by clicking and dragging, just as you would with the standard tracks effects bin; and delete an effect by either clicking on it and hitting the Delete key, or right-clicking on the effect or its enable box and selecting Delete from the pop-up menu.
MIDI Effects & Groove Clips
The instructions regarding applying effects to audio objects also apply to MIDI effects and MIDI tracks: they're inserted in the same way, and they follow the same rules when copying and moving. Groove clips follow the same rules as well. If you roll out a groove clip (MIDI or audio), the effects bin will remain in the original part of the object. If you then split the object, the effects bin will be copied to the split(s).
One other object-oriented editing window continues to evolve (if Cakewalk ever decide to consolidate everything in Sonar that's related to clips/objects in one window, this would be the one): the window that appears when you right-click on an object and select Clip Properties.
The General tab shows the name of the clip, its start time and its length (in Measures:Beats:Ticks; Samples; Hours:Minutes:Seconds:Frames; and Seconds). You can edit all of these parameters. Time base lets you select musical or absolute time for the clip, which affects where the clip starts if you change tempo. With a musical time base, the Measures:Beats:Ticks position remains the same, but the absolute (SMPTE) time changes. With SMPTE as a time base, the reverse occurs.
However, you can also mute the clip, and 'lock' it from this window (both options are also available if you right-click on the object). Lock is crucial for audio-for-video work, as it lets you tie samples to a specific SMPTE time. For example, suppose you build a sound effect that coincides with a particular visual cue into a soundtrack, but the producer decides you need to speed up the music just a bit. Locking the clip to SMPTE ensures it will always hit on the visual cue that happens at a specific SMPTE time, regardless of how the tempo changes.
Note that locking can involve the position only, the data only, or both; when locked, a small padlock appears on the clip (yellow for position only, blue for data only, and white for both).
While it may seem that the option to set a 'snap offset' (in samples) for audio clips is useful, the function can only shift the clip late compared to a snap point. So if you have something like a pad sound with a long attack time that needs to start early in order to build over the right amount of time, using snap offset can't help you. However, if you find just the right amount of delay for a snare-drum hit, for example, you can copy or change the object's position while being sure that the amount of offset will be preserved.
Finally, there's also a Clip Effects display. Although you can't drag effects into or out of this display, you can delete effects, change their order, instantiate new effects and bypass the clip's effects bin. We'll ignore the Audio Stretching tab for now, as that opens up a whole other world of options.
Object-based editing may not be a particularly sexy topic, but anything that saves time or makes your life easier is worth investigating. Although I still use track processors a lot, being able to create effects in different bits of audio can simplify the process of making complex edits, as well as opening up a lot of creative possibilities.

Biology 107 Lab Exam Review
Science B01 with Magor at University of Alberta
About this deck
Size: 132 flashcards
Sign up (free) to study this.
When is a plant cell plasmolyzed?
What is a hypertonic solution?
A hypertonic solution is a solution that has a higher concentration of solutes than found inside the cell
What are some of the functions of cell membranes?
Separation of cell contents from external environment
Organization of chemicals and reactions into specific organelles within the cell
Regulation of the transport of certain molecules into and out of the cell and its organelles
Beet cells red pigment, located in the cell's large central vacuole and surrounded by the tonoplast membrane
Molecule or part of a molecule that absorbs radiant energy (light)
Graph that shows the amount of light absorbed at a number of wavelengths
Four parts of a spectrophotometer
Device that isolates a photoelectric tube
Standard curve limitations
Standard curve is specific to the pigment and its buffer
Standard curve cannot be used for absorbances beyond the range of the standard curve
Cu = Cd/D
Deposits single bacterial cells from a liquid culture over the surface of an agar medium
Prevents bacteria in the environment from contaminating work, and prevents bacteria in work from contaminating the environment
Aspetic techniques that can be used
Sterilize surfaces and working surfaces
Washing hand before and after
Flaming inoculating loop and lip of culture tubes
Reduce time sterile medium, cultures, or bacteria are exposed to air
Work in area with low resident population of bacteria
What does the blank used with a spectrophotometer consist of?
How is a spectrophotometer zeroed?
Define each term in the "fluid mosaic model"
Fluid: membranes are able to move, things may pass through them (selective permeability)
Mosaic: membranes are composed of a variety of different things - phospholipid bilayer, enzymes, proteins that act as channels
Explain phospholipid bilayers
Fatty acid bilayers, where the hydrophobic ends of the fatty acids attract each other to the inside of the layer and the hydrophilic ends are on the outside of the membrane in the water, creating a double layer of fatty acids
How are bacterial species identified?
Cell and colony morphology, chemical composition of cell walls, biochemical activities, and nutritional requirements
What is the best way to isolate individual cells?
Streaking them onto an agar plate, so that each individual cell will produce a colony
Cell wall is composed of a thick layer of peptidoglycan surrounding the cell membrane
Differential stain to divide bacteria into Gram-positive and Gram-negatie
Steps of a gram stain
A basic dye (crystal violet) is used to stain the peptidoglycan in both cells, then iodine is used to increase affinity of the dye to peptidoglycan. Ethanol is then used to dissolve lipids in outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, allowing iodine dye complex to leave cells (peptidoglycan layer too thin to retain dye), while Gram-positive cells retain the dyed due to the thick layer of peptidoglycan - a counterstain is then applied that dies the Gram-negative cells pink
Commonly reocognized cell morphologies
Cocci: spherical shape
Bacilli: shaped like rods or cylinders (long and slender, or so short they resemble cocci)
Spirilla: resemble a corkscrew
What are three other ways to identify bacteria besides morphology?
Presence of flagella (motility)
Formation of endospores
How is motility in bacteria tested?
Bacteria are injected into a tube containing a dye that turns red when oxidized by growing bacteria- distribution of red dye indicates swimming ability
How is formation of endospores determined in bacteria?
Sample can withstand extreme conditions (high temperatures) and will grow at optimal conditions
What are the different enzymatic activities in bacteria that can be tested?
How can resolution be decreased (improved)?
Using an illumination source with a smaller wavelength
Increasing the numerical aperture of the objective lens, as well as using immersion oil with the 100x objective lens
How is the resolution value calculated?
Why do Gram-positive bacteria stain purple?
They contain a thick layer of peptidoglycan which retains the iodine-crystal violet complex CV-I, causing cells to hold the dye and thus retain the purple colour even after the ethanol wash
Why do Gram-negative bacteria stain pink?
Gram negative cells have only a thin layer of peptidoglycan, so the CV-I complex easily washes out, and thus the cells are able to be counterstained pink because they no longer contain any crystal violet dye
What is the effect of high temperatures on bacteria that do not form endospores?
High temperatures will kill cells that do not produce endospores as it can damage cell membranes and denature proteins, resulting in cells that are unable to function
Microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments which function in cell structure, cell motility (flagella and cilia - microtubules as part of their ultrastructure), and various biological processes
Mitochondria, chloroplasts, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, and vacuoles/vesicles
Function in cell motility (flagella and cilia) and one organism also uses cilia to propel food towards its oral groove
Used in amoeboid movement and organelle movement (intermediate filaments give nucleus its shape - nuclear lamina)
How do microfilaments act in amoeboid movement?
Phase contrast microscope
Phase contrast microscope
Cells and medium have different refractive index, and therefore light traveling through a material with different refractive indexes show a change in phase of light waves, which the microscope then translates to a change in light intensity (areas of higher refractive index appear darker)
Some cell structures contain autofluoresce, some require staining - by exposing cells to several stains at once, different structures will fluoresce different colours
How can contrast be improved?
Staining compounds (vital stain - living cells/tissue, or dead cells and tissues), using special types of microscopes to manipulate light, and by reducing the amount of light
What effect would cytochalasin (inhibits microtubules) and cholchicine (inhibits microfilaments) have on Pelomyxa?
Cytochalasin would cause amoeba to become sessile, as the microfilaments are responsible for the movement of amoebas - cholchicine would have no effect
What effect would cytochalasin (inhibits microtubules) and cholchicine (inhibits microfilaments) have on Euglena?
What effect would cytochalasin (inhibits microtubules) and cholchicine (inhibits microfilaments) have on motile prokaryotes?
What is phagocytosis, and how does it differ from receptor-mediated endocytosis?
Phagocytosis is the process that Paramecium use to take in food. It differs from receptor-mediated endocytosis in that receptor-mediated endocytosis is very specific and allows the cell to acquire bulk quantities of specific substances, whereas phagocytosis is more general and can take in different substances
Organelles (enzymes) that digest or break down waste materials and cellular debris, such as worn out organelles, food particles, and engulfed bacteria and viruses
Contains cell's genetic information, and is surrounded by the nuclear lamina (made up of intermediate filaments) to protect the DNA
Engulfs food via phagocytosis and uses lysosomes to break the food down
Organelles found in plant cells that are used in photosynthesis - they capture light and convert it to usable energy
Proteins that catalyze metabolic reactions without being consumed or destroyed by the molecule - lower a reaction's activation energy (substrate specific)
Molecule to be reacted, that fits into a uniquely shaped pocket of the enzyme called the active site and binds with the enzyme as it is converted into the end product
Allows plants to use starch it has stored after photosynthesis - takes amylose and breaks it down into smaller molecules by hydrolysis (glucose molecules, maltose, and shorter chains of amylose)
Polymeric macromolecule composed of glucose monomers that is too large to pass through a cell membrane
What are enzymes made up of?
Enzymes are proteins, which are made up of amino acids
What is an active site?
An active site is a site that uniquely fits the substrate specific to the enzyme, and will activate the enzyme once the substrate binds to the site
Energy transfer from light to chemical bonds through series of light reactions
What series of reactions occurs in photosynthesis?
Light energy from sun strikes pigments in thylakoid membrane of chloroplast, which is transformed into excited electrons (electrical energy), then into chemical energy in the form of bonds in ATP and NADPH molecules, and the ATP and NADH molecules are then used to power the fixation of carbon dioxide into sugar molecules (Calvin cycle, occurring in stroma)
Determines which wavelengths of light the chloroplasts maximally absorb (these wavelengths also produce the highest rates of photosynthetic activity)
Chloroplast suspension is mixed with indicator dye DCPIP - as DCPIP accepts electrons from the electron transport chain of Photosystem II it becomes reduced and therefore colourless, allowing absorptions to be measured to determine concentrations
What were the controls in the photosynthesis in spinach chloroplasts experiment?
Controls must show that DCPIP is stable and there is no other source of electrons to reduce DCPIP (colour does not change spontaneously) and that the colour of chloroplast suspension is stable and does not change colour spontaneously
What are the independent and dependent variables for the absorbance spectrum of photosynthesis in spinach chloroplasts?
The independent variable is the wavelength of light, and the dependent variable is the absorbance of the chloroplast suspension at varying wavelengths of light
What are the independent and dependent variables for the action spectrum of photosynthesis in spinach chloroplasts?
The independent variable is the colour of light, and the dependent variable is the absorbance of the solution
Why are spinach leaves green?
Spinach leaves are green because they maximally absorb blue and red wavelengths, and green wavelengths are absorbed the least and are therefore reflected back the most, resulting in the green colour
At what wavelength is the action spectrum measured at?
The wavelength that photosynthesis occurs at maximally
Where do light reactions take place in the chloroplast? Reactions of the Calvin cycle?
Light reactions take place in the stroma of the chloroplast, and reactions of the Calvin cycle take place in the stroma
Measuring oxygen levels, sugar produced, or carbon dioxide levels
How is ATP produced?
Through the catabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats
Glycolysis in eukaryotes
Cytosolic reactions to convert glucose to pyruvate (one molecule of glucose results in the net production of 2 molecules of ATP via substrate level phosphorylation
After glycolysis, what occurs in the presence of oxygen?
Eukaryotes convert pyruvate into acetyl CoA, which is transported to Kreb's cycle in mitochondria (produces 2 more molecules of ATP) and then oxidative phosphorylation (the transfer of electrons from food to oxygen) produces the rest of the ATP molecules (carbon dioxide is also formed as a by-product)
After glycolysis, what occurs in the absence of oxygen?
Pyruvate is degraded via a series of cytostolic pathways - lactic acid fermentation and alcohol fermentation (produces ethanol and carbon dioxide, regenerates NAD+ - required for glycolytic pathway)
What sort of feedback system occurs in alcohol fermentation?
Fermentation of glucose produces ethanol, but high concentrations of ethanol are toxic to yeast
Physiological response curve
Why is fermentation necessary?
Why was the yeast flask swirled prior to adding yeast to each tube?
To re-suspend the yeast and therefore the ensure that similar concentrations of yeast were present in each tube (constant)
What would happen if the metabolism in yeast experiment were done without the 10 minute pre-incubation period?
The lag phase of the physiological response curve would be significantly longer as the pre-incubation period brings the tube to a temperature at which yeast metabolizes glucose most effectively, and therefore without the incubation period the yeast would not metabolize glucose as well
What process are the yeast in the Durham tube undergoing?
The yeast are undergoing fermentation - other eukaryotes undergo aerobic respiration, and only prokaryotes undergo anaerobic respiration
What metabolic processes occur in the cytoplasm?
Alcohol fermentation, ATP production, glycolysis, and NADH production
What metabolic processes occur in the mitochondria?
ATP production, Krebs cycle, electron transport chain, and NADH production
Bacterial genomic DNA
Consists of a double stranded DNA helix arranged in a circle that is anchored to the bacterial plasma membrane - 4000 genes that encode all the functions of the bacterial cell
Bacterial plasmid DNA
Floats freely in cytoplasm of bacterial cell
Circular and can assume supercoiled conformation in which circular double helix molecule twists on itself
Much smaller than genomic DNA (2- 25 genes)
Can sometimes conform extra properties to the cell that allow the cell to survive in conditions that it could not survive without the plasmid DNA (only when there is selective pressure)
Arranged in linear strands (chromosomes - 23 pairs) in nucleus of cell (30 000 - 35 000 genes - high molecular weight DNA)
Can be used to analyze small amount of plasmid DNA - DNA is not very pure and maxi prep must be used for further analysis as it is a larger quantity of very pure DNA - separates plasmid DNA from bacterial genomic DNA based on size and conformation
How can high molecular weight (HMW) DNA be extracted?
High affinity for glass - buffer solution must contain Tris and EDTA as it binds magnesium ions which are required for DNAse, preventing DNAse from functioning and degrading the DNA into nucleotides
What does centrifuging do?
Creates a centrifugal force that causes bacterial cells to collect in a pellet at the bottom of the tube - liquid above is referred to as the supernatant
What does vortexing do?
Vortexing disrupts the pellet of cells so that they may be re-suspended
Why is STE added to the DNA treatment?
Washes the medium away from the cells
What is Solution I in the DNA treatment?
A buffered, isotonic solution that is used to re-suspend bacterial cells
What is Solution II in the DNA treatment?
Contains sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) and sodium hydroxide (an alkali) - SDS denatures proteins and disrupts the plasma membrane, causing the cell to lyse and releasing cell components into the solution, and NaOH raises the pH of the lysate to denature the hydrogen bonds between the base pairs of DNA, separating the helix
What is Solution III in the DNA treatment?
Acidic potassium acetate solution that neutralizes the pH in the lysate so that some hydrogen bonds in the DNA will re-form in random base pairs, resulting in a tangled, insoluble mass of DNA - hydrogen bonds in the plasmid DNA reform between the original complementary base pairs (when solution is placed on ice potassium forms white, insoluble mass with SDS that precipitates out along with many of the proteins, cell wall, debris, and genomic DNA)
What does centrifuging do to the genomic DNA-potassium-SDS-protein-cell wall complex?
Causes the complex to pellet in the bottom of the tube and the plasmid to remain in the supernatant solution
What does the 95% ethanol wash do in the DNA treatment?
Removes water molecules from macromolecules by decreasing hydrogen bonding between water molecules and macromolecules (plasmid DNA and RNA come out of solution and precipitate, so that they may be centrifuged into a pellet)
What does the 70% ethanol wash do in the DNA treatment?
Removes the salts which were not removed with the 95% ethanol, and hydrates the pellets slightly so that it may dissolve in the aqueous solution
Why is the 30 minute incubation period necessary in the DNA extraction?
Why is sodium acetate used to precipitate HMW DNA?
The salt ions compete with macromolecules (DNA) for the water molecules
What are the 2 properties of DNA that allow you to separate genomic DNA from plasmid DNA
Size - big genomic DNA precipitates faster with centrifugation
Conformation (shape of molecule) - supercoiled plasmid DNA maintains its shape even when hydrogen bonds in backbone are broken
How can HMW DNA be extracted from solution?
Its affinity for glass and the fact that it forms very long "threads" of DNA
What would happen if the tube were vortexed after the addition of Solution II?
Genomic DNA would break and would not all be centrifuged out, therefore contaminating plasmid DNA
What is the difference between genomic DNA, plasmid DNA, and eukaryotic DNA?
Genomic DNA contains the majority of genes needed for the bacterial cell to function
Plasmid DNA is a small, circular structure of DNA in the cell cytoplasm that contains genes that can allow the bacteria to survive in conditions where it could otherwise not survive
Eukaryotic DNA is much larger and is contained within the nucleus, in 23 pairs of chromosomes, encoding all the genes necessary for the survival of the eukaryote
What is the purpose of the 95% ethanol and 70% ethanol wash?
95% ethanol dehydrates the cell
70% ethanol treatment removes the salts and rehydrates the plasmid DNA, allowing it to dissolve faster
Why must plasmid DNA be kept on ice following incubation?
DNAse will break down DNA at room temperature - T solution has EDTA to inactivate DNAse
What was the experiment performed by Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty?
Tested various cellular macromolecules for their ability to transform non-virulent Streptococcus pneumoniae into virulent bacteria - discovered DNA was the only macromolecule capable of transforming non-virulent bacteria into virulent bacteria
How did the experiment performed in Biol 107 differ from Avery et al?
Escherichia coli was used
E. coli was examined for transformation by a gene on the plasmid DNA instead of the genomic DNA
E. coli cells needed to be made competent to uptake DNA using a calcium chloride solution
Mice were not used (medium containing kanamycin was used instead)
Only DNA was focused on (as opposed to various parts of the cell)
How were kanamycin sensitive E. coli cells made proficient to take up DNA?
A calcium chloride solution was made, which created holes in the cellular membranes (competent cells)
How is a competent cell transformed?
If plasmid DNA entering competent cells is capable of replicating, the competent cells will be genetically altered or transformed (kanamycin resistant) - all descendants of transformed cells should be genetically altered
What is kanamycin?
Antibiotic belonging to the family of antibiotics characterized by their ability to inhibit protein synthesis in prokaryotic cells - they are transported into the cell by oxygen dependent active transport system and irreversibly inhibit protein synthesis by binding to a small subunit of ribosomes in bacterial cell, so cells are unable to synthesize proteins - cell death
What occurs in kanamycin resistant cells?
Phosphotransferase enzyme is encoded and expressed in the presence of kanamycin, which phosphorylates (adds a phosphorous group) to kanamycin and renders the antibiotic inactve
Use of a DNA template to synthesize RNA
Reading of mRNA to produce protein
Plate Count Method
Viable cell count (living cells only) in which original cell suspension is diluted into suspensions of decreasing cell concentration, which are spread onto the surface of an agar medium and allowed to incubate so that single cells may grow into a colony - following incubation colonies may be counted, and each is representative of a single cell originally deposited on the plate
Petroff-Hausser Counting Chamber
Total cell count (living and dead) using a specially designed microscope slide with a depressed surface and etched grid, where a thin layer of cell suspension of known volume is spread and the number of cells in the volume is directly counted with the aid of a microscope
Optical Density (OD)
Indirect method of total cell count, measuring turbidity (cloudiness of a solution due to the presence of particles such as cells), measured using a spectrophotometer, and developing a standard curve
Why is Solution T (Tris) buffer used in the Transformation of Bacterial Cells lab?
Maintains the pH at 8.0 and is the solvent for plasmid DNA
Solution B is the solution used to dissolve DNAse but does not contain DNAse
What occurs during the first incubation period of the Transfomation of Bacterial Cells lab?
What occurs during the heat shock incubation period in the Transformation of Bacterial Cells lab?
Helps the plasmid DNA enter the competent cells and induces the expression of survival genes necessary to repair damage to the plasma membrane
What does the third incubation period in the Transformation of Bacterial Cells lab do?
Allows time for kanamycin resistance gene to be expressed - must be transcribed into mRNA, then mRNA must translate it into a polypeptide chain (phosphotransferase)
The plate which does not contain plasmid DNA, and instead contains solution B, Tris buffer, and competent cells
The plate that contains plasmid DNA that has been broken down into nucleotides by DNAse, as well as solution B and competent cells
There would be colony growth on plate 5+K, as the DNAse cannot enter the competent cells and the plasmid DNA would not have been broken down - the kanamycin resistant gene would have been expressed in the competent cells
What would occur if the environment in which the E. coli was grown was anaerobic?
The kanamycin would not affect the growth of the cells, as kanamycin enters the cell in an oxygen dependent manner
About this deck
Size: 132 flashcards

Racism uber alles 0
Auschwitz looms as a testament to the rabid quest for 'racial purity' undertaken by Hitler and the Nazis. But rather than a product of the Left or the Right, writes Queen's professor Timothy Smith, Nazism was 'tyranny with an unabashedly brutal face.'
Was Hitler a socialist? Certainly he had nothing in common with the strain of Social Democracy that emerged during the 1930s in Scandinavia and survives there and in Germany. This variant of socialism respects the rule of law and private property; it is not under examination in this article.
But was Nazism related to Soviet-style socialism? Hitler’s party was, after all, named the National Socialist German Worker’s Party (NSDAP). Early on, the party’s message was peppered with anti-big-business and anti-labor-union rhetoric alike. Some of the early leaders of the party (Hitler did not take full control for several years after joining it) were anti-capitalist, and Hitler’s early speeches can indeed be mined for denunciations of high finance and monopoly capitalism, which Hitler equated with the Jews.
These criticisms are largely rooted in Hitler’s anti-Semitism and his contempt for the profiteering of large firms during the war—they don’t stem from a sympathetic reading of Marx. In power, the Nazi party expanded the welfare state, just as Mussolini had done in Italy, and just as conservative governments did in France. Hitler subsidized leisure programs and he increased the value of family allowances (for those deemed racially “fit”). But this does not make him a socialist.
The Nazis were obsessed with the class conflict in general, and they strove to “solve” it—on their authoritarian terms. But the pursuit of racial “purity” was Hitler’s revolutionary principle. His social policy was always subordinated to his racial policy. Hitler’s world-view revolved around biological determinism; the Soviets’ world-view centred on the inevitability of the class conflict.
Under Hitler, rampant individualism would be replaced by a martial devotion to the racially pure Nation. The Nazis were suspicious of many traditional institutions. Hitler was no conservative, even if he needed, and got in 1933, the reluctant support of conservative leaders naive in the belief that they could control him.
Hitler displayed no ideological commitment to curtailing the rights of private property. He mobilized a war economy, and like the democracies during both World Wars, he requisitioned factories, but he accepted the basic contours of capitalism. There was no plan to collectivize German farms, nor were businesses and bank accounts taken over for the sake of taking them over.
Jews and political enemies were robbed of their property and eventually their lives. The Nazis’ willingness to violate property rights stemmed entirely from their racism and militarism; the state did not direct the production of basic consumer goods, as it did in the USSR.
One cannot understand Hitler’s 1941 invasion of the USSR without reference to his ideology of “Jewish Bolshevism.” Describing his own political awakening in Vienna, Hitler wrote in Mein Kampf, “in this period my eyes were opened to two menaces of which I had previously scarcely known the names ... Marxism and Jewry.”
Addressing the judge at the trial of the Beer Hall Putsch conspirators, a failed coup d’état Hitler launched in 1923, he said: “I wanted to become the destroyer of Marxism.” Shortly after becoming Chancellor, Hitler imprisoned Socialist and Communist leaders on trumped-up charges. Next he murdered several of them and demolished their unions and political parties.
Like Lenin and Stalin, Hitler had contempt for individual political rights, that quaint bourgeois notion. Like the Soviets, Hitler crushed civil society, politicizing everyday life, from the composition of city councils to the boards of directors of charities and athletic clubs.
Soviet-style Socialism was tyranny with a supposedly humane goal—the abolition of poverty, the dawning of equality, and the liberation of the individual from the alienation of modern industrial life and the backwardness of quasi-serfdom in the countryside. Hitler had no such concerns. Nazism was tyranny with an unabashedly brutal face. The end goal was certainly European domination (some historians believe world domination), the elimination of the Jews and the Marxists, and the enslavement of Eastern Europeans.
Communism and fascism treated individuals as mere abstractions, to be murdered or imprisoned if need be. But the end goals were profoundly different. Hitler did not seek to overthrow capitalism. If he threw “socialistic” crumbs of comfort to the workers who toiled in his war machine it was not out of ideological commitment. His concern was to prop up his regime and to ensure “racial fitness.” Like the men who ruled the USSR, Hitler was, in politics, a collectivist - but he was no socialist. The difference is more than semantic. Hitler was first and foremost a racist whose associated military goals required a form of intervention in the economy that should not be confused with socialism.
Timothy Smith is a history professor at Queen's University and an expert in modern European history.

Health care employment has been the bright spot in the otherwise lackluster recent jobs reports. As overall employment decreased by 2 percent from 2000 to 2010, employment in the health care sector actually increased by 25 percent.
But that’s not necessarily a good thing, according to an opinion piece published in the most recent edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.
“Treating the health care system like a (wildly inefficient) jobs program conflicts directly with the goal of ensuring that all Americans have access to care at an affordable price,” write Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra, two researchers from Harvard.
By 2020, almost one out of nine American jobs will be in health care, an April study from the Center for Health Workforce Studies projects.
As the country wrestles to reduce health care spending, which already consumes about 18 percent of GDP, those extra jobs could be a step in the wrong direction.
“Salaries for health care jobs are not manufactured out of thin air—they are produced by someone paying higher taxes, a patient paying more money for health care, or an employee taking home lower wages because higher health insurance premiums are deducted from his or her paycheck,” write the authors of the NEJM column.
Yet hospitals and politicians alike often tout the jobs that the health care industry creates in local communities. “The health care sector is an economic mainstay, providing stability and even growth during times of recession,” the American Hospital Association wrote in a fact sheet entitled “Economic Contribution of Hospitals Often Overlooked.”
The authors argue that the focus should instead be on improving health outcomes and efficiency, rather than simply more people working in the field, pointing to “mounting evidence that out health care system could deliver better care without spending more and that there are tremendous opportunities for improvements in productivity.”
Several provisions of the 2010 health care law aim to reduce inefficiencies by rewarding higher-value care and reducing some of the incentives for doctors to deliver more testing and care with unproven benefits. Such policies may serve to reduce health care employment, the authors argue, by “allowing us to get the same health outcomes with fewer health care workers.”
Some jobs in health care could be lost; however, taxpayers and workers in other fields would likely pay less in premiums.
“The bottom line is that employment in the health care sector should be neither a policy goal nor a metric of success,” they conclude.

“Writing is a way of talking without being interrupted.” — Jules Renard
“ideas to get your student’s pencils moving”
Writing is and isn’t an easy thing to do in the classroom. Especially nowadays when students don’t have long attention spans and are more and more “digital” and visual learners.
However, it is a vital skill that opens up a world of possibilities for any student. Written communication in whatever language, even with the advent of the internet, is still a necessity. Writing allows communication, controlled and deliberate – POWERFUL, communication. So we have to get our students writing more and better. How?
Below, find a rundown of what I consider the “standard” writing activities for any age group. Just change the topic/theme. Most are for any classroom, EFL / ESL or the regular classroom. My belief is that writing in English is writing in English. Whether it be a second language or first makes no difference because the “eating” is all the same.
I’ve divided the activities into different categories. These are just for the sake of having some kind of organization. I’ve also labeled them
WUP – for a warm up writing activity and something to do quickly.
CP – Controlled practice. Writing activities that help the beginning writer and offer support, repetition and guidance.
F – Free writing activities which activate student learning and allow them to practice what they already know and “test the waters” so to speak.
Where appropriate, I’ve linked to some resources that compliment the writing activity as described.
Listen — Write
There are many ways to “spice” up the standard dictation. The simplest is to have the students fold a blank piece of paper “hamburger” style (Up/down) 4 times. Unfold and they have a nice 8 line piece of paper. Speak 8 sentences , repeating each several times as the students write. Get the students to record their answers on the board and correct. Collect and keep in a portfolio!
There are many online sites where students can do the same but in a computer lab or at home. Or the teacher can even try in the classroom.
http://www.listen-and-write.com/audio – for older students
http://www.learner.org/interactives/spelling/ – for young learners
2. Story Rewriting
The teacher reads a story or the class listens to an audio story. After, students make a story board (just fold a blank page so you have 8 squares) and draw pictures. Then, they write the story based on those pictures. Very simple and powerful! – F
The students close their eyes and the teacher describes a scene. Play some nice background music. The students then write and describe the scene they imagined, sharing their scene afterwards with the class or a classmate.
4. Pop Song Rewrite
Play a familiar pop song. One with a “catchy” chorus. Afterwards, write out the chorus on the board with some of the words missing. Students can then rewrite the chorus and sing their own version. Higher level students can simply write their own version without help. Here’s a very simple example –
He’s got the whole world in his hands
He’s got ___________ and ___________
In his hands. (3x)
He’s got the whole world in his hands
Watch —– Write
Students watch a TV Commercial. Then, they write their own script based on that commercial but focused on a different product. Afterwards, they can perform. F
2. Short videos.
Just like a story but this time students watch. Then, they can rewrite / respond / reflect. Students can choose to reflect on one standard Reading Response question or as part of a daily journal. Ex. The best part was ….. / If I had made the video, I would have ……
Short videos are powerful and if well chosen can really get students writing in a reflective manner. CP / F
How to Videos
Students can watch a short “How to” video that describes a process. There are some excellent sites with User Generated Content. Expert Village and eHow are recommended. After the students watch the video several times, they can write out the steps using transitions which the teacher lists on the board. [First, first off, To begin, then, after that, next, most importantly, finally, last but not least, to finish ] CP / F
3. Newscasts / Weather reports
Watch the daily news or weather report. Students write in groups or individually, their own version of the news for that week/day. Then perform for the class like a real news report! F
4. Travel Videos
Watch a few travel videos (there are many nice, short travel “postcard” videos online). Groups of students select a place and write up a report or a poster outlining why others should visit their city/country. Alternately, give students a postcard and have them write to another student in the classroom as if they were in that city/country. For lower leveled students, provide them with a template and they just fill in the details. Ex.
I’m sitting in a ………… drinking a …………… I’ve been in ……. for ………. days now. The weather has been
……………. Yesterday I visited the ………….. and I saw …………….. Today, I’m going to ………………. I highly recommend ……………….. See you when I get home …………………
CP / F
Look —– Write
1. Pictures / Slideshows
Visuals are a powerful way to provide context and background for any writing. Make sure to use attractive, stimulating and if possible “real” photos to prompt student writing. Students can describe a scene or they can describe a series of pictures from a slideshow.
An excellent activity is to show a nice photo and get students to “guess” and write their guess in the form of the 5Ws. They answer all the 5w questions and then share their thoughts with the class.
Show a picture and get students to write a story or use it as background for a writing prompt. For example, Show a picture of a happy lottery winner. Ask students to write in their journal – If I won a million dollars I would ……
This is a much better way to “prompt” writing than simple script! – CP
Show students a selection of fairly similar pictures. The students describe in writing one of the pictures (faces work really well). They read and the other students listen and “guess” which picture is being described. Similar to this listening activity. CP
Provide students with a series of pictures which describe a story. I often use Action Pictures. Students write about each picture, numbering each piece of writing for each picture. The teacher can guide lower level students like this Mr. X’s Amazing Day example. After editing, the students cut up the pictures and make a storybook. Gluing in the pictures, coloring, decorating and adding their own story text. Afterwards read to the whole class or share among the class. CP / F
Provide students with a sequence of pictures which are scrambled. The students must order the pictures and then write out the process. Ex. Making scrambled eggs. F
Read —- Write
1. Reading Journal / Reading Response
The students read a story and then respond by making a reflective journal entry. Alternatively, the students can respond to a reading response question like, “Which character did you like best? Why?” F
Read a short story and then give students a copy of the story with some text missing. The students can fill it in with the correct version OR fill it in and make the story their own.
These are stories where words are replaced with icons/pictures. Students can read the story and then write out the whole story, replacing the pictures with the correct text. Here are some nice examples. – CP
3. Opinion / Essay
Select an article or OP Ed piece that students would find interesting or controversial. After reading and discussing, students can respond with a formal essay or piece of writing reflecting their opinion. Read them anonymously afterwards and get the class to guess who wrote it! F
4. Giving Advice
Students read a problem provided by the teacher (even better, get students to provide the problem by having them write down what they need advice on). This can often be an Ann Landers style request for advice from a newspaper. Students write their own response, giving advice. F
5. Running dictation
This is a lot of fun but quite noisy. Put students into groups of 3 or 4. For each group, post on the wall around the classroom, a piece of writing (maybe a selection of text you will be reading in your lesson). One student is appointed as the secretary. The other students must “run” to where their piece of writing is on the wall and read it. Then run back and dictate it to the secretary who records it. Continue until one group is finished (but check that they got it right!). CP
Think —- Write
1. Graphic Organizers
These you can make on your own by having students draw and fold blank sheets of paper or by giving them a pre-designed one. Students write out their thoughts on a topic using the organizer. An alphabet organizer is also an excellent activity in writing for lower level students. Graphic organizers and mind maps are an excellent way “first step” to a longer writing piece and are an important pre-writing activity. WUP
2. Prompts / Sentence Starters
Students are prompted to finish sentences that are half started. They can write X number of sentences using the sentence starter. Many starters can be found online. Prompts are also an excellent way to get students thinking and writing. Every day, students can “free write” a passage using the daily prompt (ex. What I did this morning etc… ) Creative writing of this sort really motivates students to write. There are many lists online you can use.
3. Thinking Games
Using a worksheet, students play the game while writing down their responses in grammatical sentences. What the Wordle / Not Like the Other and Top 5 are some games I’ve made and which help students begin to write. Each has a worksheet which students fill out. CP
4. Decoding / Translating
Translating a passage into English can be a good writing activity for higher level students.
Students love their cell phones and Transl8it.com is a handy way to get students interested in writing. Simply put in English text and Transl8it.com will output “text messaging”. Give this to students to decode into standard English and then check against the original. Lots of fun! See the games I’ve designed (Pop Song / Dialogues ) using this principle of decoding text messaging. CP
5. Forms / Applications
Students need to practice writing that will be of use to them directly in the wider world. Forms and filling in applications are a valuable way to do this. Fill in one together as a class and then get students to do this same for themselves individually. – CP
6. Journals / Reflection / Diaries
This type of free writing activity should be done on a regular basis if used in class. Use a timer and for X minutes, students can write upon a topic that is important to them, that day. Alternatively, students can write at the end of the day and record their thoughts about the lesson or their own learning. These are all excellent ways for the teacher to get to know their students. One caution – don’t correct student writing here! Comment positively on the student’s writing – the goal is to get them feeling good about writing and “into” it. – F
7. Tag Stories / Writing
Students love this creative exercise. Fold a blank piece of paper vertically (Hamburger style) 4 times. You’ll have 8 lines. On the first line, students all write the same sentence starter. Ex. A man walked into a bank and ……..
Next, students finish the sentence and then pass their paper to the student on their left/right. That student reads the sentence and continues the story on the next line. Continue until all 8 lines are completed. Read the stories as a class – many will be hilarious! I often do this with a “gossip” variation. I write some gossip “chunks” on the board like; “I heard that..” , “I was told…” “The word on the street is…” “Don’t pass it around but…”. Students choose one and write some juicy gossip about the student to their right. They then pass their paper to the left with everyone adding onto the gossip. Students really get into this! CP / F
8. Describe and guess
Students think of a person / a place or a thing. They write a description of them / it and they are read out and others students guess.
Jokes and riddles are also effective for this. Students write out a joke or riddle they know and then they are read and other students try to guess the punchline. – F
TEXT —– Write
1. Sentence Chains
The teacher writes a word on the board and then students shout out words that follow using the last letter(s). The more last letters they use, the more points they get. The teacher keeps writing as quick as possible as the students offer up more correct words. Ex. Smilengthosentencementality…..
Give students a blank piece of paper and in pairs with one student being the secretary, they play! This is a great game for simple spelling practice and also to get students noticing language and how words end/begin. They can also play for points. Compound words and phrases are acceptable! – WUP
2. Guided Writing
This is a mainstay of the writing teacher’s toolkit. Students are either given a “bank” of words or can write/guess on their own. They fill in the missing words of a text to complete the text. Take up together and let students read their variations. A nice adaptation to guided writing for lower level students is for them to personalize the writing by getting them to draw a picture for the writing passage to illustrate and fortify the meaning. Here’s a nice example. CP
Use a time line to describe any event. Brainstorm as a class. Then students use the key words written on the board, to write out the time line as a narrative. Really effective and you can teach history like this too! Biographies of individuals or even the students themselves are a powerful writing activity and timelines are a great way to get them started. – F
Students are given notes (the classic example is a shopping list but it might be a list of zoo animals / household items etc…) and then asked to write something using all the noted words. This usually focuses on sequence (transitions) or location (prepositions). F
5. Grammar Poems
Grammar poems are short poems about a topic that students complete using various grammar prompts. This form of guided writing is very effective and helps students notice various syntactical elements of the language.
Put the grammar poem on the board with blanks. Here are some examples but it could be on any topic (country, famous person, my home, this school, etc..). Fill out as a class with one student filling it in. Then, students copy the poem and complete with their own ideas. Change as needed to stress different grammatical elements. And of course, afterwards SHARE. Present some to the class and display on a bulletin board. Your students will be proud of them!
SPEAK — Write
1. Surveys / Reports
Students have a survey question or a questionnaire. They walk around the class recording information. After, instead of reporting to the class orally, they can write up the report about their findings.
This can also be used with FSW (Find Someone Who) games. Students use a picture bingo card to walk around the classroom and ask students yes/no questions. They write the answers with a check or X and the student’s name in the box with the picture. After, they write up a report about which student ……. / didn’t …… certain things. CP
2. Reported Speech
Do any speaking activity or set of conversation questions. Afterwards, students report back by writing using reported speech, “ Susan told me that she ………..” and “ Brad said that ………..” etc….. CP
3. Introducing each other
Students can interview another classmate using a series of questions / key words given by the teacher. After the interview of each other is over, students can write out a biography of their partner and others can read them in a class booklet. – F
4. In class letter writing
Writing for a purpose is so important and nothing makes this happen better than in class letter writing. Appoint a postman and have each student make a post office box (it could just be a small bag hanging from their desk). The students can write each other (best to assign certain students first) and then respond to their letter. Once it gets started, it just keeps going and going… – F
4. Email / messaging / chat / social networking
This is an excellent way to get students speaking by writing. Set up a social networking system or a messaging / emailing system for the students. They can communicate and chat there using an “English only” policy. Use videos / pictures like in class – to promote student discussion and communication. Projects online foster this kind of written communication and using an CMS (Content Management System) like moodle or atutor or ning can really help students write more. – F
5. Class / School English newspaper or magazine
Students can gain valuable skills by meeting and designing a school English newsletter. Give each student a role (photographer, gossip / news / sports / editor in chief / copy editor etc…) and see what they can do. You’ll be surprised! – F
WRITE —— Do
Students can write dialogues for many every day situations and then act them out for the class. The teacher can model the language on the board and then erase words so students can complete by themselves and in their own words. Here’s a neat example using a commercial as a dialogue. – CP
Students draw a picture and then write a description of the picture. They hand their description to another student who must read it and then draw the picture as they see it. Finally, both students compare pictures! – F
3. Tableaus / Drama
Students write texts of any sort. Then the texts are read and other students must make a tableau of the description or act out the text in some manner. For example – students can write about their weekend. After writing, the student reads their text and other students act it out or perform a tableau. F
4. Don’t speak / Write!
I once experimented with a class that wouldn’t speak much by putting a gag on myself and only writing out my instructions. It worked and this technique could be used in a writing class. Students can’t speak and are “gagged”. Give them post it notes by which to communicate with others. Instruct using the board. There are many creative ways to use this technique! – F
RECOMMENDED BOOKS 4 TEACHERS
I highly recommend the following two books for ideas and some general theory on how to teach writing. Purchase them for reference.
1. HOW TO TEACH WRITING – Jeremy Harmer
Very insightful and cleanly, simply written. The author explores through example and description, all the facets and theory behind that “looking glass” which we call teaching. I use this as a course text for my methodology class for in-service teachers.
2. Oxford Basics: Simple Writing Activites
- Jill and Charles Hadfield
This book (and series) is a gem! Jill Hadfield knows what working EFL / ESL teachers need and in this book there are 30 simple writing activities which teachers can use with a wide variety of levels and with only a chalkboard and a piece of chalk / paper.
See my Blog post and download the list of my TOP 10 WRITING WEBSITES FOR TEACHERS AND STUDENTS

A long time ago I wrote the article The Dull Case of Emissivity and Average Temperatures and expected that would be the end of the interest in emissivity. But it is a gift that keeps on giving, with various people concerned that no one has really been interested in measuring surface emissivity properly.
All solid and liquid surfaces emit thermal radiation according to the Stefan-Boltzmann formula:
E = εσT4
where ε=emissivity, a material property; σ = 5.67×10-8 ; T = temperature in Kelvin (absolute temperature)
and E is the flux in W/m²
More about this formula and background on the material properties in Planck, Stefan-Boltzmann, Kirchhoff and LTE.
The parameter called emissivity is the focus of this article. It is of special interest because to calculate the radiation from the earth’s surface we need to know only temperature and emissivity.
Emissivity is a value between 0 and 1. And is also depends on the wavelength of radiation (and in some surfaces like metals, also the direction). Because the wavelengths of radiation depend on temperature, emissivity also depends on temperature.
When emissivity = 1, the body is called a “blackbody”. It’s just the theoretical maximum that can be radiated. Some surfaces are very close to a blackbody and others are a long way off.
Note: I have seen many articles by keen budding science writers who have some strange ideas about “blackbodies”. The only difference between a blackbody and a non-blackbody is that the emissivity of a blackbody = 1, and the emissivity of a non-blackbody is less than 1. That’s it. Nothing else.
The wavelength dependence of emissivity is very important. If we take snow for example, it is highly reflective to solar (shortwave) radiation with as much as 80% of solar radiation being reflected. Solar radiation is centered around a wavelength of 0.5μm.
Yet snow is highly absorbing to terrestrial (longwave) radiation, which is centered around a wavelength of 10μm. The absorptivity and emissivity around freezing point is 0.99 – meaning that only 1% of incident longwave radiation would be reflected.
Let’s take a look at the Planck curve – the blackbody radiation curve – for surfaces at a few slightly different temperatures:
The emissivity (as a function of wavelength) simply modifies these curves.
Suppose, for example, that the emissivity of a surface was 0.99 across this entire wavelength range. In that case, a surface at 30°C would radiate like the light blue curve but at 99% of the values shown. If the emissivity varies across the wavelength range then you simply multiply the emissivity by the intensity at each wavelength to get the expected radiation.
Sometimes emissivity is quoted as an average for a given temperature – this takes into account the shape of the Planck curve shown in the graphs above.
Often, when emissivity is quoted as an overall value, the total flux has been measured for a given temperature and the emissivity is simply:
ε = actual radiation measured / blackbody theoretical radiation at that temperature
[Fixed, thanks to DeWitt Payne for pointing out the mistake]
In practice the calculation is slightly more involved, see note 1.
It turns out that the emissivity of water and of the ocean surface is an involved subject.
And because of the importance of calculating the sea surface temperature from satellite measurements, the emissivity of the ocean in the “atmospheric window” (8-14 μm) has been the subject of many 100′s of papers (perhaps 1000′s). These somewhat overwhelm the papers on the less important subject of “general ocean emissivity”.
Aside from climate, water itself is an obvious subject of study for spectroscopy.
For example, 29 years ago Miriam Sidran writing Broadband reflectance and emissivity of specular and rough water surfaces, begins:
The optical constants of water have been extensively studied because of their importance in science and technology. Applications include a) remote sensing of natural water surfaces, b) radiant energy transfer by atmospheric water droplets, and c) optical properties of diverse materials containing water, such as soils, leaves and aqueous solutions.
In this study, values of the complex index of refraction from six recent articles were averaged by visual inspection of the graphs, and the most representative values in the wavelength range of 0.200 μm to 5 cm were determined. These were used to find the directional polarized reflectance and emissivity of a specular surface and the Brewster or pseudo-Brewster angle as functions of wavelength.
The directional polarized reflectance and emissivity of wind-generated water waves were studied using the facet slope distribution function for a rough sea due to Cox and Munk .
Applications to remote sensing of sea surface temperature and wave state are discussed, including effects of salinity.
Emphasis added. She also comments in her paper:
For any wavelength, the total emissivity, ε, is constant for all θ [angles] < 45° [from vertical]; this follows from Fig. 8 and Eq. (6a). It is important in remote sensing of thermal radiation from space, as discussed later..
The polarized emissivities are independent of surface roughness for θ < 25°, while for θ > 25°, the thermal radiation is partly depolarized by the roughness.
This means that when you look at the emission radiation from directly above (and close to directly above) the sea surface roughness doesn’t have an effect.
I thought some other comments might also be interesting:
The 8-14-μm spectral band is chosen for discussion here because (a) it is used in remote sensing and (b) the atmospheric transmittance, τ, in this band is a fairly well-known function of atmospheric moisture content. Water vapor is the chief radiation absorber in this band.
In Eqs. (2)-(4), n and k (and therefore A and B) are functions of salinity. However, the emissivity value, ε, computed for pure water differs from that of seawater by <0.5%.
When used in Eqs. (10), it causes an error of <0.20°C in retrieved Ts [surface temperature]. Since ε in this band lies between 0.96 and 0.995, approximation ε= 1 is routinely used in sea surface temperature retrieval. However, this has been shown to cause an error of -0.5 to -1.0°C for very dry atmospheres. For very moist atmospheres, the error is only ≈0.2°C.
One of the important graphs from her paper:
Click to view a larger image
Emissivity = 1 – Reflectance. The graph shows Reflectance vs Wavelength vs Angle of measurement.
I took the graph (coarse as it is) and extracted the emissivity vs wavelength function (using numerical techniques). I then calculated the blackbody radiation for a 15°C surface and the radiation from a water surface using the emissivity from the graph above for the same 15°C surface. Both were calculated from 1 μm to 100 μm:
The “unofficial” result, calculating the average emissivity from the ratio: ε = 0.96.
This result is valid for 0-30°C. But I suspect the actual value will be modified slightly by the solid angle calculations. That is, the total flux from the surface (the Stefan-Boltzmann equation) is the spectral intensity integrated over all wavelengths, and integrated over all solid angles. So the reduced emissivity closer to the horizon will affect this measurement.
Niclòs et al – 2005
One of the most interesting recent papers is In situ angular measurements of thermal infrared sea surface emissivity—validation of models, Niclòs et al (2005). Here is the abstract:
In this paper, sea surface emissivity (SSE) measurements obtained from thermal infrared radiance data are presented. These measurements were carried out from a fixed oilrig under open sea conditions in the Mediterranean Sea during the WInd and Salinity Experiment 2000 (WISE 2000).
The SSE retrieval methodology uses quasi-simultaneous measurements of the radiance coming from the sea surface and the downwelling sky radiance, in addition to the sea surface temperature (SST). The radiometric data were acquired by a CIMEL ELECTRONIQUE CE 312 radiometer, with four channels placed in the 8–14 μm region. The sea temperature was measured with high-precision thermal probes located on oceanographic buoys, which is not exactly equal to the required SST. A study of the skin effect during the radiometric measurements used in this work showed that a constant bulk–skin temperature difference of 0.05±0.06 K was present for wind speeds larger than 5 m/s. Our study is limited to these conditions.
Thus, SST used as a reference for SSE retrieval was obtained as the temperature measured by the contact thermometers placed on the buoys at 20-cm depth minus this bulk–skin temperature difference.
SSE was obtained under several observation angles and surface wind speed conditions, allowing us to study both the angular and the sea surface roughness dependence. Our results were compared with SSE models..
The introduction explains why specifically they are studying the dependence of emissivity on the angle of measurement – for reasons of accurate calculation of sea surface temperature:
The requirement of a maximum uncertainty of ±0.3 K in sea surface temperature (SST) as input to climate models and the use of high observation angles in the current space missions, such as the 55° for the forward view of the Advanced Along Track Scanning Radiometer (AATSR) (Llewellyn-Jones et al., 2001) on board ENVISAT, need a precise and reliable determination of sea surface emissivity (SSE) in the thermal infrared region (TIR), as well as analyses of its angular and spectral dependences.
The emission of a rough sea surface has been studied over the last years due to the importance of the SSE for accurate SST retrieval. A reference work for many subsequent studies has been the paper written by Cox and Munk (1954)..
The experimental setup:
From Niclos (2004)
The results (compared with one important model from Masuda et al 1988):
From Niclos (2004)
Click on the image for a larger graphic
This paper also goes on to compare the results with the model of Wu & Smith (1997) and indicates the Wu & Smith’s model is a little better.
The tabulated results, note that you can avoid the “eye chart effect” by clicking on the table:
Click on the image for a larger view
Note that the emissivities are in the 8-14μm range.
You can see that the emissivity when measured from close to vertical is 0.98 – 0.99 at two different wind speeds.
Konda et al – 1994
A slightly older paper which is not concerned with angular dependence of sea surface emissivity is by Konda, Imasato, Nishi and Toda (1994).
They comment on a few older papers:
Buettner and Kern (1965) estimated the sea surface emissivity to be 0.993 from an experiment using an emissivity box, but they disregarded the temperature difference across the cool skin.
Saunders (1967b, 1968) observed the plane sea surface irradiance from an airplane and determined the reflectance. By determining the reflectance as the ratio of the differences in energy between the clear and the cloudy sky at different places, he calculated the emissivity to be 0.986. The process of separating the reflection from the surface irradiance, however, is not precise.
Mikhaylov and Zolotarev (1970) calculated the emissivity from the optical constant of the water and found the average in the infrared region was 0.9875.
The observation of Davies et al. (1971) was performed on Lake Ontario with a wave height less than 25 cm. They measured the surface emission isolated from sky radiation by an aluminum cone, and estimated the emissivity to be 0.972. The aluminum was assumed to act as a mirror in infrared region. In fact,aluminum does not work as a perfect mirror.
Masuda et al. (1988) computed the surface emissivity as a function of the zenith angle of observed radiation and wind speed. They computed the emissivity from the reflectance of a model sea surface consisting of many facets, and changed their slopes according to Gaussian distribution with respect to surface wind. The computed emissivity in 11 μm was 0.992 under no wind.
Each of these studies in trying to determine the value of emissivity, failed to distinguish surface emission from reflection and to evaluate the temperature difference across the cool skin. The summary of these studies are tabulated in Table 1.
The table summarizing some earlier work:
Konda and his co-workers took measurements over a one year period from a tower in Tanabe Bay, Japan.
They calculated from their results that the ocean emissivity was 0.984±0.004.
One of the challenges for Konda’s research and for Niclòs is the issue of sea surface temperature measurement itself. Here is a temperature profile which was shown in the comments of Does Back Radiation “Heat” the Ocean? – Part Three:
Kawai & Wada (2007)
The point is the actual surface from which the radiation is emitted will usually be at a slightly different temperature from the bulk temperature (note the logarithmic scale of depth). This is the “cool skin” effect. This surface temperature effect is also moderated by winds and is very difficult to measure accurately in field conditions.
Smith et al – 1996
Another excellent paper which measured the emissivity of the ocean is by Smith et al (1996):
An important objective in satellite remote sensing is the global determination of sea surface temperature (SST). For such measurements to be useful to global climate research, an accuracy of ±0.3K or better over a length of 100km and a timescale of days to weeks must be attained. This criterion is determined by the size of the SST anomalies (≈1K) that can cause significant disturbance to the global atmospheric circulation patterns and the anticipated size of SST perturbations resulting from global climate change. This level of uncertainty is close to the theoretical limits of the atmospheric corrections..
It is also a challenge to demonstrate that such accuracies are being achieved, and conventional approaches, which compare the SST derived from drifting or moored buoys, generally produce results with a scatter of ±0.5 to 0.7K. This scatter cannot be explained solely by uncertainties in the buoy thermometers or the noise equivalent temperature difference of the AVHRR, as these are both on the order of 0.2K or less but are likely to be surface emissivity/reflectivity uncertainties, residual atmospheric effects, or result from the methods of comparison
Note that the primary focus of this research was to have accurate SST measurements from satellites.
From Smith et al (1996)
The experimental work on the research vessel Pelican included a high spectral resolution Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometer (AERI) which was configured to make spectral observations of the sea surface radiance at several view angles. Any measurement from the surface of course, is the sum of the emitted radiance from the surface as well as the reflected sky radiance.
- ocean salinity
- intake water temperature
- surface air temperature
- wind velocity
- SST within the top 15cm of depth
There was also independent measurement of the radiative temperature of the sea surface at 10μm with a Heimann broadband radiation thermometer “window” radiometer. And radiosondes were launched from the ship roughly every 3 hours.
Additionally, various other instruments took measurements from a flight altitude of 20km. Satellite readings were also compared.
The AERI measured the spectral distribution of radiance from 3.3μm to 20μm at 4 angles. Upwards at 11.5° from zenith, and downwards at 36.5°, 56.5° and 73.5°.
There’s a lot of interesting discussion of the calculations in their paper. Remember that the primary aim is to enable satellite measurements to have the most accurate measurements of SST and satellites can only really “see” the surface through the “atmospheric window” from 8-12μm.
Here are the wavelength dependent emissivity results shown for the 3 viewing angles. You can see that at the lowest viewing angle of 36.5° the emissivity is 0.98 – 0.99 in the 8-12μm range.
From Smith et al (1996)
Note that the wind speed doesn’t have any effect on emissivity at the more direct angle, but as the viewing angle moves to 73.5° the emissivity has dropped and high wind speeds change the emissivity considerably.
Henderson et al – 2003
Henderson et al (2003) is one of the many papers which consider the theoretical basis of how viewing angles change the emissivity and derive a model.
Just as an introduction, here is the theoretical variation in emissivity with measurement angle, versus “refractive index” as computed by the Fresnel equations:
The legend is refractive index from 1.20 to 1.35. Water, at visible wavelengths, has a refractive index of 1.33. This shows how the emissivity reduces once the viewing angle increases above 50° from the vertical.
The essence of the problem of sea surface roughness for large viewing angles is shown in the diagram below, where multiple reflections take place:
Henderson and his co-workers compare their results with the measured results of Smith et al (1996) and also comment that at zenith viewing angles the emissivity does not depend on the wind speed, but at larger angles from vertical it does.
A quick summary of their model:
We have developed a Monte Carlo ray-tracing model to compute the emissivity of computer-rendered, wind-roughened sea surfaces. The use of a ray-tracing method allows us to include both the reflected emission and shadowing and, furthermore, permits us to examine more closely how these processes control the radiative properties of the surface. The intensity of the radiation along a given ray path is quantified using Stokes vectors, and thus, polarization is explicitly included in the calculations as well.
Their model results compare well with the experimental results. Note that the approach of generating a mathematical model to calculate how emissivity changes with wind speed and, therefore, wave shape is not at all new.
Water retains its inherent properties of emissivity regardless of how it is moving or what shape it is. The theoretical challenge is handling the multiple reflections, absorptions, re-emissions that take place when the radiance from the water is measured at some angle from the vertical.
The best up to date measurements of ocean emissivity in the 8-14 μm range are 0.98 – 0.99. The 8-14 μm range is well-known because of the intense focus on sea surface temperature measurements from satellite.
From quite ancient data, the average emissivity of water across a very wide broadband range (1-100 μm) is 0.96 for water temperatures from 0-30°C.
The values from the ocean when measured close to the vertical are independent of wind speed and sea surface roughness. As the angle of measurement moves from the vertical around to the horizon the measured emissivity drops and the wind speed affects the measurement significantly.
These values have been extensively researched because the calculation of sea surface temperature from satellite measurements in the 8-14μm “atmospheric window” relies on the accurate knowledge of emissivity and any factors which affect it.
For climate models – I haven’t checked what values they use. I assume they use the best experimental values from the field. That’s an assumption. I’ve already read enough on ocean emissivity.
For energy balance models, like the Trenberth and Kiehl update, an emissivity of 1 doesn’t really affect their calculations. The reason, stated simply, is that the upwards surface radiation and the downward atmospheric radiation are quite close in magnitude. For example, the globally annually averaged values of both are 396 W/m² (upward surface) vs 340 W/m² (downward atmospheric).
Suppose the emissivity drops from 0.98 to 0.97 – what is the effect on upwards radiation through the atmosphere?
The upwards radiation has dropped by 4W/m², but the reflected atmospheric radiation has increased by 3.4W/m². The net upwards radiation through the atmosphere has reduced by only 0.6 W/m².
One of our commenters asked what value the IPCC uses. The answer is they don’t use a value at all because they summarize research from papers in the field.
Whether they do it well or badly is a subject of much controversy, but what is most important to understand is that the IPCC does not write papers, or perform GCM model runs, or do experiments – and that is why you see almost no equations in their many 1000′s of pages of discussion on climate science.
For those who don’t believe the “greenhouse” effect exists, take a look at Understanding Atmospheric Radiation and the “Greenhouse” Effect – Part One in the light of all the measured results for ocean emissivity.
On Another Note
It’s common to find claims on various blogs and in comments on blogs that climate science doesn’t do much actual research.
I haven’t found that to be true. I have found the opposite.
Whenever I have gone digging for a particular subject, whether it is the diurnal temperature variation in the sea surface, diapycnal & isopycnal eddy diffusivity, ocean emissivity, or the possible direction and magnitude of water vapor feedback, I have found a huge swathe of original research, of research building on other research, of research challenging other research, and detailed accounts of experimental methods, results and comparison with theory and models.
Just as an example, in the case of emissivity of sea surface, at the end of the article you can see the first 30 or so results pulled up from one journal – Remote Sensing of the Environment for the search phrase “emissivity sea surface”. The journal search engine found 348 articles (of course, not every one of them is actually about ocean emissivity measurements).
Perhaps it might turn out to be the best journal for this subject, but it’s still just one journal.
Broadband reflectance and emissivity of specular and rough water surfaces, Sidran, Applied Optics (1981)
In situ angular measurements of thermal infrared sea surface emissivity—validation of models, Niclòs, Valor, Caselles, Coll & Sànchez, Remote Sensing of Environment (2005)
Measurement of the Sea Surface Emissivity, Konda, Imasato, Nishi and Toda, Journal of Oceanography (1994)
Observations of the Infrared Radiative Properties of the Ocean—Implications for the Measurement of Sea Surface Temperature via Satellite Remote Sensing, Smith, Knuteson, Revercomb, Feltz, Nalli, Howell, Menzel, Brown, Brown, Minnett & McKeown, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (1996)
The polarized emissivity of a wind-roughened sea surface: A Monte Carlo model, Henderson, Theiler & Villeneuve, Remote Sensing of Environment (2003)
Note 1: The upward radiation from the surface is the sum of three contributions: (i) direct emission of the sea surface, which is attenuated by the absorption of the atmospheric layer between the sea surface and the instrument; (ii) reflection of the downwelling sky radiance on the sea, attenuated by the atmosphere; and (iii) the upwelling atmospheric radiance emitted in the observing direction.
So the measured radiance can be expressed as:
where the three terms on the right are each of the three contributions noted in the same order.
Note 2: 1/10th of the search results returned from one journal for the search term “emissivity sea surface”:
Remote Sensing of Environment - search results
Read Full Post »

The Bruce-Benedicks Saga and the Birth of the AGH
While living in Paris in the 1880's, the budding young Canadian artist, William Blair Bruce
, met the aristocratic Swedish sculptress, Caroline Benedicks
. They fell in love, married, and eventually established themselves in a permanent year-round residence, Brucebo
, on the western seashore of Gotland Island in Sweden. From their artistic union two significant institutions in the world of fine art were to evolve – the birth of the Art Gallery of Hamilton in Canada and the creation of the Brucebo Fine Art Scholarship Foundation in Sweden.
The saga of William and Caroline’s life-story spans one of the most exciting phases in European contemporary history, including its fine art development. It comprises the last quarter of the 19th century and the decades leading up to World War II. The era is characterized by dramatic transformations in not just technological and industrial developments, but also in social and cultural institutions, including the world of art in its various forms.
was born in 1856 into a wealthy industrialist family in Stockholm. Caroline had finished her studies in Sweden in the early 1880's, before moving South, to Paris, and settling in the village of Grez-sur-Long in 1884, where she stood out from the majority of artists living there. First, she was a single young female in a society that basically frowned upon such status. Second, she was financially independent, and third, she had received a typical "proper" education as behooved a young woman of wealthy family circumstances. Finally, she was a family girl whose keen interest in the fine arts had landed her in a sea of male artists. Another factor that made her quite atypical was her chosen field of art specialization in sculpture rather than the standard popular domain of painting.
William Blair Bruce’s
formative years could not have been more different from Caroline’s. William was born in 1859 into a comfortable middle-class here a continent away in Canada, on Hamilton’s “mountain”. He received his early training from his father who was also an amateur painter. In 1877, William studied at the local Mechanics Institute (Hamilton Art School), and from 1878 until 1880 was employed as a draftsman for a local architectural firm.
In the autumn of 1881, at age 22, William sailed to France, settling in Paris and enrolling in classes at the Académie Julien. William wanted to soak up the Parisian atmosphere, discover new inspirational approaches in painting by rubbing shoulders with contemporaries, and to meet the new generation of avant-guard painters. Above all, he wanted to pit his artistic skills and talent in the open competition at the annual Grand Salon, and at various exhibition galleries, against other talented painters who tried to achieve fame in the art world “mecca”, Paris.
William’s behavior in this world was typical. He first rented a studio apartment on Rive Gauche with all the other aspiring artists. However, in 1882, he leased a cottage in the village of Barbizon, on the outskirts of the Forest of Fontainebleau. This became his permanent pied-a-terre during his years in Paris.Meanwhile, Caroline was mixing with the Swedish crowd that tended to center upon the village of Grez-sur-Long, where the young, up-and-coming generation of Swedish painters were developing their talents.
The 1880's were an exciting time for any young artist to reside in France. Toward the latter part of the 19th century, the art world in general had broken with the previous romantic/realism styles that had typified the (landscape) painting schools, both on the Continent and in England during earlier decades. New fine art waves were washing away the traditional studio-based approach to painting, and the innovations in France at the time fostered the first generation of impressionistic painters. This powerful wave of avant-garde art as represented by the impressionists had a major impact throughout European and international art communities. The standard bearers, such as Corot, Monet, Pissaro, and Sisley, were all well-established, and frequently organized private exhibitions outside the annual Paris Salon. They, and others in a widening flock, served as beacons for the younger generation of artists that came to France. William and Caroline included.
The first couple of meetings of Caroline and William must have occurred in this context - accidental and informal encounters in popular places of residence typical of the artistic community at large.
By this time, Caroline was an active and respected member of the Swedish art circles, first at Grez and later Paris. Indeed, before she came to Paris, she had been admitted into the Royal Swedish Academy of Art, a measure of her professional calibre. How a " colonial nobody " such as William, straight out of the British North America Dominion of Canada, could fit into her busy social and professional calendar is hard to imagine. Perhaps it can be best explained through the "Parisian way of life " - the great ease by which people in the art community socialized. Also, both William and Caroline belonged to the younger "talent pool" of the foreign art colony, which also raised their public profile. Hence, given the artist's small world, it was only matter of time before they bumped into each other sometime in the spring of 1885.
William’s letters home suggested that he possessed both a strong personal determination and a great belief in his own artistic talent. William’s talents were not generally being recognized in France at the time, but what surely must have added a certain personal fame was his ill-fated trip home to Canada in the Fall of 1885, during which the steamship, Brooklyn
, sank in the Gulf of St. Lawrence with his whole portfolio of five years hard work in Paris – some 200 paintings. Such an event must have been much talked about, and seen as a catastrophic, almost monumental personal tragedy - a drama literally handmade for the bistro and cafe gossip-mills.
Shortly thereafter, a surprise transatlantic voyage brought Caroline and her chaperone uncle to New York and to Canada. After considerable discussion the young couple decided to return to Paris, where William would start resurrecting his shattered career and Caroline continue hers. Caroline and her understanding uncle must have been quite persuasive in the discussions, but more important was the fact that the pair wanted more than anything else to be together, preferably in Paris, where their love affair had begun.
So, they crossed the Atlantic again in 1887, she getting closer to her twin "home-bases" of Paris and Stockholm, he subconsciously casting loose his moorings from his Canadian home-base.
Although Caroline and William were engaged in the fall of 1886, their subsequent marriage did not materialize until 1888. One can only conclude that there existed a certain amount of concern, even resistance, to the young couple's marriage on the part of the Benedicks family. The fact that the newly-weds almost immediately after the wedding returned to Paris is perhaps indicative of their preference of having the Benedicks clan at some distance rather than just round the corner in Stockholm. After the wedding, which saw an impressive gathering of Stockholm high society and cultural elite, Caroline and William literally fled southward to Paris, where they remained for another couple of years practicing a typical bohemian, but fashionable, vagabond lifestyle. They freely traveled to places that caught their fancy and inspired their creativity. They also took up the habit of spending summers in the North, where at an early stage they became enamored with the Island of Gotland.
The Gotland connection is something of an enigma in the Bruce - Benedicks saga. There were no family links with Gotland among the Benedicks, nor any business. The couple seemed to have fallen in love with the island, its serene landscape and leisurely summer ambiance. Gotland Island possessed an open, expansive, almost prairie-flat, pastoral landscape dotted with Viking rune stones, burial sites, rich archeological digs, and 14th century churches in classical "Gotland Gothic style". Gotland was romantic, historical, aesthetically pleasing, and highly inspirational - well worth the young artists’ gaze.
William quickly succumbed. As an aspiring impressionist, he was fascinated by the “Gotland light” and shoreline/seascape interface, both of which figured prominently in his painting from that time on. And, in winter, the island atmosphere was hauntingly dark, with the afternoon's magical l'heure bleue
reflected across the frozen beaches and snow-covered meadowlands.
In 1899, the Bruces' settled at Brucebo
. The site of their home was located a few kilometers up the coast from Visby, at Skalso - a fishing village on a limestone terrace offering a beautiful westward view toward the low-lying shore, with the light blue sea and sky serving as an immense backdrop. The air was clear, salubrious, and healthy, combining its tonic quality with a scent of fresh pine and the sound of the wind through the forest. At Brucebo
they experienced spectacular and ever-changing scenery and the rhythmic sounds of wave and wind mixed with the cries of terns and seagulls. The summer climate was dry, sunny and warm – the very best Sweden could offer, especially for William who was sensitive to damp and raw weather.
The Bruces loved their Brucebo
homestead. Caroline did sculpture, etchings, and watercolors, while William captured seascapes on canvas.
They had only seven years on Gotland before William’s untimely death on November 17, 1906 at the age of 47. Caroline was then 50 years old, and would survive her husband by 29 more years. She settled for good at Brucebo
and continued to work as a painter and sculptress. She also took an active interest in a number of contemporary political causes - especially the women's emancipation movement in the years prior to World War I. Strangely perhaps, she also became active in Gotland's voluntary military organization, and over the years established herself as a great nationalist-patriot with strong sympathies for the British- French Grande Entente. Indeed, Caroline's life remained full to the very end.
When Caroline passed away, World War II was only four years away, the famous impressionists were all long-gone, 20th century modernistic fine art styles were in full bloom, and social democracy was about to become the political standard in Sweden.
After the death of Caroline in 1935 at the age of 70, a grant endowment was established. However, it was only in 1972 that the formula and institutional arrangement for her wish that a stipend be made available to a promising Canadian painter to spend some summer weeks at Brucebo
on the island of Gotland, became reality. Thus, through the Gotland Fine Art Museum, and the Brucebo Fine Art Scholarship Foundation, the Brucebo Fine Arts Summer Scholarship and in recent years, the William Blair Bruce Fine Arts European Travel Scholarship have been offered in a tangible and lasting manner to talented Canadian artists, in commemoration of William Blair Bruce of Hamilton Ontario, and Caroline Benedicks of Stockholm Sweden, and of their transatlantic saga of love and art.
But there was also another more immediate legacy of this saga. Upon the death of William, his father in Hamilton and his widow in Gotland offered the City of Hamilton twenty-nine of William’s works, on the understanding that a permanent municipal gallery would be established to house them. However, Hamilton lacked a municipal art gallery at the time, and six years were to pass before the City acquired a space to house the Blair Bruce Collection
In 1913 the first Hamilton Public Library vacated their building, built on Main Street West near James in 1890, and moved across the street into the new Carnegie Library. Finally, on November 27, 1913 the City finally designated the second floor and attic of the old Public Library Building as space for the first municipal art gallery, named the Hamilton Municipal Gallery
Without the Blair Bruce bequest, it would likely have been many years before Hamilton could ever boast a municipal art gallery – perhaps never. Today, that modest gallery with its Blair Bruce Collection has grown and matured to become the Art Gallery of Hamilton
For AGH's chronology from 1886 to 2005, click here.

Tamoxifen use 'should double' to stop breast cancer returning
A decade's treatment with tamoxifen could stop the return of breast cancer for many more women than the current recommendation for five years, say researchers.
University of Oxford scientists say the doubling cuts both the risk of the cancer returning and deaths from the disease.
Writing in The Lancet, they say this outweighs the risk of side effects.
Cancer Research UK said the study added important clarity.
Tamoxifen tablets have long been part of the daily routine for women in the years after remission from 'ER-positive' breast cancer.
ER-positive tumour growth is accelerated by the female sex hormone oestrogen, and tamoxifen blocks the hormone.
An international group of scientists, led by Dr Christina Davies from the University of Oxford, looked at the effect of sustained tamoxifen on the likelihood that cancer would return.
They looked at 6,847 women with the ER-positive version of the disease, half of whom were given tamoxifen for the standard five year period, and half who continued with the drug until the 10 year mark.
The results found that cancer returned in a quarter of the women given five years of tamoxifen. That fell to 21.4% in those given ten years of the drug.
Deaths from breast cancer was also significantly reduced, from 15% of those on the five-year programme, to just over 12% of those given 10 years.
End Quote Dr Caitlin Palframan Breakthrough Breast Cancer
This trial is great news for women with this type of breast cancer as it suggests that taking the commonly used drug, tamoxifen, for longer could save more lives with minimal additional side effects”
While the changes are only a few percent, with more than 40,000 women diagnosed with breast cancer in the UK alone every year, a large proportion of whom have 'ER-positive' cancer, it could mean a significant decrease in the number whose cancer returns.
The report authors said: "Good evidence now exists that 10 years of tamoxifen in ER-positive breast cancer produces substantial reductions in rates of recurrence and in breast cancer mortality not only during the first decade, while treatment continues, but also during the second decade, long after it has ended."
The drug does cause side-effects in some patients, including, rarely, cancer of the lining of the womb, but the scientists said that the increased chance of preventing breast cancer returning far outweighed the risk.
Dr Caitlin Palframan, head of policy at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "ER-positive breast cancer is the most common type of breast cancer and so improving treatment and getting the most out of the effective treatments we already have is key.
"This trial is great news for women with this type of breast cancer as it suggests that taking the commonly used drug, tamoxifen, for longer could save more lives with minimal additional side effects."
Other scientists say that 10 years could now become the standard for treatment.
Prof Trevor Powles, from Cancer Centre London, said that this, and other studies due to report next year, "should herald a change in practice".
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence said: "We do not generally make recommendations relating to how long a patient should receive tamoxifen; that decision should be made by a doctor according to their professional judgement and in discussion with their patient, not least because there are continuing trials in this area.
"We review our guidance regularly to ensure it remains based on the best, most up-to-date evidence available and, when we come to update our guidelines on the diagnosis and management of breast cancer, we will take all new evidence into consideration."
Martin Ledwick, from Cancer Research UK which funded the study, said: "This important study adds further clarity to the question about the length of time women should take tamoxifen.
"Although treatment for hormone receptor positive breast cancer has become more complex in recent years with some women receiving aromatese inhibitors, these results will help in deciding the length of treatment for women who are prescribed tamoxifen alone."

Nov. 30, 2006 -- Do the sounds of our native languages affect how we hear music and other non-language sounds" A team of American and Japanese researchers has found evidence that native languages influence the way people group non-language sounds into rhythms.
People in different cultures perceive different rhythms in identical sequences of sound, according to Drs. John R. Iversen and Aniruddh D. Patel of The Neuroscience Institute in San Diego and Dr. Kengo Ohgushi of the Kyoto City University of Arts in Kyoto, Japan. This provides evidence that exposure to certain patterns of speech can influence one's perceptions of musical rhythms. In future work, they believe they may even be able to predict how people will hear rhythms based on the structures of their own languages. The researchers will present their findings Nov. 30 at the Fourth Joint Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America (ASA) and the Acoustical Society of Japan (ASJ), which will be held at the Sheraton Waikiki and Royal Hawaiian Hotels in Honolulu, Hawaii. The meeting will run from Nov. 28 through Dec. 2, and more than 1600 papers will be presented.
Researchers have traditionally tested how individuals group rhythms by playing simple sequences of tones. For example, listeners are presented with tones that alternate in loudness (...loud-soft-loud-soft...) or duration (...long-short-long-short...) and are asked to indicate their perceived grouping. Two principles established a century ago, and confirmed in numerous studies since, are widely accepted: a louder sound tends to mark the beginning of a group, and a lengthened sound tends to mark the end of a group. These principles have come to be viewed as universal laws of perception, underlying the rhythms of both speech and music. However, the cross-cultural data have come from a limited range of cultures, such as American, Dutch and French.
This new study suggests one of those so-called "universal" principles, perceiving a longer sound at the end of a group, may be merely a byproduct of English and other Western languages. In the experiments Iversen, Patel and Ohgushi performed, native speakers of Japanese and native speakers of American English agreed with the principle that they heard repeating "loud-soft" groups. However, the listeners showed a sharp difference when it came to the duration principle. English-speaking listeners most often grouped perceived alternating short and long tones as "short-long." Japanese-speaking listeners, albeit with more variability, were more likely to perceive the tones as "long-short." Since this finding was surprising and contradicted a common belief of perception, the researchers replicated and confirmed it with listeners from different parts of Japan.
To uncover why these differences exist, one clue may come from understanding how musical rhythms begin in the two cultures. For example, if most phrases in American music start with a short-long pattern, and most phrases in Japanese music start with a long-short pattern, then listeners might learn to use these patterns as cues for how to group them. To test this idea, the researchers examined phrases in American and Japanese children's songs. They examined 50 songs per culture, and for each beginning phrase they computed the duration ratio of the first note to the second note and counted how often phrases started with a short-long pattern versus other possible patterns such as long-short, or equal duration. They found American songs show no bias to start phrases with a short-long pattern. But Japanese songs show a bias to start phrases with a long-short pattern, consistent with their perceptual findings.
One basic difference between English and Japanese is word order. In English, short grammatical, or "function," words such as "the," "a," and "to," come at the beginning of phrases and combine with longer meaningful, or "content," words such as a nouns or verbs. Function words are typically reduced in speech, having short duration and low stress. This creates frequent linguistic chunks that start with a short element and end with a long one, such as "to eat," and "a big desk." This fact about English has long been exploited by poets in creating the English language's most common verse form, iambic pentameter.
Japanese, in contrast, places function words at the ends of phrases. Common function words in Japanese include "case markers," or short sounds which can indicate whether a noun is a subject, direct object, indirect object, etc. For example, in the sentence "John-san-ga Mari-san-ni hon-wo agemashita," ("John gave a book to Mari") the suffixes "ga," "ni" and "wo" are case markers indicating that John is the subject, Mari is the indirect object and "hon" (book) is the direct object. Placing function words at the ends of phrases creates frequent chunks that start with a long element and end with a short one, which is just the opposite of the rhythm of short phrases in English.
In addition to potentially uncovering a new link between language and music, the researchers' work demonstrates there is a need for cross-cultural research when it comes to testing general principles of auditory perception.
AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert! system.

How do you get your heart rate on target?
When you work out, are you doing too much or not enough?
There’s a simple way to know: Your target heart rate helps you hit the bull’s eye. “We don’t want people to over-exercise, and the other extreme is not getting enough exercise,” says Gerald Fletcher, M.D., a cardiologist and professor in the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine in Jacksonville, Fla.
First Thing’s First
Before you learn how to calculate and monitor your target training heart rate, you have to know your resting heart rate. Your resting heart rate is the number of times your heart beats per minute while it’s at rest.
It’s best to check it in the morning after you’ve had a good night’s sleep and before you get out of bed. The average resting heart rate is 60-80 beats per minute, but it’s usually lower for physically fit people. It also rises with age.
Hitttin’ the Target
Now you’re ready to determine your target training heart rate. As you exercise, periodically:
• Take your pulse on the inside of your wrist, on the thumb side.
• Use the tips of your first two fingers (not your thumb) to press lightly over the blood vessels on your wrist.
• Count your pulse for 10 seconds and multiply by 6 to find your beats per minute. You want to stay between 50 percent to 85 percent of your maximum heart rate. This range is your target heart rate.
Know Your Numbers
The table below shows estimated target heart rates for different ages. In the age category closest to yours, read across to find your target heart rate. Your maximum heart rate is about 220 minus your age. The figures are averages, so use them as general guidelines.
|Age||Target HR Zone 50-85%||Average Maximum Heart Rate, 100%|
|20 years||100-170 beats per minute||200 beats per minute|
|30 years||95-162 beats per minute||190 beats per minute|
|35 years||93-157 beats per minute||185 beats per minute|
|40 years||90-153 beats per minute||180 beats per minute|
|45 years||88-149 beats per minute||175 beats per minute|
|50 years||85-145 beats per minute||170 beats per minute|
|55 years||83-140 beats per minute||165 beats per minute|
|60 years||80-136 beats per minute||160 beats per minute|
|65 years||78-132 beats per minute||155 beats per minute|
|70 years||75-128 beats per minute||150 beats per minute|
Important Note: A few high blood pressure medications lower the maximum heart rate and thus the target zone rate. If you're taking such medicine, call your physician to find out if you need to use a lower target heart rate.
So what’s in a number?
If your target heart rate is too high, you’re straining. So slow down. If it’s too low, and the intensity feels “light” or “moderate/brisk,” push yourself to exercise a little harder. During the first few weeks of working out, aim for the lowest part of your target zone (50 percent). Then, gradually build up to the higher part (85 percent). After six months or more, you may be able to exercise comfortably at up to 85 percent of your maximum heart rate. But you don't have to exercise that hard to stay in shape.
“It’s not an absolute, but it’s a good tool to have,” says Fletcher, who is also an American Heart Association volunteer. “And if you don’t know it, remember, if you’re not able to carry on a conversation (while exercising), that may be a bit too much.”
If you have a heart condition or you’re in cardiac rehab, talk to a healthcare professional about what exercises you can engage in, what your target heart rate should be and whether you need to be monitored during physical activity. This will also help you to choose the types of physical activity that are appropriate for your current fitness level and health goals, because some activities are safer than others.

Today is Sunday, Feb. 3, the 34th day of 2013. There are 331 days left in the year.
Today's Highlight in History:
On Feb. 3, 1913, the 16th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, providing for a federal income tax, was ratified.
On this date:
In 1783, Spain formally recognized American independence.
In 1865, President Abraham Lincoln and Confederate Vice President Alexander H. Stephens held a shipboard peace conference off the Virginia coast; the talks deadlocked over the issue of Southern autonomy.
In 1924, the 28th president of the United States, Woodrow Wilson, died in Washington, D.C., at age 67.
In 1930, the chief justice of the United States, William Howard Taft, resigned for health reasons. (He died just over a month later.)
In 1943, during World War II, the U.S. transport ship Dorchester, which was carrying troops to Greenland, sank after being hit by a German torpedo; of the more than 900 men aboard, only some 230 survived.
In 1953, the Batepa Massacre took place in Sao Tome as Portuguese troops killed some 1,000 striking plantation workers.
In 1959, rock-and-roll stars Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens and J.P. "The Big Bopper" Richardson died in a small plane crash near Clear Lake, Iowa. An American Airlines Lockheed Electra crashed into New York's East River, killing 65 of the 73 people on board.
In 1966, the Soviet probe Luna 9 became the first manmade object to make a soft landing on the moon.
In 1971, New York City police officer Frank Serpico, who had charged there was widespread corruption in the NYPD, was shot and seriously wounded during a drug bust in Brooklyn.
In 1972, the XI Olympic Winter Games opened in Sapporo, Japan.
In 1991, the rate for a first-class postage stamp rose to 29 cents.
In 1998, Texas executed Karla Faye Tucker, 38, for the pickax killings of two people in 1983; she was the first woman executed in the United States since 1984. A U.S. Marine plane sliced through the cable of a ski gondola in Italy, sending the car plunging hundreds of feet, killing all 20 people inside.
Ten years ago: President George W. Bush sent lawmakers a $2.23 trillion budget for 2004. Abandoning a two-month-long general strike that failed to oust President Hugo Chavez, Venezuela's workers returned to work in all sectors but the vital oil industry. Legendary record producer Phil Spector was arrested in the shooting death of actress Lana Clarkson at his mansion in Alhambra, Calif. (Spector's first trial ended in a jury deadlock; he was convicted of second-degree murder in a retrial and sentenced to 19 years to life in prison.)
Five years ago: The New York Giants scored a late touchdown to win Super Bowl XLII, 17-14, ending the New England Patriots' run at a perfect season.
One year ago: Susan G. Komen for the Cure abandoned plans to eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood, following a three-day furor that resounded across the Internet, in Congress and among Komen affiliates. Federal prosecutors dropped their investigation of Lance Armstrong, ending a nearly two-year effort aimed at determining whether the seven-time Tour de France winner and his teammates had participated in a doping program. (In January 2013, Armstrong publicly admitted taking performance-enhancing drugs.) Actor Ben Gazzara, 81, died in New York. Actor-filmmaker Zalman King, 70, died in Santa, Monica, Calif.
Today's Birthdays: Comedian Shelley Berman is 88. Former Sen. Paul Sarbanes, D-Md., is 80. Football Hall-of-Famer Fran Tarkenton is 73. Actress Bridget Hanley is 72. Actress Blythe Danner is 70. Singer Dennis Edwards is 70. Football Hall-of-Famer Bob Griese is 68. Singer-guitarist Dave Davies (The Kinks) is 66. Singer Melanie is 66. Actress Morgan Fairchild is 63. Actress Pamela Franklin is 63. Actor Nathan Lane is 57. Rock musician Lee Ranaldo (Sonic Youth) is 57. Actor Thomas Calabro is 54. Actor-director Keith Gordon is 52. Actress Michele Greene is 51. Country singer Matraca Berg is 49. Actress Maura Tierney is 48. Actor Warwick Davis is 43. Actress Elisa Donovan is 42. Reggaeton singer Daddy Yankee is 37. Musician Grant Barry is 36. Singer-songwriter Jessica Harp is 31. Actor Matthew Moy is 29. Rapper Sean Kingston is 23.
Thought for Today: "When there is an income tax, the just man will pay more and the unjust less on the same amount of income." — Plato, Greek philosopher.

Growing Political Turmoil
After the conservatives came to power in Spain in November 1933, the CNT planned a national uprising for December 8. Despite a spectacular Barcelona jail break by CNT prisoners, the insurrection was a failure; indeed, it was used to legitimate government censorship, union repression, and the arrest of labor leaders. When, in October 1934, the Catholic conservative party won three cabinet positions, Socialists and anarcho-syndicalists were galvanized to take action against what they feared would be a right-wing coup, whether in fact or
in name. Within a few days, the CNT and the Socialist General Confederation of Workers (UGT), which since December 1933 had been discussing some kind of working-class alliance, planned a national general strike. It began on October 4, with coal miners in Asturias in northern Spain leading the struggle. If there had been any doubts about the ruthlessness of the new republican government, they were laid to rest by its treatment of the workers. Utterly unsympathetic to the gruesome conditions under which the coal miners worked and without concern for their fears, it called in Colonel Francisco Franco. As commander of the crack Moroccan troops and Foreign Legion mercenaries, Franco showed no mercy as his soldiers quashed the miners and their supporters. From October 10 to October 18, Moroccan troops and Legionnaires were permitted to rape and pillage in the mining towns of Asturias. The maneuver resulted in about one thousand dead and thirty to forty thousand jailed throughout Spain.
The day after the nationwide general strike was called on October 4, 1934, Lluís Companys, now president of the Generalitat, proclaimed the "Republic of Catalunya within the Federal Republic of Spain"—an act that was regarded as treason, since there was no federalist state at the time. Companys was arrested and held for sixteen months, and the Statute of Autonomy was abrogated.
After the strike, forces from among Spain's landowners, its army, and its fascist Falange political party had begun to negotiate with Mussolini and Hitler, from whom they obtained financial commitments and promises of military support for a rebellion to overthrow the legally elected Second Republic. The republicans and the left, increasingly aware of the growing fascist menace throughout Europe and mindful that in 1933 divisions among republicans, Socialists, and leftists had permitted conservatives to come to power in Spain, decided to run a unified slate for the parliamentary elections of February 16, 1936. Their coalition, like other such slates elsewhere in Europe, was known as the Popular Front.
Meanwhile, during the summer of 1935, Jaume Sabartés, a poet turned journalist who had been a close friend of Picasso's some three decades earlier in Barcelona, received a summons from the painter. Now that Picasso had left his wife Olga Koklova, with whom he had been fighting for years, he needed a secretary. He hoped that Sabartés, who had recently returned to the city after twenty years as a journalist in Latin America, would accept this position. Although Sabartés had been
the butt of Picasso's jokes in their youth, he was happy to serve. Persuading his own wife to join him, Sabartés headed for Paris, where, from November 1935 to the winter of 1937, he practically lived with Picasso as his secretary and companion. Presumably, he filled Picasso in on recent events in Barcelona.
In the midst of the Popular Front election campaign, Picasso was contacted by the Catalan Friends of the New Arts (Amics de l'Art Nou, or ADLAN), who wanted to open an exhibit of his work on February 18, 1936, two days after the election was scheduled to take place. Even though Picasso was a celebrity, few in Barcelona were familiar with his art, which had not been seen since he and Ramón Casas exhibited jointly in Barcelona in 1932. Picasso agreed to the retrospective but refused to attend. His mother, María Picasso, Joan Miró, and Salvador Dalí talked on the radio in his place to publicize the show. Picasso's friend, the surrealist poet Paul Éluard, traveled down to Barcelona from Paris for the exhibit and delivered a lecture at the opening. Éluard, standing in for Picasso, received the hearty support of students who chanted, "Picasso, the Marxist," confirming that they saw Picasso as a radical. (In fact, although Picasso did later, in 1944, join the Communist party of France, Éluard, like most of the other surrealists, had become a member in 1926.)
When the Popular Front won the elections in February, the left was jubilant, and the right intensified their plotting. With the support of Catholic landowners and fascists, five generals, including Francisco Franco, organized a barracks uprising for July 18, 1936, that was designed to overthrow the freely elected government and impose one more congenial to themselves. The plotters, however, had not counted on the loyalty of certain officers who supported the Popular Front. Nor did they count on the quick action of the people in cities like Barcelona, Madrid, and Seville, where civilians—many of them acting through their unions—rose up to defend the Republic. Only about half of Spain went over to the rebels. And thus the Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939 began.
On the day of the attempted coup in Barcelona, the CNT marched on the army barracks, disarmed the soldiers, and seized their weapons to arm themselves. Having chafed at the bit under nearly five years of republican rule, the CNT now attempted to carry out a social revolution by collectivizing all local economic and social resources. George Orwell, who was in Barcelona shortly afterward, talked about how it felt to be in a city in which the people ruled:
It was the first time I had ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle. Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the Anarchists; . . . almost every church had been gutted and its images burnt. Every shop and café had an inscription saying that it had been collectivized; even the bootblacks had been collectivized and their boxes painted red and black. Waiters and shop-workers looked you in the face and treated you as an equal. Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily disappeared. Nobody said "Señor" or "Don" or even "Usted"; everyone called everyone else "Comrade" and "Thou. " . . . The revolutionary posters were everywhere, flaming the walls in clean reds and blues that made the few remaining advertisements look like daubs of mud. . . . Practically everyone wore rough working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognized it immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for.
The Spanish Republican government continued to carry on its work while it attempted to defend itself against its enemies. The right-wing rebels, among whom General Francisco Franco had become preeminent by November 1936, were willing to empower Hitler and Mussolini to test new military strategies on Spain in their behalf. On October 23, 1936, three months after the Civil War had begun, the Luftwaffe began to bomb Madrid. Over five thousand people were killed in a single night, in the first time systematic bombing was used specifically to terrorize and crush the will of a civilian population. Like later similar attempts, however, this first instance only enhanced the resolve of the people, both in Madrid and in the Spanish nation as a whole. It was at this time that Dolores Ibarruri, a Communist leader known as "La Pasionaria," coined the slogan "No pasarán" (They shall not pass), which became a watchword for democratic forces throughout the world.

MONTPELIER — Vermont students’ vocabulary comprehension in the fourth and eighth grades are above national averages, according to data released by the National Assessment of Educational Progress.
Challis Breithaupt, NAEP state coordinator at Vermont Department of Education, said it was the first-ever national vocabulary report.
“There was a new framework for reading in 2009 and the feeling was there needed to be a criteria developed for vocabulary,” Breithaupt said.
The measure would assess more of students’ ability to understand vocabulary and their ability to acquire meaning from passages they were reading.
“Helping students to increase their vocabulary and to feel comfortable using words in various contexts is paramount,” state Education Commissioner Armando Vilaseca said in a statement. “There is significant research in the field supporting a link between vocabulary and comprehension.”
On a scale of 0-500, fourth-graders scored 224 and eighth-graders scored 274. The national average for fourth- and eighth-graders was 217 and 263, respectively.
Only Connecticut, Massachusetts, Montana and North Dakota scored higher than Vermont’s eighth-grade vocabulary.
“Students use their knowledge of words in order to understand what they are reading, to identify ideas and themes,” said Vilaseca. “Summer reading programs continue to support the good work that is done throughout the school year; keeping our children’s minds active supports strong reading and comprehension skills.”
The NAEP addressed the method of the vocabulary test in its results: “Unlike traditional tests of vocabulary that ask students to write definitions of words in isolation, NAEP always assesses word meaning within the context of particular passages. Students are asked to demonstrate their understanding of words by recognizing what meaning the word contributes to the passage in which it appears.”
For more information, The report card can be found online: www.nationsreportcard.gov.MORE IN Vermont News
- Most Popular
- Most Emailed
- MEDIA GALLERY

This is an old revision of ArchaeologicalFindsandtheClassroom from 2008-03-13 15:48:05.
West Yorkshire Archaeology Advisory Service
Archaeological Finds and the Classroom
As its name suggests this web-based presentation is intended primarily for use with schools. However, the ideas it contains will also be useful for those of you working with young people in a less formal setting, perhaps through a youth group or a Young Archaeologists Club. Archaeological Finds and the Classroom outlines activities which you can use to get children thinking and talking about archaeological artefacts. It also offers guidance on carrying out fieldwork (fieldwalking, garden pottery surveys and molehill surveys) and offers advice on how to make the best use of the results.
To find out more, visit the website (www.arch.wyjs.org.uk/AdvSrv/Classroom/introduction.htm∞).
| CBA, St Mary's House, 66 Bootham, York YO30 7BZ.
tel: +(44) (0)1904 671417 | fax: +(44) (0)1904 671384 | email:

Don't miss our great houseplant growing section with self watering planters, high quality potting soil, organic houseplant fertilizers, sprouting bags and more.
In the late 1980s, a study by NASA and the Associated Landscape Contractors of America (ALCA) resulted in excellent news for homeowners and office workers everywhere. The study concluded that common houseplants such as bamboo palms and spider plants not only make indoor spaces more attractive, they also help to purify the air!
The study was conducted by Dr. B.C. Wolverton, Anne Johnson, and Keith Bounds in 1989. While it was originally intended to find ways to purify the air for extended stays in orbiting space stations, the study proved to have implications on Earth as well.
Newer homes and buildings, designed for energy efficiency, are often tightly sealed to avoid energy loss from heating and air conditioning systems. Moreover, synthetic building materials used in modern construction have been found to produce potential pollutants that remain trapped in these unventilated buildings.
The trapped pollutants result in what is often called the Sick Building Syndrome. With our ultra modern homes and offices that are virtually sealed off from the outside environment, this study is just as important now as when it was first published.
While itís a well known fact that plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen through photosynthesis, the NASA/ALCA study showed that many houseplants also remove harmful elements such as trichloroethylene, benzene, and formaldehyde from the air.
NASA and ALCA spent two years testing 19 different common houseplants for their ability to remove these common pollutants from the air. Of the 19 plants they studied, 17 are considered true houseplants, and two, gerbera daisies and chrysanthemums, are more commonly used indoors as seasonal decorations.
The advantage that houseplants have over other plants is that they are adapted to tropical areas where they grow beneath dense tropical canopies and must survive in areas of low light. These plants are thus ultra-efficient at capturing light, which also means that they must be very efficient in processing the gasses necessary for photosynthesis. Because of this fact, they have greater potential to absorb other gases, including potentially harmful ones.
In the study NASA and ALCA tested primarily for three chemicals: Formaldehyde, Benzene, and Trichloroethylene. Formaldehyde is used in many building materials including particle board and foam insulations. Additionally, many cleaning products contain this chemical. Benzene is a common solvent found in oils and paints. Trichloroethylene is used in paints, adhesives, inks, and varnishes.
While NASA found that some of the plants were better than others for absorbing these common pollutants, all of the plants had properties that were useful in improving overall indoor air quality.
NASA also noted that some plants are better than others in treating certain chemicals.
For example, English ivy, gerbera daisies, pot mums, peace lily, bamboo palm, and Mother-in-law's Tongue were found to be the best plants for treating air contaminated with Benzene. The peace lily, gerbera daisy, and bamboo palm were very effective in treating Trichloroethylene.
Additionally, NASA found that the bamboo palm, Mother-in-law's tongue, dracaena warneckei, peace lily, dracaena marginata, golden pathos, and green spider plant worked well for filtering Formaldehyde.
After conducting the study, NASA and ALCA came up with a list of the most effective plants for treating indoor air pollution.
The recommended plants can be found below. Note that all the plants in the list are easily available from your local nursery.
For an average home of under 2,000 square feet, the study recommends using at least fifteen samples of a good variety of these common houseplants to help improve air quality. They also recommend that the plants be grown in six inch containers or larger.
Here is a list of resources for more information on this important study:
PDF files of the NASA studies related to plants and air quality:

U.S. Presidents: Everything You Need
Who was the first president to live in the White House? Learn about this and other presidential "firsts."
Read more >
History of the White House and Washington, D.C. from 1792 to today.
Who was the first U.S. president to be photographed?
Grades: 3–5, 6–8
A few fun facts about America's first President of the United States, from this height and weight to his favorite foods.
Grades: PreK–K, 1–2
In this lesson, students read about George Washington and discuss the monument built in his honor. Then they create their own monument to honor a...
Birthplace: Shadwell, Albemarle County, VirginiaReligion: Christian (no specific denomination)College Attended: College of William and Mary,...
Spend a day in the life of the multi-talented man, President Thomas Jefferson, with these informative biographical websites.
The President of the United States has seven roles in his job, from being the Commander-In-Chief to the Guardian of the Economy.
Brief biography of Gerald R. Ford, the 38th president of the United States of America.
Timeline of the life of former U.S. President Gerald R. Ford.
Transcript from the February 10, 1995 online interview with former President Gerald R. Ford.
Grades: PreK–K, 1–2, 3–5, 6–8, 9–12
Important events during the presidency of Jimmy Carter.
President Jimmy Carter agreed to answer seven questions selected from several hundred posted by Scholastic students.
A time line showing the events in Ronald Reagan's life
Read about the vital statistics and important events that happened during the time Ronald Reagan was President of the United States.
President George H.W. Bush answers questions from students.
Get the vital statistics and learn about important events that occurred during Bill Clinton's presidency.
Lesson Plans, Book Resources
Even United States Presidents started out as regular kids! So You Want to Be President? is chock-full of interesting tidbits about our Presidents;...
Activities and Games, Extension Activities, Book Resources
Extension activity for Arthur Meets the President by Marc Brown.
Biography of former United States President George Herbert Walker Bush.
Sign up today for free teaching ideas, lesson plans, online activities, tips for your classroom, and much more.
Choose your grade range:
See a sample >

King of clocks
King bong visited
As the UK Parliament prepares to celebrate the 150th anniversary of its world-famous clock, E&T examines the history of Big Ben.
With a few seconds to go to midday, I am told to put my fingers firmly in my ears. Even then, when the four quarters are struck, the noise is phenomenal, but nothing compared to the striking of the hour bell, Big Ben. The belfry reverberates with the sound which they say could be heard all over London when the 300kg clapper was first triggered on 11 July 1859.
Nowadays, of course, amid the roar of London's traffic, it is not so noticeable away from the immediate vicinity of the Palace of Westminster, but for many people all around the world its instantly recognisable sound is familiar from the radio and television, especially on New Year's Eve.
Though over time the clock tower has become known as Big Ben, it is in fact only the hour bell that has that nickname. The mechanism for powering the hands on the four dials and operating the quarter bells and the hour bell is correctly known as the Great Clock of Westminster.
Showing me around the tower are Paul Roberson and Ian Westworth, who are responsible (together with Huw Smith) for the maintenance of the Great Clock and the other 2,000 clocks in the Palace of Westminster, of which 450 are mechanical or antique. Roberson has been an horologist all his life, taking an apprenticeship in watch and clockmaking straight from school. An obvious clock enthusiast, he says: "It gets under your skin. I am interested in anything mechanical." Westworth worked as a turret clock restorer before becoming a Place of Westminster clockmaker four years ago. Both are proud of the Great Clock as, Westworth says, "it still does exactly what it was designed to do 150 years ago".
After the destruction of both houses of parliament by fire in 1834, it was decided that the new buildings should have a grand tower housing "a noble clock, indeed a king of clocks, the biggest the world has ever seen within sight and sound of the throbbing heart of London".
In his specification, the Astronomer Royal, George Airy, wrote: "The striking machinery is to be so arranged that the first blow for each hour shall be accurate to the second of time." No clockmaker thought it remotely possible to construct a mechanism of the required size that, in addition to sounding five bells and powering hands of four dials, would keep such accurate time. But an appeal by the Worshipful Company of Clock-makers for a less onerous specification was turned down and three horologists were invited to tender.
Edmund Becket Denison
If Edmund Becket Denison had not been invited to join George Airy as a second referee, it is unlikely that such an accurate clock would have been built. Though a barrister by profession, Denison was a gifted amateur horologist, the author of articles and the designer of some fine clocks. He favoured the submission of EJ Dent & Company, to whom he suggested many improvements that amounted to a redesign, and it was to that firm that the contract was awarded in 1852.
Within three years the clock was complete, but neither the bells nor the tower in which it would be installed had been finished. However, the delay was fortuitous as it gave Denison the time to design a mechanism that would ensure the clock's accuracy.
The problem with turret clocks had always been how to prevent the external forces on the hands being reflected back to the pendulum thus affecting the clock's accuracy. This is achieved with an escapement, a device that transfers the power of the descending weight to the hands by hitting (impulsing) the pendulum. It was Denison who came up with the double three-legged gravity escapement, an ingenious yet simple device, which, as Roberson says, was "a massive advancement, without which the clock would not be here now". It was successfully tried out in the harshest of conditions in a clock built by Dent for Fredericton Cathedral in New Brunswick, Canada and thereafter became widely used in turret clocks.
While Denison carried out further trials, the great bell had been completed at a foundry in Stockton-on-Tees in northern England and was transported by water arriving in London on 21 October 1856.
Trial and error
With the clocktower still incomplete, it was set up on a specially built gallows near the foot of the tower, where for almost a year it was struck regularly until, on 17 October 1857, a 1.2m crack appeared. The only solution was to break it up and, in April 1858, a new, lighter, bell, which would become Big Ben, was cast at the Whitechapel Foundry in London's East End.
In the meantime, the tower designed by Charles Barry, with the decoration and beautiful dials by Augustus Pugin, was completed. In the summer of 1858, the bells were hand-winched up the shaft, the hoisting of Big Ben taking teams of men working in relays some days to complete.
With the installation of the operating mechanism below the Belfry, all was ready by spring 1859. However, each time the minute hands approached the hour, they stopped. The construction of lighter minute hands of hollow copper and hour hands of copper-backed hollow gunmetal allowed it to operate successfully.
As far as is known, the clock started officially on 31 May 1859, with Big Ben first sounding the hour on 11 July and the quarter bells chiming from 7 September. The public appreciated the sound but, perhaps predictably, the Members of Parliament complained that it was too loud.
The trouble with the clock hands had brought Denison to near despair, so it is not difficult to imagine how he felt when told, less than a month later, that a 30cm-long crack had appeared in Big Ben. There were recriminations all round: Denison accused the Whitechapel Foundry of poor workmanship while the foundry put the damage down to Denison's continued use of a 300kg hammer. Two ensuing libel actions both found in favour of the foundry over Denison.
To dismantle the clock, lower the bell and recast it was not considered possible. So, as the crack was neither as deep nor as long as that in the first bell, a slot was cut out to prevent it spreading, a 200kg hammer installed, and the bell turned through about 90°, where it has remained ever since without further problems.
Of course, there have inevitably been a few problems with the clock mechanism, but normally these are discovered and put right before they become severe. Though it has been given a thorough overhaul for its 150th anniversary, Roberson says: "There isn't a servicing schedule like a car. We are up here three times a week and can see any fault developing."
With the last chime of Big Ben, we remove our fingers from our ears, but the resonance seems to go on and on - "for 30 seconds", I am told by Roberson. From the belfry we make our way down to see the dials. Now each illuminated by 28 long-life bulbs of 85W, they were originally lit by gas jets and looked after by a gas man who was required to stay in the tower all night.
As we make our way down the remainder of the 334 steps, it is clear that this is more than just a job for those who work with Big Ben. As Westworth says: "Working on the Great Clock of Westminster is one of the things most horologists want to do because it is probably the most prestigious clock in the world." Roberson adds: "I have been involved in clocks all my life but this is the most famous clock in the world and we are the ones responsible for looking after it."
Behind the scenes
The clock is divided into three sections or trains. In the centre is the going train, which has three functions. First, it is connected to a single shaft that transfers the motion of the pendulum through a nest of bevel gears to the hands on the four clock faces. Its second function is to trigger the chiming train to the right that, via a series of shafts rising up to a linkage room and from there to the belfry, operates the five hammers on the four quarter bells every 15 minutes. Finally, the going train also triggers the strike of the hour train situated on the left which, via a steel wire, raises the hammer on the hour bell (Big Ben).
The whole mechanism is powered by gravity, with the descending weight unwinding the wire wrapped round a large barrel on each train thus rotating it, so that it can operate the train via a series of gears. The escapement controls the rate of descent of the weight in the going train, while on the other two it is controlled by a fly fan or air break.
While the weight on the going train is wound up regularly by hand, those on the other two, which are much heavier, are wound up by an electric motor, though this is not automatic and has to be switched on.
To ensure that the pendulum is protected from vibration and other external forces, a large part of it swings in a 3m-deep pit, made of cast iron. The pendulum is made of a zinc rod in an iron tube to compensate for temperature changes.
The clock's accuracy is maintained by altering its mass. This is done extremely simply by adding or removing an old imperial penny or halfpenny from a shelf, specially constructed near the top of the pendulum. Adding one penny speeds up the clock by two-fifths of a second over 24 hours.
Bells still ringing in Whitechapel
It's a short walk from the City of London's glittering palaces of financial innovation to the Whitechapel Bell Foundry, where tradition, rather than innovation, holds sway. It's here, in listed premises just along from the site of St Mary's, the original 'white chapel', that skilled craftspeople still make bells in much the same way as they have for more than half a millennium.
Officially Britain's oldest manufacturing company, the foundry has been in business since 1570 producing some of the world's best-known bells. If you visit the foundry shop, you'll pass under a profile of Big Ben. The foundry also made the Liberty Bell for the Philadelphia State House in 1752, produced a Bicentennial Bell to go with it in 1976, and a replica of the Liberty Bell in 2001.
It has also made bells for Westminster Abbey, for Washington DC's National Cathedral in 1964 and for a host of more modest churches scattered across the furthest reaches of what was the Empire. In a nod to old-fashioned customer service, passers-by can sometimes see crates arriving from far-flung churches, bringing back bells that have been in use for decades to be repaired, retuned or even recast.
It's not all about the past though. Last year the foundry cast a new peal of 12 bells for the church of St Magnus the Martyr at London Bridge. It does a steady trade in sets of hand bells, tuned for change ringing. And, in a nod to the modern age, it has a website listing its products with prices and delivery. If you want a standard bell tuned to C, with a diameter at its lip of 60in and a weight of 2,032kg, it will cost £39,481 plus delivery. Since they're not in stock at the moment, you might even be able to watch it being cast...
|To start a discussion topic about this article, please log in or register.|
"Is augmented reality the next big thing or a marketing gimmick? Is it fundamental to the future or a fashion faux pas?"
- The Energy Bill and What is an Investment Contract [05:54 pm 21/05/13]
- The Energy Bill and What is a Contract for Difference? [05:15 pm 21/05/13]
- Advanced data communications and networking [03:47 pm 21/05/13]
- Define Energy. [11:36 am 21/05/13]
- Tap Off Unit for riser cabling system [11:27 am 21/05/13]
Tune into our latest podcast

Forget the batteries for a second, thats just one of a thousand analogies you could use to describe voltage/current and the reason that no current flows has nothing to do with the electro-chemical properties of batteries, its far simpler.
The easiest way to think of it is this: Current will only ever flow in a loop, even in very complex circuits you can always break it down into loops of current, if there is no path for current to return to its source, there will be no current flow.
In your battery example, there is no return current path so no current will flow. There is obviously a more deep physics reason for why this works but as the question asked for a simple answer I'll skip the math, google Maxwell's Equations and how they are used in the derivation of Kirchhoff's voltage law.
Batteries do make a good example for this simply because they are current sources with completely isolated grounds. This example would be equally true of any other power source with a completely isolated "ground".
However, this is not an easy thing to find, for instance doing this with 2 bench supplies would likely make one of the bench supplies very unhappy, but thats not because the effect is different, the difference is that the bench supplies are likely both grounded to the electrical wiring in the building and as such there is a return path for current to flow through.
The water analogy for this also effective. Think of your battery example this way:
You have a water pump (battery A) connected to a pipe (the wire), and you have another water pump (battery B) connected to the same pipe (the wire) . Now in your example the there is no return path in the system so imagine that the pipe is full of water but capped off on both ends.
You hit the power switch on the pumps, what happens?
The answer is nothing, there is no where to move the water to, the pumps don't even spin. (ignore water turbulence like effects for this analogy).
Now if you were to connect the pipe in a loop and hit the switch the pumps would spin up (voltage) and water would flow (current).
If you used 2 difference speed pumps (different voltage batteries) and faced them toward each other one will over power and cause the other to spin in the wrong direction (burn out just like connecting a 9V and 6V battery in parallel).
If you connected both pumps pointing in the same direction you would get more water pressure (voltage) because the pumps are helping each other out (2 batteries in series).

|• Total||10.56 km2 (4.08 sq mi)|
|Elevation||396.4 m (1,300.5 ft)|
Lipica (Italian: Lipizza) is a village in the Municipality of Sežana in the Littoral region of Slovenia, close to the border with Italy. Lipica is one of the main tourist centers of Slovenia's Karst region and it is known for the Lipica Stud Farm.
The name of the settlement is derived from the Slovenian word lipa 'linden tree'. The species is common in the area and is a national symbol of Slovenia. The staff at the Lipica Stud Farm plant a new linden tree for every foal born.
From the 14th century until 1947, Lipica was part of the municipality of Trieste. When Charles II, Archduke of Inner Austria (son of Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor) decided to establish a new stud farm in the 16th century, the Spanish horse was considered the ideal horse breed. Because the soil and climate in the Karst region is similar to that of Spain, Lipica was chosen as the perfect spot for the new farm. The Lipica stud farm was established in 1580 and the first horses were bought from Spain in 1581 (24 broodmares and 6 stallions). The farmers living in the area at the time were evicted and resettled in Laže.
A coal mine operated east of the settlement from 1778 to 1817. Coal mining was attempted at the site again in 1857 and at sporadic later dates, but was deemed uneconomical because it is deposited only in lenses. Coal from the mine was once used at the sugar refinery in Rijeka. In 1947, Lipica was annexed to Yugoslavia and incorporated into Slovenia as a constituent republic.
Mass grave 
Lipica is the site of a mass grave associated with the Second World War. The Lipica Shaft Mass Grave (Slovene: Grobišče Lipiško brezno) is located about 500 m southwest of the tree-lined boulevard by the stud farm. It contains an undetermined number of human remains.
Lipica Stud Farm 
Lipica is the origin of the Lipizzan horse. The Lipizzan breed as known today was fully developed in the time of Maria Theresa of Austria, whose husband was greatly interested in horse-breeding. During the Napoleonic wars, the stud farm was relocated to Székesfehérvár. In 1802, an earthquake struck Lipica, killing large numbers of horses. The stud farm was relocated to Đakovo in 1805, to Pecica (near Mezőhegyes) in 1809, to Laxenburg during the First World War, and then to Kladruby nad Labem. After the First World War, when Lipica was awarded to Italy, most of the horses were returned to Lipica. On 16 October 1943, the stud farm and 178 horses were relocated to Hostouň. After the Second World War, the farm had only 11 horses; all of the others had been confiscated by the Germans during the war. In the 1960s, Lipica was opened to tourists and new development began. In 1996, Lipica became a public institution that is owned by the Republic of Slovenia and has made significant progress since then. Queen Elizabeth II visited Lipica and its stud farm on 22 October 2008 and was presented with a Lipizzan horse as a gift from the Slovenian people. Today the Lipica Stud Farm is fully functional and breeds the finest horses for haute-école riding. The stud farm now also includes a hotel and leisure complex, a modern adjunct to a historical setting.
The Lipica Open 
The Lipica Open is an international orienteering competition that is held every year at the beginning of March. It is the biggest orienteering competition in Slovenia and was held for the first time in 1992.
Other places of interest 
Other places of interest in and near Lipica include:
- The Avgust Černigoj gallery
- The Škocjan Caves system (Škocjanske jame/Grotte di San Canziano), a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
- Vilenica Cave, the oldest show cave in Europe (with guided tours since 1633)
- The Valley of Our Lady of Lourdes (Slovene: Dolina Lurške Matere Božje): an outdoor church and a local pilgrimage destination
Notable people 
Notable people that were born or lived in Lipica include:
- Ivan Slavec (1859–1940), co-founder of the newspaper Primorski list and the last Slovene-speaking priest at the Trieste cathedral
- Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia
- Sežana Municipality site
- Snoj, Marko. 2009. Etimološki slovar slovenskih zemljepisnih imen. Ljubljana: Modrijan and Založba ZRC, pp. 234–235.
- Savnik, Roman, ed. 1968. Krajevni leksikon Slovenije, vol. 1. Ljubljana: Državna založba Slovenije, pp. 319–320.
- Lipica Shaft Mass Grave on Geopedia (Slovene)
- BBC News 22 October 2008
- Lipica Stud Farm site

|ARM Technical Support Knowledge Articles|
Applies to: ARM7TDMI
MAS[1:0] is used to indicate whether a word/half-word or byte access is to be performed, and is described in the ARM7TDMI Technical Reference Manual (1.8MB PDF).
The signal has the following states:
|Bit 1||Bit 0||Data Size|
The memory system must be able to handle word, half word and byte writes.
Memory systems supporting only word writes will have severe difficulties supporting C code because the compilers assume that the underlying access types of the ARM architecture are always available. Furthermore, it will not be possible to set software breakpoints in Thumb code using the EmbeddedICE Interface.
When in Thumb state, A is not driven, and will be held at whatever level it was last driven to, by a 'sticky latch'. Usually, this will be set following a BX instruction (with bit 0 of the register set), or a data transfer to/from an odd address. It would normally be cleared again following a data transfer to/from an even address.
The memory controller should ignore A for Thumb instruction fetches (nOPC=0 and MAS[1:0]=01), and A[1:0] for ARM instruction fetches (nOPC=0 and MAS[1:0]=10).
Article last edited on: 2008-09-09 15:47:35
Did you find this article helpful? Yes No
How can we improve this article?

Cancer of the cervix (sir-vix) is one of the most common cancers in women. There seems to be a connection between cervical cancer and sexual activity at an early age, especially when multiple partners are involved. Cervical cancer grows without symptoms, that's why a yearly pap smear is so important. A pap smear can detect the presence of cancer cells at an early stage. When precancerous cells are found, usually called dysplasia (dis-PLAY-zha), they can be removed in the doctor's office using various procedures that burn or freeze the cells off the cervix. If the cancer has advanced, the recommended treatment usually includes a combination of chemotherapy, radiation and surgery, which will prevent a woman from bearing children. For more information about cervical cancer, contact your healthcare provider.

ARCHIVED: Expanding Role for Genetics Counselors
The completion of the human genome sequencing launches a new era in genetic medicine. With the decoding of the letters that make up the recipe of human life an opportunity now exists for scientists to discover new cures for cancer, heart disease, drug addiction, neurological disorders and mental illness. In this brave new world of medicine, the human genetics counselor will play an increasingly important role as patients and doctors struggle with the impact of these exciting new breakthroughs. The Human Genetics Program at Sarah Lawrence College the oldest and largest training program for genetic counselors in the United States, is well positioned to take on this challenge.
Many ethical dilemmas have surfaced. For example, should people be tested to determine whether they might later develop a disease if there is no cure for that disease? Should fetal genetic testing extend beyond the health of a baby to screen for desirable physical and mental traits?
A recent study conducted by the Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington published in Genetics in Medicine, found that 70 percent of health care practitioners surveyed had discussed genetics with their clients. Yet fewer than 10 percent of those people surveyed - including physical therapists, speech and hearing therapists and social workers - were confident in their training in these issues. According to Dr. E. Virginia Lapham, the lead author of the study, a need exists to expand genetic education programs for health professionals.
"As the field broadens, the need for more counselors and more thorough training will also increase," says Lauren Scheuer, a genetic counselor at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and a graduate of the Sarah Lawrence Program. "At the present time there are a finite number of genetic counselors in the field. As more and more complex medical information becomes available to patients and their families, there will be an increasing need for trained professionals to help sort out the all the issues and ramifications."
The two-year master's program at Sarah Lawrence began in 1969 and trains 25 counselors per class. Half of the nation's genetic counselors, including the directors of many other human genetics programs in the U.S. and Canada and in other parts of the world, are graduates of the SLC Program.
Genetic counselors work as members of a health-care team, providing information and support to families that have members who have birth defects or genetic disorders, or who may be at risk for a variety of inherited conditions, says Caroline Lieber, program director. "We identify families at risk, interpret information about the disorder, analyze inheritance patterns and risks of recurrence, discuss the risks, benefits, and limitations of genetic testing, review available options with families and provide supportive counseling," she added.
Human genetics counselors also serve as patient advocates, educators, administrators, researchers and resources for health-care professionals and the public. The importance of training in the field of human genetics counseling is demonstrated by the success of the Sarah Lawrence graduates. Genetics programs at major teaching hospitals, other colleges and universities, government agencies and corporations are staffed by Sarah Lawrence College graduates. These include the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Center for Disease Control, Glaxo Wellcome and Applied Genetics.
"This is a field with definite career opportunities and is well suited to individuals interested in being on the leading edge of medical research, and with an interest and commitment to helping others and making a difference." says Lieber.

Moore's Law Is Alive And Well, And Intel Will Prove It Today
Intel, the world’s biggest manufacturer of computer chips, and by far the one with the most advanced manufacturing capabilities, is holding a big event in San Francisco which it described in an invitation to reporters as its “most significant technology announcement of the year.” It provided no further details.
This appears to be the announcement that CEO Paul Otellini alluded to during Intel’s quarterly earnings conference call last month. Intel has kept a pretty tight lid on the details, but I’ve talked to enough people who say this is one of those times when Intel will “open the kimono” on what will be going on inside its chip factories–or fabs–later this year. The big news will revolve around Intel’s disclosure of its 22-nanometer manufacturing process. It’s the sort of thing that gets people who know chips kind of excited and leaves others kind of cold. But in fact, everyone should be kind of excited about this.
Perhaps you’ve heard of Moore’s Law. This was the observation in 1965 by the Intel co-founder Gordon Moore (pictured at the Intel Museum in 2005) that the number of transistors that could be crammed onto a chip doubles–and the size of those chips tended to shrink–as manufacturing technology improved on a fairly regular basis: About every 18 to 24 months. That shrinking meant two things. Chipmakers could make a chip with the same computing power as the previous generation more cheaply, or they could make a more powerful one with more transistors for about the same cost.
It all comes down to how many transistors you can cram onto a chip, and how many useful chips you can get from a single silicon wafer. In both cases, more is better. Moore’s observation–which was first published 46 years ago this month–has held up remarkably well and has proven one of the most important engines of growth in the technology industry. All the computing oomph you take for granted in your notebook, your smart phone, in the cloud, and all around you happens in part because the chips inside the hardware have gotten smaller and yet ever more powerful every two years or so.
So back to today’s announcement. As I mentioned, it’s going to revolve around its 22-nanometer manufacturing process. A nanometer is a billionth of a meter, and its current factory processors turn out chips with transistors that are somewhat bigger–32 nanometers. Intel executives often refer to a process they call “tick-tock.” Today constitutes a tick, when in odd-numbered years, a new manufacturing process comes online and the previous generation chips are shifted to being built with the smaller transistors. A “tock” occurs in even-numbered years when Intel engineers come up with new chip designs that really show what the new factory processes are capable of. The implication is that it’s so regular you can almost set your watch by it. Intel’s long-term strategy can be summed up like so: Tick, tock, repeat.
On top of that there are likely to be disclosures about some of the advances in physics that Intel has had to make in order to get chips with transistors so small to work properly. When you’re dealing with things that small, the individual electrons flowing on the chip sometimes don’t behave as they should. For example, in 2007 Intel had to add the element Hafnium to its chip-making process in order to stop individual transistors from wasting electricity. (It was more complicated than that, but that in a nutshell was the problem.) Billions upon billions of transistors in billions of computers around the world wasting electricity is a bad thing, both financially–power is expensive–and environmentally.
What’s funny is that for years people have been saying that Intel–and indeed the entire chip industry–can’t continue on the Moore’s Law trajectory. At some point things get so small that you’re dealing with individual atoms and you can’t get any smaller than that. However, every time people have predicted its end, something happens to keep it going. A lot of companies have come up with some important advances that have kept it going. In the 1990s and early 2000s, IBM came up with some important advances that kept Moore’s Law on track. But more often that not it has been Intel that has kicked down the door when the experts said it was locked. Today it will probably kick down another.
This older video was created around the time that Intel unveiled its 45-nanometer process with Hafnium–kicking down one of those earlier doors. Perhaps there will be another today. Check in later as I cover the announcement.

NEW YORK — Children of older fathers are known to be more at risk for diseases including schizophrenia and autism. Now, a new scientific look at the genes passed down within families may have pinpointed a reason why.
The study, reported Wednesday in the journal Nature, found that older fathers transmit more new DNA variations to their children than younger dads, with each added year of age resulting in an average of 2 extra new mutations. The genetic changes occur in men as they age because of environmental factors, such as radiation, or through mistakes that occur in cell division.
The research led by scientists at Reykjavik, Iceland-based deCode Genetics Inc., is the first to quantify the number of new, or de novo, mutations that fathers hand along by age to their children. The findings may suggest that dads-to-be should consider collecting their sperm at a young age and storing it for later use, according to Alexey Kondrashov, a professor of evolutionary biology at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
“If the paternal-age effect on the de novo mutation rate does lead to substantially impaired health in the children of older fathers, then collecting the sperm of young adult men and cold-storing it for later use could be a wise individual decision,” Kondrashov wrote in an accompanying editorial that called for further study on the issue.
Mental processes may be most affected, leading to illnesses such as schizophrenia, because more genes express themselves in the human brain than elsewhere.
The de novo findings suggest it may be “reasonable to assume that the ongoing increase in the incidence and prevalence of autism in many human populations could be due, at least in part, to the accumulation of mutations resulting from relaxed selection and a higher average paternal age — and not only to better recognition of cases,” Kondrashov said.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in March reported that one in 88 children in the U.S. had autism or a related disorder in 2008, the latest period for which data was available. That was a 23 percent rise from 2006, the agency’s researchers reported, saying it was unclear how much of the increase was due to increased awareness of the disease.
Genes are the blueprints for making all the proteins needed by the human body to grow, develop and work properly. DeCode Genetics’ group looked at the DNA shared by 78 groups of Icelandic mothers, fathers, and children.
A 20-year-old father transmits on average 25 new mutations to his child while a 40-year-old transmits 65, the study found. Mothers always transmit about 15 new mutations, regardless of their age, according to the accompanying editorial.
Men probably contribute more mutations because sperm have to divide many more times than eggs, which don’t actively split when women are of reproductive age, according to Kondashov.
“The only important thing when it came to explaining the mutations was the age of the father,” said study author Kari Stefansson, who is also the chief executive officer of deCode Genetics. “There’s very little else to be accounted for. That’s a stunning observation.”
Most de novo mutations are neutral, and all mutations in the genome were once de novo, Stefansson said by telephone. Once scientists determine the importance of de novo mutations relative to heredity mutations in autism, it will be easy to see how much contribution a father’s age has to the child’s health. That work hasn’t yet been done, he said.

Make your own D-net. The net is named for the "D" shape of its frame. It
is used to collect stream insects from the bottom of a stream. You can
make one at home (but make sure an adult is around to help!).
Materials you will need
x 14" piece of screen •
42" x 2" piece of canvas or heavy cloth
Thread and needle •
Wire coat hanger •
Drill with 1/8" and 1/4" bits
Wooden broom handle
Building a D-net
1. Fold the screen in half (21" x 14") and cut screen (as shown).
2. Sew the two pieces of screen together along the cut edge.
3. Fold the canvas in half along the open edge of the net.
4. Untwist the wire hanger and cut off the top (as shown).
5. Bend the smaller cut piece into a U-shape.
6. Drill a 1/4" hole in the flat end of the broom stick.
7. Drill two shallow 1/8" holes on the sides of the broomstick, positioned
so you can fit U-shaped wire over the flat end and into the holes.
8. Slip large wire into the folded canvas slot of the net and twist the
9. Cut the twisted wire to no longer than 2" in length and insert into
hole at flat end of the broomstick.
10. Secure the net to the pole using the U-shaped wire and duct tape (as
Volunteer Water Quality Monitoring
Non-profit Stream Monitoring
County Stream Monitoring Groups
Maryland DNR's Teaching Environmental Awareness in Maryland (TEAM) program
offers students a two-part stream investigation in a local freshwater
stream of their choice. At this streamside setting, trained volunteers
guide them as they learn about water quality, stream habitats and the
community of organisms that inhabit the stream. Using the information they
collect, the students will then formulate conclusions about the health of
the stream they have investigated. If you are interested in becoming a
TEAM volunteer and helping educate Marylanders about our natural
resources, visit our website at
www.dnr.maryland.gov/education/teamdnr and fill out an application.
It's a known fact kids are drawn to streams and waterways. Some visit them to
fish, hike, canoe and kayak or just enjoy nature; others want to learn more
about them and how people affect their overall health. Streams offer students a
unique outdoor field experience and a window to understanding their local
environment and the Chesapeake Bay.
Maryland's 8,800 miles of
streams form the life support system for the Chesapeake Bay watershed by
providing important habitats for many aquatic and terrestrial organisms. Each
stream plays a vital role in linking the Chesapeake Bay to its surrounding
Many kids think of a stream in terms of the trout they caught while
fishing or the crayfish they found while exploring its banks. These are some of
the more visible examples but they are only a fraction of the diversity
contained within Maryland's streams. Upon closer examination you can find fish,
amphibians and insects that are invisible to the casual observer. More
important, many of these organisms are biological indicators of stream health,
especially the insects or macroinvertebrates.
An Outdoor Classroom Realized
year thousands of students experience Maryland's streams through programs
offered by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) outdoor education centers,
and summer camps. However, students, parents or teachers can organize their own
stream investigations. Using a stream as an outdoor classroom offers kids an
incomparable hands-on learning experience that leads them to a greater
understanding and appreciation of their natural environment.
Getting to Know Macroinvertebrates
Prior to going out and doing an actual field investigation,
students should learn how to identify some of the basic types of stream insects
and stream habitats
they might encounter, either through classroom exercises or
home study. Stream insects are one of the most important indicators of the
long-term health of a stream. Many are long-lived and spend most of their lives
within the stream. Some, like stoneflies, are highly sensitive to pollution
while others such as blackfly larvae are very tolerant. During a field
investigation, many of these insects may be seen; however without some initial
preparation, students will not have the proper knowledge and skills to conduct a
meaningful investigation of a stream.
In the Field
After completing the
classroom or home study of stream insects and their habitats, it's time to
consider a field investigation. The best time to conduct one is typically in
spring or late fall when weather conditions are most favorable for being
outside. First and foremost, the stream must be accessible to the students.
Those on the school grounds are ideal but streams on other public lands are also
Prior to going out to the stream, students will also need to have
some sampling equipment. A net, preferably a D-net, is used to sample for macroinvertebrates. However you can also just use your hands and look under
rocks to get a sample. It's also helpful to have a bucket to put your sample in,
a magnifier, tweezers and a tray with a white background. The white background
provides good contrast for seeing the darker macroinvertebrates.
Once at the
stream, look for riffles or woody debris to sample. A stream riffle is a shallow
area where rocks break up the flow of water. This area is highly enriched in
oxygen and has lots of small spaces for macroinvertebrates to hide in. Woody
debris found in the water -- leaves, sticks and tree roots -- is another
important habitat as these materials provide an important food source for stream
In addition to looking at the macroinvertebrate community within the
stream, you may also decide to sample for dissolved oxygen levels, pH, depth,
water flow and turbidity. All provide important information on the physical and
biological conditions of the stream. You should end the investigation by making
some basic conclusions about the health of the stream.
By using streams as
outdoor classrooms, students are making an important and meaningful connection
to the Chesapeake Bay watershed; they learn monitoring techniques and problem-
solving skills that will benefit them for a lifetime.
Maryland DNR currently offers opportunities for middle school
students to conduct a stream investigation. Those interested in learning more
about DNR's student streams investigations should visit
or contact Matthew Chasse at 410-260-8828, or
our website for more information at
is an Education Specialist for DNR's Conservation Education Division, the TEAM
Program Coordinator, and serves on the Education Matrix Team.

- THE MAGAZINE
- INFO FOR...
- ASI Store
- ASI Top 25
- Product & Literature Showcases
- Services Marketplace
- List Rental
- Market Research
- Custom Content & Marketing Services
You may already know something about the benefits of plasma treatment, such as higher treatment (dyne) levels, extended life of treatment over time, the lack of surface morphology degradation, and the elimination of pinholing and backside treatment.
Until recently, low-pressure vacuum plasmas have been used to treat two- and three-dimensional plastic objects and polymer films. The recent introduction of high-density atmospheric plasma for film, foil, paper, foam, nonwoven and woven substrate applications has had a significant impact on the surfaces of these materials at considerably lower capitalization costs.
High-density atmospheric plasma represents a new generation of surface-treatment technology. It allows plasmas to be sustained at atmospheric pressure in a way that permits the surface treatment of polymers and other substrates. It can be configured to work with a variety of feeding systems, including continuous web.
How does Plasma Compare to Corona?Corona treatment is an electrical process that uses ionized air to increase the surface tension of non-porous substrates. Normally, corona-treating systems operate at an electrical voltage of approximately 10 kV.
Like corona, plasma is the electrical ionization of a gas. The plasma (glow) discharge creates a smooth, undifferentiated cloud of ionized gas with no visible electrical filaments. However, unlike corona, plasma is created at much lower voltage levels and temperatures.
Plasma Effects on Substrate SurfacesCorona converts the substrate surface from a non-polar state to a polar state. Oxygen molecules from the corona discharge area are then free to bond to the ends of the molecules in the substrate being treated, resulting in an increase in surface tension.
The same description holds true for atmospheric plasma, with a few exceptions. The rate at which electron bombardment occurs within a high-density atmospheric plasma is up to 100 times greater. This increased electron activity forces greater ion bombardment to the substrate surface. This results in increased etching, chain scission and crosslinking on the substrate's surface, which influences stronger bonding attributes across the surface of the web. Specifically, mechanical interlocking is enhanced, bonding materials together by allowing the adhesive or sealant to take advantage of the microscopic roughness etched to the surface by atmospheric plasma, locking them together. In addition, covalent chemical bonding is promoted, using mutually reactive chemical groups newly resident at the substrate surface (delivered by atmospheric plasma treatment) and the adhesive to form the strongest, most durable bond.
Summarizing the treatment process, high-density atmospheric plasma employs chemical gases that produce controlled chemical reactions on the surface. Chemistry molecules that are introduced are propelled to the material surface. Low-molecular-weight material is cleaned from the surface and specific gas molecules covalently bond to the surface. This is how adhesion can be boosted between the adhesive and the material surface.
Atmospheric plasma technology also eliminates the possibility of backside treatment. The high-speed photos capture the optical differences between corona and atmospheric plasma treatment. The corona image shows the expected "filaments," while the plasma treatment generates a smooth treat pattern.
Benefits of Atmospheric Plasma for Adhesive AdhesionPlasma treatment offers three key benefits that adhesive manufacturers can use to their advantage.
1. Longer life treatments. Substrates that have been atmospheric plasma-treated hold their treatment levels longer than corona-treated surfaces. Longer treatment life allows product converters to take advantage of economies of scale during production, increase inventory life and provide enhanced manufacturing flexibility.
2. Higher treat levels allow for treatment of difficult-to-treat surfaces. Atmospheric plasma treatment is a viable alternative for substrates for which corona treating is ineffective. For example, difficult-to-treat fluoropolymer-based materials like Teflon® do not respond to the corona process but do respond to atmospheric plasma treatment.
3. Treatment of thicker substrates. While substrates that are thicker than 0.125" usually do not respond well to the corona process, they can be treated by atmospheric plasma. Films, metallized films, foils, foams, wovens and nonwovens are all candidates for atmospheric plasma surface treatment.
An atmospheric plasma treatment system called Plasma3™ that can operate at low temperature to provide the advantages plasma technology has over existing surface-treatment technologies has been developed by Enercon Industries. The surface energies of materials treated by this system have been shown to increase substantially, thereby significantly enhancing the wettability, printability and adhesive/ink/coating adhesion properties of these materials.
Web-Based Atmospheric Plasma Market ApplicationsWater- and solventborne, alcohol-based, and cold-seal adhesives are used for a variety of laminating applications. They are used by contract laminators and consumer products companies to bond multiple combinations of film, fiberglass, foam, fabric, paper, nonwovens, and rubber. The laminates are used to produce a range of products, including the following.
- Packaging applications - sealing tapes, weather-strip, labels
- Automotive applications - seals, gaskets, headliners, trim
- Textile applications - protective apparel, outerwear
- Medical applications - medical drapes and garments, bandages, electrodes, labeling, lidding, covers
- Electronic applications
- Bonding/assembly and thermal management tapes
The system also has the flexibility to be operated with variable chemistries and without the generation of ozone, pin-holing, and backside treatment.
For more information, contact Rory Wolf at email@example.com .

A Box of Universe
Watch the cosmos evolve in a cube one billion light-years wide
Isaac Newton’s universe was a cozy, tidy place. Gathered around the sun were six planets, a handful of moons and the occasional comet, all moving against a backdrop of stationary stars. Newton provided us with the mathematical tools needed to compute the motions of these bodies. Given initial positions and velocities, we can calculate the forces acting on each object, using Newton’s law of universal gravitation. From the forces we can determine accelerations, and then update the positions and velocities for the next round of calculations. This scheme of computation is known as the n-body method. Perhaps Newton himself could have put it to work if he had had suitable computing machinery.
Today we have the computers. On the other hand, our universe is far larger and more intricate than Newton’s. Now the solar system is merely a speck in a spiral galaxy of several hundred billion stars. Our galaxy drifts among billions of others, which form clusters and superclusters and a whole hierarchy of structures extending as far as the eye (and the telescope) can see. Those objects are getting farther away all the time because the universe is expanding, and moreover the expansion is accelerating. Strangest of all, the luminous matter of the galaxies—everything we see shining in the night sky—makes up less than one-half of 1 percent of what’s out there. Most of the universe is unseen and unidentified stuff known only as “dark matter” and “dark energy.”
Given this profound change in the nature and the scale of the known universe, I find it remarkable that computer simulations of cosmic evolution can still rely on n-body algorithms rooted in the principles of Newtonian mechanics. The same techniques that predict planetary motions here at home in the solar system also describe the gravitational process that assembles thousands of galaxies into filaments a hundred million light-years long.
A major new series of cosmological simulations is now beginning to release its findings. The project, known as Bolshoi, is led by Anatoly Klypin of New Mexico State University and Joel Primack of the University of California, Santa Cruz. “Bolshoi” is Russian for “big” or “grand,” and the name is apt: This is a large-scale computational project, consuming six million CPU hours and producing a hundred terabytes of data. And yet, when you ponder the vast sweep of space and time being modeled, it seems a marvel that so much universe can be squeezed into such a small box.
» Post Comment

Register New Player
Welcome to our world of fun trivia quizzes and quiz games:
The Battle of Badr
"The Battle of Badr was a key battle in Islam's struggle for independence. Outnumbered greatly, the victory at Badr gave the army great hope and is mentioned in detail in the Quran."
15 Points Per Correct Answer - No time limit
Let's start out with the setting of Badr: The Muslims were fighting, but against who were they fighting?
There were only 300 Muslims fighting in the Battle of Badr. How many men did the Meccans have fighting?
During the heat of the Battle of Badr, the Prophet Muhammad was said to have done what?
Thrown sand into the air in the direction of the enemy
Killed those who fled
The Battle of Badr is a battle in Islamic history in which it is said that angels participated. One angel who revealed the Quran to the Prophet also commanded the thousands of angels at Badr. Who was this angel?
At the beginning of the Battle of Badr, three of the Meccans challenged three of the Muslims for a small skirmish between them. One of the future Caliphs (He was also one of the key issues of contreversy which resulted in the first major schism in Islam) was in the skirmish, along with two other soldiers. Who was this Caliph?
What else is God said to have done to the Meccan's the night before the Battle of Badr?
Heavy winds blew away their arrows
Comets raced through the night sky scaring the camels, making them useless for battle
Lightning killed the commanders
Heavy rain fell on the hill where they were camped
What key resource at Badr were the Muslims able to cut off from the enemy?
How many Muslims died in the Battle of Badr?
Two hundred and fifty
How many Meccans did the Muslims capture in the Battle of Badr?
What happened to the majority of the captured Meccans at the Battle of Badr?
They were let go
They were tortured
They were executed
They were sold into slavery
Copyright, FunTrivia.com. All Rights Reserved.
Legal / Conditions of Use
Compiled Jun 28 12

There's No Such Thing as Ethical Oil (or Nuclear Power)
Canada is digging itself a dirty energy destiny in the Athabasca oil sands.
By Evan O'Neil | March 22, 2011
After the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and now the nuclear meltdown at the Fukushima reactors in Japan, it should be clear that oil and nuclear power are not benign forces in our world. Both are toxic, dirty, and insecure forms of energy. It is thus astonishing that the Canadian energy industry proposes combining the two.
The boreal forest of northern Alberta sits atop one of the largest fossil fuel deposits in the world: the Athabasca bituminous sands. Energy insiders call it oil sands, while environmentalists prefer tar sands—each side seeing what it wants. At room temperature, raw bitumen has the consistency of asphalt and won't flow through a pipeline without being diluted or upgraded into synthetic crude oil.
Underground, the bitumen exists in a mixture with sand and clay, and there are two techniques for extracting it. Surface mines have been the predominant method since commercial production began in the 1960s. At the Suncor Energy mine, for example, the native forests, topsoil, and muskeg bog were cleared, and 50 meters of "overburden" earth was removed to expose a tar sand deposit itself about 50 meters thick. The bitumen is mined 24 hours per day with massive electric shovels that fill dump trucks three stories tall.
The dump trucks haul the tar sands out of the mine to a separation unit where it is mixed with hot water. The bitumen floats to the top and is skimmed off, while the wastewater slurry—containing sand, clay, salts, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arsenic, naphthenic acid, and other substances—is pumped into large, open-air tailings ponds where it is left to evaporate. The problem with tailings ponds has been that the finest clay particles take decades to settle into sediment. To accelerate reclamation of the land, some companies are now experimenting with adding polyacrylamide flocculant, in a process similar to municipal waste treatment, to help separate the solids from the water.
Mining for deeper deposits is uneconomical, so the industry also employs in situ drilling. In a typical setup, two horizontal wells are drilled, one above the other. The top well injects steam into the sands, melting out the bitumen, which is then pumped out through the lower well in a process called Steam-Assisted Gravity Drainage, or SAGD. The well pads of these SAGD installations dot the remote boreal landscape in a network of roads, pipelines, and seismic cutlines.
Mining and in situ operations both consume a lot of energy. The advantage of in situ is that the land is much less disturbed, making it easier to return it to a natural state. SAGD also separates the sand and bitumen below the surface, requiring significantly less infrastructure. Of the total Athabasca deposit, 80 percent is thought to be recoverable through in situ and 20 percent through mining.
SAGD requires a lot of natural gas to make steam. The ratio of steam injected to oil extracted is what determines a project's carbon emissions as well as its profitability. Mining and SAGD together consume hundreds of billions of cubic feet of natural gas per year, a substantial fraction of Canada's entire demand.
That's where nuclear power enters the picture. As bitumen production in Alberta is slated to expand over the next several decades, gas production will be in decline. This means that eventually producers will have to either burn part of their bitumen, thus eating into their profits, or find new power sources to generate heat and electricity.
Nuclear power has been mooted to fill this gap. Japan, of course, turned to nuclear power during the 1970s oil shocks to offset its dependence on foreign oil. Now, in an ironic twist, Canada is considering nuclear power so that it can expand its oil exports. Most of the tar sands oil is sold south of the border through a pipeline network to meet American demand, while Canada still imports foreign oil to its eastern provinces.
One has to wonder why Canada would burn so much of its natural gas, a relatively clean fossil fuel, to extract an even dirtier energy. The answer is, of course, to make money. Most of the world's oil is controlled by national oil companies, making Canada one of the only remaining patches where the energy industry can really play in the sandbox.
And the Athabasca deposit is a big sandbox. The area is roughly the size of New York State. It contains an estimated 1.7 trillion barrels of bitumen, of which about 170 billion barrels are extractable with current technologies. Multiply by $100 per barrel and pretty soon we're talking real money.
But it is capital intensive to slurp these heavy, unconventional dregs of the global oil barrel. Hundreds of billions of dollars have already been invested in the Alberta tar sands, where it takes an oil price of $65 to 85 per barrel to recuperate costs. As recently as 2009, oil was back down in the $40 range, slowing or canceling many projects.
So is tar sands oil dirty oil? Of course it is. All oil is dirty. But is it dirtier than other sources? On average, yes. According to Cambridge Energy Research Associates, oil from Alberta tends to be about 5 to 15 percent more polluting than the average oil consumed in the United States when compared on a well-to-wheels basis. Twenty-five percent of oil's emissions occur during the production phase, while 75 percent comes from combustion in a vehicle.
Industry insiders often repeat the following argument: It's the consumer's fault, whether they mean car owners or America in general. "If you would stop driving so much, we would stop digging up all this oil and pumping it in your direction," goes the typical line. Then whenever the United States wavers in its affection for Canadian energy, the argument becomes a threat: "We'll just sell it to the Chinese instead."
This argument is nonsense on the individual level. American consumers aren't presented with a significant choice at the pump. They get to decide between three octane ratings with maybe a dash of dubiously efficient ethanol in the blend. The only real power a person has to reduce oil consumption is in deciding where to live. Ditching the car and moving to a dense, pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly community with access to mass transit is the most effective solution. For those who cannot or do not wish to move, the alternative is to work through the local political process to redesign your community.
Most families haven't made the carless choice yet. Instead the typical response is to buy a bigger car when gasoline is cheap and a more efficient one when the price goes back up. Without a price floor of some sort, America will never break its addiction to oil, foreign or domestic. A strong gasoline tax could serve as a de facto price floor if it were set high enough. Unfortunately the United States has chosen to set the bar very low: Gas tax is a pittance relative to the price of gasoline, and it isn't indexed to inflation, meaning the value has actually declined over the last several decades.
It is an abdication of political responsibility to argue that an unorganized and reactionary collective such as consumers is at fault for oil consumption. The essence of ethics is whether our political institutions can make choices that are in the interest of all affected stakeholders, local and global, regardless of the political cost.
Seen in this light, can the Canadian and Albertan governments be trusted not to morph into petrostates?
It is an abdication of political responsibility to argue that an unorganized and reactionary collective such as consumers is at fault for oil consumption.Sadly the outlook is bleak. The federal environment minister recently declared that Canadian oil is "ethical oil." This concept is drawn straight from the title of a book by conservative political activist Ezra Levant, in which he argues that Canada's oil is morally superior to oil from countries with poor human rights records. Even if Canada and the United States were to boycott imports from all countries they consider problematic, an option neither is willing to consider, oil would still remain a globally priced and traded commodity and the benefits of its consumption would continue to flow to unsavory dictators.
On the provincial level, the Alberta government is of the opinion that the tar sands "should" be developed further, despite the fact that a panel recently found that water and environmental monitoring program has been inadequate. Alberta's Energy Resources Conservation Board, its regulatory agency for energy development, has one of the more Orwellian names one can imagine.
Bullish development of the oil sands has also contributed to Canada's violation of its Kyoto Protocol commitments. The goal was to decrease emissions 6 percent below 1990 levels. Instead, Canadian emissions have increased by a whopping 24 percent, in great measure due to tar sands expansion. Tar sands emissions now account for about 5 percent of Canada's total.
Alberta did manage to enact one innovative policy that few other jurisdictions will even consider: a carbon tax of $15 per ton. This move should be applauded, but it is unfortunately accompanied by billion-dollar investments in the unproven technologies of carbon capture and sequestration—an expensive crutch to help the fossil fuel industry limp into the future—with minimal focus on renewable energy research, development, and deployment.
Another concern for Canada's energy future is that the royalty regime [PDF] for tar sands leases is too weak. The rate is set at 1 percent until a project becomes profitable, and then it jumps to 25 percent, which is still low compared to some countries. Alberta risks squandering an opportunity to build its Heritage sovereign wealth fund while the people's resources disappear into private pockets, leaving the province without financial means to transition to a cleaner economy.
Is America being a good neighbor in this transaction, or merely abetting a fellow oil junkie? The proposed Keystone XL extension of the pipeline network that carries Albertan oil to the United States is currently under consideration, and final approval falls to the U.S. Department of State because of the international border crossing. It was announced on March 15 that a supplemental environmental impact statement will be issued, followed by a new public comment period, to determine whether the project is "in the U.S. national interest."
Buying more energy from a friendly neighbor appears like a good idea on the surface. But while energy security has the ring of a robust and consistent concept, it is actually a relative one. It wears a false halo of military necessity even during peacetime. Supplier countries want security of demand, and consumer countries want security of supply. What the oil industry really worries about is running out of business. "Producers who seek to maximize long-term revenue will want to maintain oil prices stable at the highest price that does not induce substantial investment in substitutes," writes technology and innovation expert Philip Auerswald.
Should we be worried about today's high prices? Auerswald doesn't think so. High prices merely hasten the inevitable transition to a post-oil economy. Estimations vary on the timing of peak oil, but the finitude of the resource is undisputed and so is its eventual depletion to a level where the cost of extraction will equal the value of the product.
Saying that America should be open to more tar sands oil is basically just another version of the "drill here, drill now" argument for tapping the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve in Alaska. The Obama administration, it should be noted, has been a booster of domestic production, and production has gone up in the last five years. Canadian production has also increased significantly in the last decade, mostly from growth in the tar sands. But after two major oil price spikes during the same period, in 2008 and again now, it should be crystal clear that domestic and Canadian production growth doesn't control the global price, and that a much better strategy lies in finding replacement technologies and actively reducing demand.
But this is a tough sell when you think of things like how many Caterpillar 797B dump trucks are needed to mine the tar sands, and how the parts are manufactured all over the United States, by quite a few workers in quite a few Congressional districts. Add to that the public's resistance to raising gasoline taxes, and it becomes quite easy to see why it's politically difficult to enact bold and necessary energy policy. The hundreds of millions of lobbying dollars the oil industry spends certainly don't help our Senators see things clearly.
American politicians have been saying we need to get off foreign oil for half a century. Canadian energy executives and politicians bristle when they hear things like that. They feel that somehow Canadian oil shouldn't be considered foreign because it comes from North America. But the ethical thing is for both countries to pursue energy independence based on clean, renewable sources that don't pollute the environment, harm human health, and risk massive destabilization of the global climate.
As it stands, Canada has become a climate change ostrich with its head in the oil sands.
A version of this article first appeared in the Carnegie Ethics Online column.
Read More: Business, Conservation, Democracy, Development, Diplomacy, Economy, Energy, Environment, Ethics, Jobs, Security, Sustainability, Technology, Trade, Transportation, Canada, United States, Americas, Global, Middle Eastblog comments powered by Disqus

Oct. 6, 2010 Doppler weather radar will significantly improve forecasting models used to track monsoon systems influencing the monsoon in and around India, according to a research collaboration including Purdue University, the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi.
Dev Niyogi, a Purdue associate professor of agronomy and earth and atmospheric sciences, said modeling of a monsoon depression track can have a margin of error of about 200 kilometers for landfall, which can be significant for storms that produce as much as 20-25 inches of rain as well as inland floods and fatalities.
"When you run a forecast model, how you represent the initial state of the atmosphere is critical. Even if Doppler radar information may seem highly localized, we find that it enhances the regional atmospheric conditions, which, in turn, can significantly improve the dynamic prediction of how the monsoon depression will move as the storm makes landfall," Niyogi said. "It certainly looks like a wise investment made in Doppler radars can help in monsoon forecasting, particularly the heavy rain from monsoon processes."
Niyogi, U.C. Mohanty, a professor in the Centre for Atmospheric Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology, and Mohanty's doctoral student, Ashish Routray, collaborated with scientists at the National Center for Atmospheric Research and gathered information such as radial velocity and reflectivity from six Doppler weather radars that were in place during storms. Using the Weather Research and Forecasting Model, they found that incorporating the Doppler radar-based information decreased the error of the monsoon depression's landfall path from 200 kilometers to 75 kilometers.
Monsoons account for 80 percent of the rain India receives each year. Mohanty said more accurate predictions could better prepare people for heavy rains that account for a number of deaths in a monsoon season.
"Once a monsoon depression passes through, it can cause catastrophic floods in the coastal areas of India," Mohanty said. "Doppler radar is a very useful tool to help assess these things."
The researchers modeled monsoon depressions and published their findings in the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. Future studies will incorporate more simulations and more advanced models to test the ability of Doppler radar to track monsoon processes. Niyogi said the techniques and tools being developed also could help predict landfall of tropical storm systems that affect the Caribbean and the United States.
The National Science Foundation CAREER program, U.S. Agency for International Development and the Ministry of Earth Sciences in India funded the study.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
- A. Routray, U. C. Mohanty, S. R. H. Rizvi, Dev Niyogi, Krishna K. Osuri, D. Pradhan. Impact of Doppler weather radar data on numerical forecast of Indian monsoon depressions. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 2010; DOI: 10.1002/qj.678
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Tag writer: Michele Wick, Psychology
Imagine the texture of skirt fabric rubbing against tiny feet, the sweet smell of grass, or the delight of looking at a resplendent blue shirt. Sensory experiences are a vital part of who we are; they are building blocks of a growing brain. Countless occurrences, like the intimate play we see in Cassatt’s print, help shape the contours of pliant neural networks. The child may not remember this exact moment, the feel of the woman’s secure grasp, the pleasure of gazing in her eyes, or the sound of her breath. Nevertheless, they have left their imprint on a blossoming mind.
Image Information: Mary Cassatt, American (1844–1926). Under the Horse Chestnut Tree , 1895. Drypoint and aquatint printed in blue, green, yellow, brown and flesh on paper. Sheet: 18 13/16 x 14 3/8 in.; 47.7838 x 36.5125 cm; plate: 16 1/8 x 11 3/8 in.; 40.9575 x 28.8925 cm. Bequest of Helen Haase

Photo used with kind permission of Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation
Baby clings to dead mother
For millions of years, orangutans thrived in the once-vast forestlands of South
East Asia, possibly even existing as far North as Southern China. Today,
less than 1% of the species remains, and can now only be found in small,
secluded pockets of orangutan habitat on the islands of Borneo and Sumatra.
There are two sub-species of orangutan remaining, the endangered
Bornean, with approximately 30,000 individuals, and the critically endangered
Sumatran, with less than 6,000.
Orangutans are the most intelligent species on earth after humans. They
have the ability to undo bolts, knocks, pick locks and even communicate with
humans via sign language. They share many of the same emotions as us,
have their own culture and share 97% of our DNA!
Orangutans reproduce more slowly than any other primate, with the female
producing a baby on average once every 7-8 years. Infants are dependent on
their mothers for 5-8 years, learning about survival in the forest. Orangutans
live for around 45 years in the wild, and a female will usually have no more
than 3 offspring in her lifetime. This means that orangutan populations grow
very slowly, and take a long time to recover from habitat disturbance and
Poaching and the illegal animal trade are contributing factors to the genocide
of this species; however, the number one threat to the survival of the
orangutan in the wild is deforestation for the development of palm oil.
Every hour, rainforest land equivalent to 300 football fields in size is
destroyed, burnt and replaced with palm oil plantations. To put it into
perspective - in Sumatra alone there is now more than 4 times as much land
cultivated with oil palms as there is orangutan habitat remaining.
This results in the death of an orangutan every 2 hours. These gentle apes
are often killed in the most inhumane ways; run over, set on fire, hacked with
machetes, shot and decapitated. The “lucky” ones, often babies, have their
mothers shot and they are then taken to be kept as pets, sold, used in the
entertainment industry or even used as prostitutes in Indonesian brothels.
In some cases, palm oil farming provides employment to locals in South East
Asia, however it often involves gross human rights violations and involves
dangerous labour under risky conditions. But in many cases, palm oil does the
opposite to providing money. It often robs indigenous communities who still
depend on the natural landscape of their livelihood, when they are displaced
from their land to make way for palm oil development.
This one vegetable oil is found in over 50% of all supermarket products
in Australia. Palm oil can be found in everything from baked goods,
confectionery and ice-cream, to body products, cosmetics and cleaning
agents. It can even be used in toothpaste, paint, printer ink and car fuel!
Why is palm oil so popular and widely used?
- High yielding vegetable oil crop
- Large economic benefit to Indonesia & Malaysia
- Cheap cost
- Diverse in its uses
- Acts as a preservative in some foods
Palm oil is not only having devastating impacts on wildlife, the environment
and indigenous communities, but also your health. Palm oil is comprised of
50% saturated fat, meaning it has the ability to increase cholesterol levels and
promote heart disease.
To conclude, there is currently a massive amount of degraded land available
for planting oil palms in Sumatra and Borneo, but palm oil companies can
make a quick profit when they cut down rainforests and sell the timber, so the
relentless deforestation continues.
We do not advocate a boycott of products containing palm oil, or companies
using palm oil in their products. However, the international community must
demand that oil palm concessions are not granted in forested areas, and that
our local retailers and consumer goods manufacturers either source their
palm oil from non-destructive plantations, or switch to an alternative ingredient
that isn’t abusing wildlife, the environment and indigenous communities.
WANT TO KNOW MORE?
You can visit our Anti-Palm Oil Ambassador’s educational website on palm
oil, to learn about it’s impacts, what products do/don’t contain palm oil, how to
detect palm oil on labels and much more!

The unmanned Jules Verne ATV cargo ship breaks up in a spectacular display
during re-entry, as seen on Monday over the Pacific from an observation plane.
The European Space Agency's first cargo mission to the international space station ended in a spectacular fireworks show today, with the fiery re-entry of the unmanned Jules Verne ATV spaceship over the South Pacific.
"Jules Verne has now successfully completed its mission," ESA Director-General Jean-Jacques Dordain declared at the International Astronautical Congress in Glasgow, Scotland.
The end came at around 9:30 a.m. ET, when controllers back at Europe's mission control in Toulouse, France, directed the 17-ton craft into its final plunge. Jules Verne, the first of Europe's Automated Transfer Vehicles, was launched from the ESA spaceport in French Guiana early March 9. It linked up with the space station almost a month later, delivering tons of food, water and equipment.
During its stay, Jules Verne periodically boosted the space station's orbit, and in fact helped the station dodge a passing piece of Russian space junk last month.
But all good things must come to an end: Unlike the Italian-built space cargo modules that are carried back and forth inside NASA's space shuttle, the Euroean-built ATVs are not designed for return or reuse. Instead, each spent craft has to be disposed of safely, by directing it remotely on a plunge through the atmosphere. The wide-open South Pacific is the favorite dumping ground for such space junk, as we saw back in 2001 when Russia's Mir space station fell to its doom.
Jules Verne's re-entry was witnessed by an international team of scientists flying aboard a NASA DC-8 observation plane. Studying the spacecraft's controlled fall could lead to fresh insights about the chemical and radiation effects of falling meteors - as well as better computer models for predicting how objects fragment as the blast through the atmosphere.
The Jules Verne ATV cargo craft glows during its atmospheric re-entry, in a view
captured Monday from a DC-8 observation plane flying over the Pacific. A lens
diffraction flare can be seen in rainbow colors at lower right.
Today's first pictures from the DC-8, posted to ESA's ATV blog, revealed a spray of fireworks similar to those seen during Mir's fall. More tragically, they also recalled what witnesses saw during the shuttle Columbia's breakup five years ago.
Although experts still have to track all the bits of debris, it looks as if Jules Verne's plunge through the atmosphere provided a great light show, but no big impact. There were far more damaging plunges elsewhere on the planet today.

Story posted January 16, 2008
Brads, nails, and spikes take on the characteristics of line, mass and color in sculptures by artist and Lecturer in Art John Bisbee. Covering his more than 20-year career, Bright Common Spikes: The Sculpture of John Bisbee, features 20 large-scale abstract sculptures of nails that are welded and forged into various organic configurations. The exhibition will be on view at the Portland Museum of Art January 24, 2008, through March 23, 2008.
The January 20, 2008, edition of The Boston Globe features an in-depth profile of Bisbee and his art. Click here to read the article and watch a video slideshow.
Bisbee welds, cuts, hammers, forges, and bends his nails and spikes into a variety of forms for his sculptures. Since 1988, when he overturned a five gallon bucket of nails that had rusted and fused together, he has been creating small- to large-scale sculptures comprising mainly brads, nails and spikes.
Over the years, as Bisbee has gradually increased the size of his nails from brads to 10- and 12-inch spikes, the overall scale of his work has become more expansive. Bisbee began to explore the implications of monumentality in more serious ways with a series he calls "Tons." Each piece is made up of one ton of nails, and to date he has completed 11 "Tons." They vary in type of fabrication and assembly — groups of nails are welded together and piled in various configurations into corners, spread across the floor, or affixed to the wall.
Some "Tons" pieces vary with each new installation, and Bisbee does not determine the exact configuration until the moment a piece is installed. He arrives at the gallery with barrels filled with the component pieces and lets the spirit of the day and the idiosyncrasies of the site suggest the rest. Bisbee's intuitive working method comes closest to the surrealist process of automatic drawing, allowing the subconscious mind to direct the hand.
In addition to the "Tons" series, Bisbee has recently produced more intricately patterned pieces. These works share the decorative flair that characterizes a great deal of contemporary painting and sculpture. For his most recent sculptures, Bisbee uses a forge, press, and hand tools to flatten and bend his nails into even more elaborate shapes that resemble calligraphic lines. Some of these flattened nails are then welded together to form larger mandala-like shapes; others are piled freely on the floor.
Bisbee's solo museum exhibitions include the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo, N.Y., and the Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art in Kansas City, Mo.
A recent recipient of a 2006 Joan Mitchell Foundation Grant, Bisbee has also received a Maine State Individual Artist Grant (2000) and The Rappaport Prize (2003), administered by the DeCordova Museum and Sculpture Park. He has also been awarded the Purchase Prize and the William E. Thon Jurors' Prize from the Portland Museum of Art's Biennial exhibition (1998, 2001). His work has been reviewed in Art in America, ARTnews, Sculpture Magazine, The New Yorker, The New York Times and The Boston Globe.
John Bisbee and his art were the focus of a Spring 2005 Bowdoin magazine feature. Read it here.

Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam (JBPHH)
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam on the left, and HNL on the right share the Reef Runway.
Honolulu International Airport and Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam (JBPHH) have been neighbors and partners for many years. In 1956 the Air Force and the Hawaii Aeronautics Commission (predecessor to the State of Hawaii Department of Transportation) agreed to a single airport complex that would be operated under a Joint Use Agreement.
Today, JBPHH and HNL share runways, safety networks, and a partnership that is more than 50 years old.
Hickam Field, as it was then known, was completed and officially activated on September 15, 1938. It was the principal army airfield in Hawaii and the only one large enough to accommodate the B-17 bomber.
During World War II the base played a major role in pilot training and aircraft assembly work, in addition to service as a supply center for both air and ground troops. Hickam served as the hub of the Pacific aerial network, supporting transient aircraft ferrying troops and supplies to, and evacuating wounded from, the forward areas, not only during World War II but also during the Korean conflict and the Vietnam War.
During the Korean Conflict, 19 percent of HNL operations were military. During the Vietnam War that increased to 20-50%.
Today, military operations are five to six percent of total operations.

Kanthapura is the story of a village in South India named `Kanthapura` written by Raja Rao. He was an excellent writer and the simple story of a village life is depicted in an extra-ordinary way in this creation of his. The title of the story is kept by the name of the village only. So the title truly signifies the story.
Born on November 8 in the year of 1908 Raja Rao was a famous writer. The place was Hassan, in the state of Mysore in south India, into a well-known Brahman family. He post-graduated in France, and all his publications were in English. Rao was very much concerned with his language and consciousness. He studied in a Muslim school. After taking a degree from Madras University, he left India for Europe, where he remained for a decade. He studied at the universities of Montpellier and the Sorbonne, doing research in Christian theology and history. In 1931 he married Camille Mouly. She was a French academic. His first stories were published in French and English. His Kannada articles were also published in an influential journal `Jaya Karnataka`. He marriage with Camille Mouly didn`t work out and he got divorced in 1939. Rao returned to India and began his first period of residence in an ashram. In search of his spiritual heritage, he traveled widely in India. This happened during WW II. In 1942 he was active in an underground movement against colonial rule. He also edited the literary magazine `Tomorrow` for some days.
`Kanthapura` is the first major Indian novel in English by Raja Rao. The novel deals with the Civil disobedience movement of 1030`s. Mahatma Gandhi on the participation of a small village of South India in the National struggle calls for the story`s central concern. The villagers sacrifice all their material possessions in a triumph of the spirit. It shows how the people of country united at the time of movement and joined at the non-violence movement to bring independence from the British. `Kanthapura` was first published in English and then in France. Achakka narrates the whole story. She is an old village woman and the story revolves around in a village Kanthapura in South India. In this village there are clear discrimination between Brahman, Sudra and Pariah quarters still the mutual bonding between the villagers are very strong and they live happily with equal social and economical bonding. To maintain social harmony they live like one single family. Kanthapura may be isolated and deprived of modern civilization but it is compensated by an ever-enriching cycle of ceremonies, rituals and festivals. Rao depicts beautifully the partication of the villagers in different festivals like Dussera,
Sankara-jayanti, Kartik Purnima, Ganesh Jayanti, Styanarayana Puja, etc. the common picture of village has always come up in many of Rao`s story and that can be called as Raja Rao`s speciality.
`Kanthapura` by Raja Rao is a marvelous creation. He depicts very simple happenings of a village in a lively manner. In his writing a clear picture of villagers become prominent. In his village religion imparted through discourses and pujas keeps alive in the natives a sense of presence of God. In the whole story a serenity flows in a simple harmonic motion which makes the story worth reading.

Ancient galaxies newly discovered in southern sky
A concentrated effort by Australian telescopes and the Hubble Space Telescope on a tiny, dark patch of the southern sky has led to the discovery of thousands of previously unknown galaxies.
Preliminary resuts will be released today from the ten-day period of observation in October, when the Hubble and ground-based telescopes were focused simultaneously on a patch of sky called the Hubble Deep Field South.
The tiny piece of sky was carefully chosen for astronomers to learn more about distant galaxies. Like the Hubble Deep Field, another small patch in the northern sky which was observed in late 1995, it contains no bright stars to drown out the light from objects much further away. Unlike its northern counterpart, however, the Hubble Deep Field South was picked because it had a quasar -- the bright centre thought to be the central 'engine' of a distant galaxy.
Astronomers at the Anglo-Australian Observatory sifted through their photographic records of the whole southern sky until they found a likely quasar, 10 billion light-years away. "The quasar acts like a lighthouse in the distance," said the Observatory's Dr Chris Tinney. "It helps you see anything in its path."
While the high-resolution Hubble detected and photographed the galaxies in the path of the quasar's beam, the Anglo-Australian Observatory could analyse their spectra for more information about their shape and size.
From the results, astronomers hope to learn about the life cycles galaxies go through, from creation to old age.
"What you're seeing are the embryonic stages of very old galaxies," said Dr Tinney. "When you're looking at distant galaxies you're looking back in time -- right back to the first ten percent of the age of the Universe."

Discover the words hidden in the grid, written through one another in eight horizontal, vertical and diagonal directions. Select words by clicking on the first and last letters, in any order. If the selected letters match an item in the list, the letters are highlighted and the item is crossed out. Spaces, capitalization and diàçritîcš are ignored. Once the list is cleared you win. The letters remaining at the end, if any, may or may not spell a little Aesopean or other proverbial gem of wisdom. Recognizing those words in the gaps left between the stroked terms can help spot that last few stubborn hidden letters.
The grid can be resized, flipped and rotated in all directions. This may help to make some furtive words more readable. Also the spacing, boldness and capital case can be switched to make the letters stand out from their context. Optionally a handy hover-cross is shown, highlighting those letters that are in line with the letter that is currently under the mouse pointer. Especially the longer and diagonal words may benefit from this.
Click a word in the list for some hints about its whereabouts in the grid. Doubleclicking an item in the list will reveal its location in the soup of letters. This is known as cheating.
The available word search grids cover subjects ranging from animals and timbers via countries and capitals to Shakespeare and mythology.
All that is needed for your own word search game is a list of words, or short word groups as spaces and other non-alphabetic features are ignored. A mixture of a few longer items and some terms of 3 to 6 characters usually gives good results. Avoid words that overlap each other, with one being contained in the other, like ‘raw’ in ‘straw’ or ‘if’ in ‘life’, as they are bound to appear double in the playing field. The same applies to reverse contained words, like ‘art’ in ‘straw’ or ‘raw’ and ‘war’. Use the update function to automatically scan for overlaps, the numbers should update every time you click outside the word list.

||On this site, kids can enter
their spelling words and the site will create word search puzzles. They
can select varying levels of difficulty. The students can complete
these puzzles online or on paper.
||Once the customized spelling
list is entered, students can play numerous spelling games to reinforce
their vocabulary. Games are available for different ages and
||This website is a great way for
kids to practice their spelling words. They can be taught the
words, be tested on the words or play games to reinforce the word
|| Kids can play math games
to practice their skills. They also can review lessons on
specific mathematical concepts to supplement their learning.
||This site was created by the Oswego City School
District. It gives the students timed tests on their chosen math
facts. If desired, the kids can choose to be tested on a mix of
||This site provides lessons to help children better
their math concepts. It also offers math games and puzzles.
||An overview of different animals is provided.
can select specific animals to review general facts. Printable
worksheets also are available for additional learning.
||Run by the BBC, this site allows children to study
topics related to living things. They can play games, read and
then be quizzed on the material.
|Yahoo! Kids||This site contains facts on animals. Kids can
specific animals to see photos and statistics. They can play
games and get homework help in the study zone.

Study Questions Antibiotics' Safety in Preterm Labor
There's important new information out today for pregnant women and their doctors: Giving antibiotics to some pregnant women who have gone into labor too early could be dangerous for the long-term development of their children, according to a major new study.
Now, it's important to make it clear right away that if a pregnant woman definitely has an infection she should take an antibiotic--an infection can be very dangerous to the mom and baby. But the new study says doctors should be very careful about giving a pregnant woman antibiotics if there is no clear evidence that she has an infection and her water hasn't broken.
This comes from a big international study involving more than 11,000 women known as the ORACLE study. British researchers started it to find out if antibiotics might help women who go into labor too soon. Infections can trigger premature labor without causing any other symptoms. So the idea was that antibiotics could help.
In 2001, the researchers reported that giving erythromycin to pregnant women whose water had broken prematurely reduced the risk their babies would develop infections, breathing problems and other short-term complications. But erythromycin didn't seem to help women in premature labor whose water had not broken.
The researchers then followed more than 6,000 of the children in the study who were born in England to see how they fared. In a pair of papers released yesterday by the journal The Lancet, the researchers reported that those whose mothers took erythromycin before their water broke were 18 percent more likely to have mild developmental problems. And, perhaps most disturbing, they were about three times as likely to have cerebral palsy.
The researchers do not know why antibiotics would cause those problems, but they speculate that perhaps keeping a fetus in the womb of a mother who has an infection may not be good for the child.
Now, it's important to note that current guidelines only recommend antibiotics for pregnant women whose water has broken or have clear signs of an infection, and the study shows that is the right thing to do.
But experts say it's important to get the word out in case some doctors are giving pregnant women who go into premature labor antibiotics even though their water has not broken and they have no obvious signs of infection.
The research also is a good reminder that just because something seems like a good idea you never know for sure until you do the research to find out. You could end up doing more harm than good.
September 18, 2008; 7:00 AM ET
Categories: Cancer , Motherhood
Save & Share: Previous: LIfe's Big Questions: How Can I Face This Financial Stress?
Next: Colon Screening: Ready to Go Virtual?
The comments to this entry are closed.

Multiple sclerosis is a progressive disease for which no cure has yet been found. Researchers are working to identify new and better strategies to stop that progression.
People with primary-progressive MS (read more about courses of MS) experience a slow but nearly continuous worsening of their disease from the onset, with no distinct relapses or remissions. A more common type of progressive MS is secondary-progressive MS, which starts as relapsing-remitting MS and then transitions into a progressive course, with or without occasional relapses.
Some of the burning questions that are being addressed through research include:
- What factors influence the transition from a largely relapsing-remitting course with distinct immune attacks to a largely progressive (steadily worsening) course (secondary-progressive MS)?
- Can the disease-modifying therapies prevent, delay, or slow long-term MS progression?
- What causes primary-progressive MS, and is it the same (currently unknown) thing that causes more common forms of MS?
- What new therapies will help people with progressive MS?
- What causes degeneration of nerve fibers—thought to be the cause of long-term disability experienced by many with MS—and how can that be stopped or reversed?
Although many of the National MS Society’s research studies explore virtually every aspect of MS and more basic aspects of how the nervous system and immune system works, some studies focus specifically on progressive forms of MS. As part of its Strategic Response for 2011-2015, the National MS Society is increasing its focus on understanding mechanisms that drive MS progression and finding new therapies to treat it. Current projects involving people with progressive MS include:
- Four different teams at Harvard and State University of New York, Buffalo using different methods and approaches to identify possible risk factors that drive progression, some of which may be preventable. Ideally, they will find ways to more quickly identify progressive disease based on biological markers, rather than waiting for symptoms to worsen.
- A genetics study at Vanderbilt University looking at how variants in a person’s DNA may lead to progressive MS.
- An imaging study of people with primary-progressive MS at Massachusetts General Hospital aimed at revealing spinal cord damage that is difficult to detect.
- New York University researchers developing and applying a new way to assess cumulative disability over many functions to provide a tool to improve care and research.
- MS Tissue Banks that provide shared resources to empower investigations into disease mechanisms.
- Clinical trials at the University of Alabama at Birmingham and University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, of novel rehabilitation strategies aimed at restoring mobility in people with progressive and advanced MS. A Cleveland Clinic study evaluating a new "hip flexion assist device" designed to improve walking ability.
- A Fast Forward alliance to accelerate the clinical application of adult stem cells for MS including progressive MS.
- Drexel University researchers examining driving ability at various stages of MS progression to improve safety and independence.
- A clinical trial at the University of California, Los Angeles testing the ability of aerobic exercise to improve cognitive function.
- A study at Buffalo General Hospital investigating changes in the brain (atrophy) that may lead to personality and behavior disorders in MS and the impact of those disorders on disease course and quality of life.
- Oregon Health & Science University pilot study evaluating the sensitivity of an electronic instrument to detect and measure gait and mobility changes in people with MS.
- In collaboration with the MS Society of Canada, the Society has funded seven research projects focusing on whether CCSVI (vein blockages) plays a role in the MS disease process.
- Shared DNA bank at the University of California, San Francisco, propelling studies aimed at identifying genes that make people susceptible to developing MS, and genes that may influence course and severity.

Oct 08 2008
The Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded this week to two French virologists, Françoise Barré-Sinoussi and Luc A. Montagnier, for discovering the AIDS causing virus, the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). They will share half the prize of 1.4 million dollars, the other half going to three Dr. Harald zur Hausen for discovering the human papilloma virus and its relation to cervical cancer.
The prize comes 25 years after Barré-Sinoussi and Montagnier, working at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, published their paper identifying what was later called HIV. The last quarter of a century has proven their discovery to be a triumph of science-based medicine. The Nobel committee is correct, in my opinion, in waiting such long periods of time before granting such recognition. It reflects that fact that, even in a fast-paced arena of science such as medicine, it takes time for the meticulous process of science to work itself out. It takes decades to garner the perspective necessary to tell the difference between a crucial breakthrough and a false lead.

Science Fair Project Encyclopedia
The World Factbook
The World Factbook is an annual publication by the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States with basic almanac-style information about the various countries of the world. The factbook gives a two- to three-page summary of the demographics, location, telecommunications capacity, government, industry, military capability, etc, of all US-recognized countries and territories in the world.
As The World Factbook is prepared by the CIA for the use of U.S. Government officials, the style, format, coverage, and content are designed to meet their specific requirements.
Information is provided by:
- Antarctic Information Program (National Science Foundation),
- Bureau of the Census (Department of Commerce),
- Bureau of Labor Statistics (Department of Labor),
- Central Intelligence Agency,
- Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs ,
- Defense Intelligence Agency (Department of Defense),
- US Department of State,
- US Fish and Wildlife Service (Department of the Interior),
- US Maritime Administration (Department of Transportation),
- National Imagery and Mapping Agency (Department of Defense),
- Naval Facilities Engineering Command (Department of Defense),
- Office of Insular Affairs (Department of the Interior),
- Office of Naval Intelligence (Department of Defense),
- United States Board on Geographic Names (Department of the Interior), and
- other public and private sources.
The official seal of the CIA, however, may NOT be copied without permission as required by the CIA Act of 1949 (50 U.S.C. section 403m). Misuse of the official seal of the CIA could result in civil and criminal penalties. Also, "Federal law prohibits use of the words "Central Intelligence Agency," the initials "CIA," the seal of the Central Intelligence Agency, or any colorable imitation of such words, initials, or seal in connection with any merchandise, impersonation, solicitation, or commercial activity in a manner reasonably calculated to convey the impression that such use is approved, endorsed, or authorized by the Central Intelligence Agency. "
Many sites have used information and images from the CIA World Factbook, because of its public domain status, including this encyclopedia.
Besides the World Factbook, the CIA puts out a directory of Chiefs of State and Cabinet Members of Foreign Governments each week.
Oddities and controversies
The maps of countries in the Factbook also appear to have strange anomalies. For example, the map of the United Kingdom lists the town of Grangemouth in Scotland, although it is only a small town and in no way a major city (this is perhaps due to its status as a major centre of the oil industry in Scotland).
The U.S. does not recognize the renaming of Burma by its ruling military junta to Myanmar and thus keeps its entry for the country under "Burma."
Specific regions within a country or areas in dispute among countries, such as Kashmir and Kosovo, are not covered, but other areas of the world whose status is disputed, such as the Spratly Islands, have entries.
Maps depicting Kashmir have the India-Pakistan border drawn at the Line of Control, but the region of Kashmir occupied by China drawn in hashmarks.
Northern Cyprus is not given a separate entry or listed as part of Turkey because "territorial occupations/annexations not recognized by the United States Government are not shown on U.S. Government maps."
Taiwan has a separate entry not listed under "T", but at the bottom of the list. The name "Republic of China" is not listed as Taiwan's "official name" under the "Government" section, perhaps due to U.S. recognition of Beijing's One-China Policy according to which the Republic of China is a defunct entity having been replaced by the People's Republic of China. The name "Republic of China" was briefly added on January 27, 2005 but changed back to "none" on February 10, 2005.
On December 16, 2004, the CIA added an entry for the European Union. According to the CIA, the European Union was added because the EU "continues to accrue more nation-like characteristics for itself".
- World Factbook Website
- 2004 CIA World Factbook for Pocket PC and Palm OS devices
- Nationmaster.com: statistics with bars, based on the Factbook
- Authorama CIA World Factbook: The complete Factbook as XHTML1.0 (easily readable, no images, device-independent)
The contents of this article is licensed from www.wikipedia.org under the GNU Free Documentation License. Click here to see the transparent copy and copyright details

Although often used interchangeably, the words "fate" and "destiny" have distinct connotations.
- Traditional usage defines fate as a power or agency that predetermines and orders the course of events. Fate defines events as ordered or "inevitable" and unavoidable. Classical and European mythology features three goddesses dispensing fate, known as Moirai in Greek mythology, as Parcae in Roman mythology, and as Norns in Norse mythology. They determine the events of the world through the mystic spinning of threads that represent individual human fates.
- Destiny is used with regard to the finality of events as they have worked themselves out; and to that same sense of "destination", projected into the future to become the flow of events as they will work themselves out.
In other words, "fate" relates to events of the future and present of an individual and in cases in literature unalterable, whereas "destiny" relates to the probable future. Fate implies no choice, but with destiny the entity participates in achieving an outcome that is directly related to itself. Participation happens willfully.
In Hellenistic civilization, the chaotic and unforeseeable turns of chance gave increasing prominence to a previously less notable goddess, Tyche, who embodied the good fortune of a city and all whose lives depended on its security and prosperity, two good qualities of life that appeared to be out of human reach. The Roman image of Fortuna, with the wheel she blindly turned, was retained by Christian writers, revived strongly in the Renaissance and survives in some forms today.
In daily language, "destiny" and "fate" are synonymous, but with regard to 19th century philosophy, the words gained inherently different meanings.
For Arthur Schopenhauer, destiny was just a manifestation of the Will to Live, which can be at the same time living fate and choice of overrunning the fate same, by means of the Art, of the Morality and of the Ascesis.
For Nietzsche, destiny keeps the form of Amor fati (Love of Fate) through the important element of Nietzsche's philosophy, the "will to power" (der Wille zur Macht), the basis of human behavior, influenced by the Will to Live of Schopenhauer. But this concept may have even other senses, although he, in various places, saw the will to power as a strong element for adaptation or survival in a better way. Nietzsche eventually transformed the idea of matter as centers of force into matter as centers of will to power as mankind’s destiny to face with amor fati. The expression Amor fati is used repeatedly by Nietzsche as acceptation-choice of the fate, but in such way it becomes even another thing, precisely a "choice" destiny.
Many Greek legends and tales teach the futility of trying to outmaneuver an inexorable fate that has been correctly predicted. This form of irony is important in Greek tragedy, as it is in Oedipus Rex and in the Duque de Rivas' play that Verdi transformed into La Forza del Destino ("The Force of Destiny") or Thornton Wilder's The Bridge of San Luis Rey, or in Macbeth's uncannily-derived knowledge of his own destiny, which in spite of all his actions does not preclude a horrible fate.
Other notable examples include Thomas Hardy's Tess of the d'Urbervilles, in which Tess is destined to the miserable death that she is confronted with at the end of the novel; Samuel Beckett's Endgame; the popular short story "The Monkey's Paw" by W.W. Jacobs.
Destiny is a recurring theme in the literature of Hermann Hesse (1877–1962), including Siddharta (1922) and his magnum opus, Das Glasperlenspiel, also published as The Glass Bead Game (1943). The common theme of these works involves a protagonist who cannot escape a destiny if their fate has been sealed, however hard they try. Destiny is also an important plot point in the hit TV shows Lost, Heroes and Supernatural, as well a common theme in the Roswell TV series. Destiny is a recurring theme in the video-game franchise Kingdom Hearts, with Kingdom Hearts: Birth By Sleep having its story based around the concept of Destiny, and the tagline for the game stating "Destiny is never left to chance." Destiny is also a prominent theme in the anime Mawaru Penguindrum, which focuses on the concept that humans cannot escape from their own fate.
See also 
|Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Destiny|
- Divine Providence
- Lazy argument
- Qadr, destiny in Islam
- Russian avos'
- Psychology of human destiny
- "The Wheel of Fortune" remains an emblem of the chance element in fate(destiny).
- Beyond Good & Evil 13, Gay Science 349 & Genealogy of Morality II:12
- Cornelius, Geoffrey, C. (1994). "The Moment of Astrology: Origins in Divination", Penguin Group, part of Arkana Contemporary Astrology series.

Outer doublet heterogeneity reveals structural polarity related to beat direction in Chlamydomonas flagella
Department of Cell Biology
Chlamydomonas; Dynein ATPase; Flagella; Microscopy, Electron; Microtubules
Analysis of serial cross-sections of the Chlamydomonas flagellum reveals several structural asymmetries in the axoneme. One doublet lacks the outer dynein arm, has a beak-like projection in its B-tubule, and bears a two-part bridge that extends from the A-tubule of this doublet to the B-tubule of the adjacent doublet. The two doublets directly opposite the doublet lacking the arm have beak-like projections in their B-tubules. These asymmetries always occur in the same doublets from section to section, indicating that certain doublets have consistent morphological specializations. These unique doublets give the axoneme an inherent structural polarity. All three specializations are present in the proximal portion of the axoneme; based on their frequency in random cross-sections of isolated axonemes, the two-part bridge and the beak-like projections are present in the proximal one quarter and one half of the axoneme, respectively, and the outer arm is absent from the one doublet greater than 90% of the axoneme's length. The outer arm-less doublet of each flagellum faces the other flagellum, indicating that each axoneme has the same rotational orientation relative to the direction of its effective stroke. This strongly suggests that the direction of the effective stroke is controlled by a structural component within the axoneme. The striated fibers are associated with specific triplets in a manner suggesting that they play a role in setting up or maintaining the 180 degrees rotational symmetry of the two flagella.
Rights and Permissions
Citation: J Cell Biol. 1983 Sep;97(3):902-8.
The Journal of cell biology

To create a true net-zero building, one that literally generates as much or more energy than it consumes, is no easy task. Still, it’s a task that makes good business sense. After all, buildings consume a huge amount of energy, which cuts into profit margins. This simple equation finally hit home with Hines, the international real estate firm, and equity partner J.P. Morgan Asset Management. The two are partnering to build a new 13-story, 415,000-square-foot building at La Jolla Commons in San Diego that will become the nation’s largest carbon-neutral office building to date.
In order to achieve this rare feat, the building will utilize combination of high-performance building design, directed biogas and on-site fuel cells that annually will generate more electricity than tenants will use. The fuel cells, made by Bloom Energy, will generate approximately 5.0 million KWh of electricity annually, which is roughly equivalent to the electricity required to power 1,000 San Diego homes. Methane needed to power the fuel cells will be acquired from carbon-neutral sources, such as landfills and wastewater plants, and placed into the national natural gas pipeline system. The building’s exterior is predominately a glass curtainwall system incorporating highly efficient, insulated, double-paned glass with a clear, low-emissive coating.
Hines views its newest building, which will also contain a highly efficient under-floor air system, as a sort of ongoing R&D project. “Our net-zero project at La Jolla Commons gives us a great foundation for furthering the use of carbon-neutral technologies and fuels,” said Gary Holtzer, Hines’ global sustainability officer. ”Our next step is to adapt what we have learned and apply it to an existing urban property in a less temperate environment.”
Construction on the carbon neutral building began in April 2012 and completion is scheduled for mid-2014.

Philosophy East and West 46 (2):143-164 (1996)
|Abstract||The origin, content, argumentative basis, practical implication, and influence of Mencius' views of mind-heart and human nature are discussed. While the differences between Confucius and Mencius are acknowledged, it is argued that Mencius' view that human nature is good is consistent with and is a further development of basic ideas in Confucius' thinking. The basis of Mencius' view is not empirical generalization but inner reflection and personal experience, which reveal a shared natural endowment in human beings with a transcendental source. In addition to a discussion of Mencius' views, the development of his ideas in the Sung and Ming and by contemporary Neo-Confucians is also considered|
|Keywords||No keywords specified (fix it)|
|Through your library||Configure|
Similar books and articles
James Behuniak Jr (2011). Naturalizing Mencius. Philosophy East and West 61 (3):492-515.
David E. Soles (1999). The Nature and Grounds of Xunzi's Disagreement with Mencius. Asian Philosophy 9 (2):123 – 133.
Qingping Liu (2001). Is Mencius' Doctrine of 'Commiseration' Tenable? Asian Philosophy 11 (2):73 – 84.
James Behuniak (2002). Mencius on Becoming Human. Dissertation, University of Hawaii at Manoa
Liang Tao & Andrew Lambert (2009). Mencius and the Tradition of Articulating Human Nature in Terms of Growth. Frontiers of Philosophy in China 4 (2):180 - 197.
Kwong-loi Shun (1997). Mencius and Early Chinese Thought. Stanford University Press.
Zhang Pengwei, Guo Qiyong & Wang Bei (2008). New Insight Into Mencius' Theory of the Original Goodness in Human Nature. Frontiers of Philosophy in China 3 (1):27 - 38.
Katrin Froese (2008). Organic Virtue: Reading Mencius with Rousseau. Asian Philosophy 18 (1):83 – 104.
Tao Liang (2009). Mencius and the Tradition of Articulating Human Nature in Terms of Growth. Frontiers of Philosophy in China 4 (2):180-197.
Added to index2009-01-28
Total downloads13 ( #88,007 of 549,196 )
Recent downloads (6 months)1 ( #63,397 of 549,196 )
How can I increase my downloads?

1. Yodhājīva Sutta. On five kinds of warriors: those who are frightened by a cloud of dust, by the sight of a flag, by tumult, by conflict, and those who fight victoriously; and on five similar kinds of monks. A.iii.87f.
2. Yodhājīva Sutta. On five kinds of warriors: those who go down into the thick of the fight where they are overpowered, those who are wounded and die on the way to their home, those who survive for some time but die of their wounds, those who are cured of their wounds, those that are victorious in battle and continue to fight. There are five corresponding kinds of monks. A.iii.94ff.
3. Yodhājīva Sutta. Records the visit of the headman Yodhājīva to the Buddha. S.iv.308.

Galactorrhea is a discharge of milk-like substance from the breast that is not associated with breastfeeding after pregnancy. This condition mainly occurs in women. It does occur in men, but much less commonly. The milky white discharge can come from one or both breasts, and the breast may leak fluid with or without stimulation.
Galactorrhea has many causes, though sometimes the cause is unknown. Tumors of the pituitary gland, called pituitary adenomas or prolactinomas, can cause galactorrhea. The pituitary is a small gland attached to the brain. Pituitary tumors are usually not cancerous. They can cause galactorrhea when they produce excess prolactin, a hormone that stimulates milk production.
Other causes of galactorrhea include:
- Hormonal imbalance
Some medications, such as:
- Stopping or starting to take birth control pills or other hormones
- Certain blood pressure drugs
- Certain psychiatric medications
- Anti-nausea drugs
- Some antigastroesophageal reflux medications
- Some pain killers
- Certain herbs, such as :
- Illicit drugs, such as marijuana and opioids
- Sexual stimulation of the breast
- Certain diseases, such as underactive or overactive thyroid, and chronic kidney failure, or liver disease
- Chronic emotional stress
- Hypothalamic tumors or disease
Chest wall conditions, such as:
- Surgical scars
- Tumors of chest wall
- In newborns, high levels of circulating estrogen may result in enlarged breast tissue and secretion of milk
Galactorrhea is more common in women. Other factors that may increase your chance of galactorrhea include:
- Wearing clothing that irritates the nipple
- Frequent breast self-exam or frequent breast stimulation
The primary symptom is a milky discharge from the nipple that is not associated with breast-feeding. The discharge can come from one or both breasts. Other symptoms that can occur along with the discharge include:
- Abnormal or absent menstruation
- Heat or cold intolerance
- Disordered appetite, increase or decrease in weight
- Increased thirst or urination
- Loss of sex drive
- Bloody or foul-smelling discharge
- Acne or abnormal hair growth
- Visual difficulties
- Impotence in men
The doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. Tests may include:
- A sample of the breast discharge to look at under a microscope
- Blood tests to check hormone levels
- Pregnancy test
- Imaging tests to check for a pituitary gland tumor in the brain:
If the discharge is not milky or contains blood, then this is not galactorrhea. Other tests must be done to check for breast cancer or other disorders.
Treatment depends on the cause. In some mild cases, no medical treatment is necessary, and the condition will go away on its own. In these cases, breast binders that prevent stimulation of the nipples may be effective. If medications are identified as the potential cause, safe alternatives should be sought.
If an underlying cause for galactorrhea, such as a pituitary tumor, is found, this condition may be treated.
Tumors of the pituitary gland that cause galactorrhea are usually benign. Small tumors may be treated with a medication, such as a dopamine agonist. Larger tumors that do not respond to medication may be treated with the following:
- Surgery to remove the tumor and nearby tissues
- Radiation therapy to shrink tumors
Despite treatment, pituitary gland tumors often recur.
To reduce your risk of galactorrhea, take these steps:
- Avoid wearing clothing that irritates the breast.
- Avoid frequent breast self-exam; usually once a month is enough.
- Avoid excessive sexual stimulation of the breasts.
- Do not use illicit drugs.
- Reviewer: Andrea Chisholm; Brian Randall, MD
- Review Date: 06/2013 -
- Update Date: 06/11/2013 -

Date: April 2003
Why does DNA decompose when heated to too high a temperature?
The most of the hydrogen bonds that join the two DNE stands break from the
heat. With more heat the actual bonds between the nucleotides can break
-fragmenting a strand.
Very few organic molecules can with stand high temperatures for very
long. Heat provides the activation energy to break covalent bonds and
denature/destroy molecular structure. Proteins are particularly sensitive.
There are exceptions, as in the case of thermophillic bacteria. There are
cases or heat shock-proteins or "chaperone" proteins that can protect
regular proteins from breakdown - to a point.
DNA doesn't actually decompose when heated. It just melts. DNA comes in two mirror image strands that you could visualize as a zipper. The chemical bonds that make up each strand of the zipper are permanent joins, but the teeth that connect the two strands are much weaker and sensitive to heat. So when you expose DNA to heat (for instance, by boiling it), the two strands of the zipper separate. By very slowly cooling that denatured DNA, you could actually get the strands to reanneal or zip up again.
Christine Ticknor, Ph.D.
Ireland Cancer Center
Case Western Reserve University
DNA in its native form is composed of two molecules that have the
characteristic of being complementary such that one strand associates
with the other in a particular fashion, forming a "double helix." The
two molecules are stabilized in this structure due to noncovalent bonds,
mostly hydrogen bonds and vanderWaals forces. These bonds are not
strong; accordingly, when the temperature rises sufficiently, the double
helix is said to "melt" into its two component molecules, and will
reassociate upon slow cooling under appropriate salt conditions. So,
the issue is not decomposition so much as disassociation upon exposure
to too high a temperature; and the reason for the disassociation is that
the energy input of the heat overcomes the ability of the noncovalent
bonds to keep the molecules together.
Heat "cooks" organic material, DNA or others, especially in the presence of oxyge. So
DNA can "burn" in the usual sense of the word forming CO2, N2 and other compounds. Even in the
absence of O2, heat can cause DNA, or other molecules, to change its structure either by losing
some degradation product, or just changing structure so that it cannot replicate. The
"technical" term for proteins is "denaturing", which is a catch-all phrase for "losing its
Chemical bonds have a certain stability based on the type of bonding. Some
bonds are quite strong The following are covalent bond strengths.
Bond Bond Strength(kJ/mole); Bond Bond Strength (kJ/mole)
Cl-Cl 239 H-Cl 427
H-H 432 C-H 413
N N 941 N-H 391
Bond strength can be overcome by adding heat...The GC and AT bonds in DNA
are hydrogen bonds (non-covalent) and can also be overcome with heat.
these hydrogen bonds are about 71 kilojoules per mole...relatively weak (but
strong in large numbers) and can be broken and reformed by heating and
cooling. This is the secret behind the polymerase chain reaction.
Click here to return to the Molecular Biology Archives
Update: June 2012

BURKE TEACHERS STUDY, PREPARE FOR NEW CURRICULUM
Burke County schools are preparing for a curriculum change coming in August as North Carolina joins more than 40 other states in adopting the Common Core State Standards. A pamphlet Burke schools will send to parents next month explains the new way of teaching, testing and holding principals accountable.“These standards describe what students are supposed to know from kindergarten through 12th grade,” the pamphlet reads. “They define the reading, writing and math knowledge and skills needed at each grade level. Each year builds on the next so that by high school graduation, young people are prepared to go to college or to enter the workplace.”Burke school officials attended a crash course in Common Core last month as North Carolina Superintendent of Public Instruction June Atkinson toured the state to talk about the upcoming changes.

Race for survival
On the brink of extinction, Honu'ea struggle to the sea
October 23, 2008A full moon floods the wide swath of sand that conceals Orion's nest. Big Beach is lit up so bright we can see where the first ones emerged, the football-sized divot on a small mound of sand cordoned of with yellow caution tape.
This is the third and final full moon to hit the still-gravid mound.
Sheryl King, a biologist with the Hawaii Wildlife Fund, sits at the head of a circle consisting of a dozen or so of us. She explains what we are to do should more baby honu'ea—hawksbill turtles—dig their way out on one of our shifts: make sure they head in the right direction—toward the sea. Keep cats, mongooses, and crabs away. If one flips over in a footprint, push up sand beneath it so it can right itself, but don't ever touch a hatchling.
We determine who stakes out when, then hit the hay, or rather the sand.
Hawksbill nests typically gestate for around 60 days, King said, but she adjusts a nest's "due date" according to various factors, among them temperature and shade.
King spotted Orion, the mother, depositing this particular clutch around 64 days prior to the first hatchlings' emergence. She was watching for nesting hawksbills as part of the dawn patrol, a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service effort to spot nesting females as part of the Honu'ea Recovery Project. She estimated the nest would begin to hatch on October 11. She was only 2 days off.
The project takes place with help from several entities, including FWS, the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The aim is to get the honu'ea population up to more stable number.
Orion herself likely hatched very close to the spot where she dropped off her most recent batch.
"They tend to return to their natal beach," said HWF co-founder Hannah Bernard. "We don't really understand how they find their way."
Yet Orion doesn't stick around for very long after nesting. According to King, she spends most of her days off the coast of Oahu and comes to the vicinity of Big Beach every three to four years just to nest.
"I first tracked her, and named her, in 2001," King said. "We've tracked her with satellite transmitters so we have a good handle on her movements."
This is Orion's third or fourth nest this season. Two other nests were laid on island this year by an as yet unidentified female, which Bernard says is a good thing—one more nesting female adding to the species' extremely small gene pool.
This is one of only ten or so nesting areas archipelago-wide. There are three on Maui. Other sites include Kameahame Beach on the Big Island and a black sand beach at the mouth of Moloka'i's Halawa River. Ninety percent of honu'ea nesting occurs on the Ka'u Coast of the Big Island.
Nests contain an average of 140 eggs. But while a single hawksbill may lay nearly a thousand eggs in a given year, Hawaii's honu'ea aren't exactly thriving. King said that they have a one in 10,000 chance of making it to adulthood. Volunteers stake out the nest for 24 hours a day as the due date approaches to help ensure the hatchlings' instinctual seaward striving goes without predatory incident.
HWF volunteer coordinator Angie Hofmann compares the hatching of a sea turtle nest to childbirth. Everyone was antsy in the days leading up to the hatching. A handful of volunteers parked nest-side in beach chairs day and night, eyes locked on the mound for even the tiniest movement. One volunteer called it a "watched pot."
Only this one boils.
The first batch emerged at around 5am on Monday, October 13. Forty-eight hatchlings made their way to the water that morning, but Orion's nest was still far from empty.
Glimpsing these tiny hatchlings, bellies full of yolk, as they march toward the sea is an extraordinary sight on its own, but there is a particular sense of urgency for the little ones whose prolific mama chose to deposit them in the shade of a keawe tree at Big Beach.
Honu'ea are not the enormous green guys that bob up beside you when you're snorkeling at Black Rock or Molokini. Honu'ea are smaller—they grow to be up to 270 pounds, whereas the greens round out at 400. Honu'ea have a beak rather than a rounded snout—hence the Anglo name, hawksbill.
Most importantly, honu'ea are endangered under the U.S. Endangered Species Act and most people you ask will say they're critically endangered; greens are not.
Though their plight is severe and stemming from the same source, green sea turtles are listed as threatened, which means that their numbers are much higher than those of the honu'ea.
Statewide, according to King and Bernard, there are fewer than 100 nesting female honu'ea. Fewer than ten of these will nest throughout the isles in any given year. Only five or six total dig their nests on Maui's coastline.
"That's critically low," Bernard said, adding that the entire Hawaii hawksbill population is extremely vulnerable. "The greater your numbers, the greater your resilience."
They cite anthropogenic—human—causes for the species' alarmingly low numbers: runoff, traffic, lights that disorient nesting turtles, introduced predators, habitat loss and more.
Hawksbills across the globe were once plundered for their shells, which were made into combs, jewelry and even guitar picks. In Japan, according to the 1999 Jay April documentary Red Turtle Rising, they were seen as a sign of longevity, and thus stuffed and hung on the walls in many homes. In Hawaii their shells were used to make dinnerware, jewelry and medicine, though a kapu (taboo) barred honu'ea meat from being consumed (they dine primarily on poisonous sponges, which makes their meat toxic). The tortoiseshell pattern that may or may not constitute your sunglass frames was inspired by the hawksbill. In 1973 real tortoiseshell was banned worldwide under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
|Researchers have tracked Orion's (the mama turtle) route and found she likes to hang out on Oahu, but comes to Maui to nest.|
It may be illegal to mess with them these days, but they're not exactly bouncing back.
That's why the 140 or so hatchlings here at Big Beach, barely larger than your big toe, need to make it the ocean.
So far the turnout has been outstanding. The first night saw 48 turtles scamper into the tide. The next night more than 100 came out. Tonight we'll see the stragglers to the shore, if there are any.
The next day King will excavate the nest carefully with her hands for any that didn't make it out, dead or alive. Live hatchlings will be placed in the water after dusk. Eggshells will be counted and unhatched eggs will be sent to a NOAA lab in Honolulu for DNA testing.
My one to 2am shift comes and goes without a peep. I've been instructed to shine a red flashlight on the nest every few minutes, but the mound is frozen.
I fall asleep after my shift with few expectations.
At some bleary hour a voice startles me awake.
"There's a turtle!" King says as she passes my tent. "A turtle just hatched!"
It's barely a quarter past five in the morning. Volunteers climb out of sleeping bags and tents and flood the area around the nest. One hatchling moves slowly toward the sea in the moonlight, almost a silhouette at this dark hour. Its tracks look like tire tread from a mountain bike. We inch along behind it, awestruck.
After 20 minutes the turtle is at the edge of the sea. Although its flippers have just had a killer workout, the hatchling takes to the waves effortlessly after the lapping water swallows it whole.
Any number of things could have thrown off the hatchling and its siblings. Had this been a beach up the road they may have gone toward bright lights. They may have gone toward South Kihei Road and gotten smashed, which has happened before with nesting mothers; once in 1993 and once in 1996, thanks to speeding motorists. A feral cat (of which there are many) could have gotten to them. King says that even ghost crabs prey on sea-bound hatchlings, gouging out their eyes in a horrific display King herself has witnessed in the northwest Hawaiian Isles.
Hofmann said her major concern is the long-term impact of development on nesting. While Big Beach is a state park and thus can't be built upon, two proposed developments—Wailea 670 and the expansion of Makena Resort—could increase the volume of beachgoers that may, inadvertently or otherwise, disturb the nests.
"If they both get their way there'd be another city down here," she said.
The proposed development sites may be pretty far mauka of where the turtles nest, but storm runoff has an obvious impact on their ability to successfully hatch and make it to the sea, as does lighting.
Hofmann said that, given how close honu'ea are to extinction, developers should reconsider how they determine appropriateness when choosing a building site.
"The turtles have chosen this as their nesting place," she said.
While there are several well-documented hawksbill nesting sites statewide, there is no bureaucratic mechanism that can designate them as a critical habitat.
Bernard said that the only defense for sites with impending developments so far has been a lighting ordinance that the county adopted in 2007, which she said was watered-down.
"It's not the bill that we hoped for," she said, "but it's a start."
Just after six in the morning the camp gets jostled awake once again. Three more babies have come out, a volunteer says. I hop to my feet. The last ones to emerge on their own are making it to sea in the new daylight, each on a separate trajectory, seemingly unaware of one another but probably very aware of us.
We scare away the looming ghost crabs. We clear the path of debris, as the turtles' tiny flippers hoist them along the final stretch of sand.
It takes one honu'ea a few tries to take to the water; the oncoming surf pushes it off course. The other two swim off almost instantly.
Nobody knows where they're headed. They return to near shore areas after about five to 10 years, but the time in between is known as the lost years. One theory is that they attach themselves to little clumps of seaweed, floating wherever the current takes them. Those ready to nest, of course, eventually make it back to the beach of their birth using some mysterious sense that we don't yet understand. The hope is they'll stick around long enough for us to find out. MTW
For more information on how you can help hawksbills visit wildhawaii.org. To find out more about the role of honu'ea in Hawaiian history and culture check out the award-winning 1999 documentary Red Turtle Rising, directed by Jay April. The film is available for free on the Web at filmmaui.com and through the World Turtle Trust.
|Entertainment and lifestyle news for Maui, Hawaii and the surrounding Islands. Maui Time Weekly is Mauis only independent and locally owned newspaper.
Mail this link to a friend|

| Quote #1
Richard's first mention of his relation to his family prepares us for the way family will function in the play. Richard speaks of deceiving one brother to imprison the other. He even explicitly compares himself to his brother Edward, saying that he is all the evil that Edward is not. Thus we get the hint that family will not be about the ties and the love that bind people. Instead, it's just one more instrument Richard will use to manipulate and spread his hate.
| Quote #2
Richard implicitly draws a comparison between himself and Anne's dead husband, the murdered Prince Edward, by pointing out their old family connection. By invoking the Plantagenet name, Richard goes far back to the original family from which the two warring houses, Lancaster and York, sprang. Amidst all the animosity in the play, it's easy to forget that the warring Lancasters and Yorks are actually related by blood (hence the dispute). Remembering the family connection between the Lancasters and Yorks also makes all the quarreling within the York family a bit more understandable. Being family doesn't guarantee allegiance. Fighting within the family is common, hence the Wars of the Roses.
| Quote #3
Margaret represents the old guard that the Yorks defeated to come to power. As they turn from their in-fighting to attack her, we get a rare glimpse of family loyalty and unity amongst those related to King Edward.

MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS LEARN ABOUT THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
Middle school students from several New Castle County schools are having an opportunity to spend a morning in the New Castle County Courthouse to learn more about how the court system works and to speak informally with prosecutors and public defenders. Starting with a tour of the courthouse, the students learn about the “nuts and bolts” of the justice system, including new technologies used in the courtroom, as well as court facilities and security, and watch a demonstration by Pocket, the dog whose well-trained nose aids Capitol Police in protecting the courthouse.
Thereafter, they get an opportunity to learn about the legal aspects of the court system from a judge who explains how trials work. And, then, when they least expect it, they get to experience a trial themselves – albeit a mock one. As they are listening to the judge explain the various aspects of a trial, a “theft” occurs and the alleged perpetrator is put on trial. Students act as prosecutors, public defenders, judges, bailiffs, and jurors, with their real-life counterparts coaching them on their roles. After the trial is completed and the jury reaches a verdict, the group discusses what occurred at the trial and why the jury reached its verdict. The visit concludes with lunch and an opportunity to speak informally with the real life prosecutors, public defenders, and others involved in the trial.
All of those attending expressed a great deal of enthusiasm about the experience. “I loved everything!” exclaimed one student on his evaluation. “My favorite part of the day was the mock trial. It was fun to act like it was a real case,” said another. A third student appreciated the one-on-one contact with those who work in the field, saying “My favorite part of the day was talking to Mr. Andy [Public Defender Andrew Rosen]. He told me some important things.” And the professionals involved enjoyed working with the students, as well, according to “Mr. Andy” of the Public Defender’s Office.
In November and December, the project hosted approximately 25 students from Bayard Middle School in Wilmington, as well as about 180 students over three days from Newark Charter School. In the upcoming months, the project is slated to host students from East Side Charter, Springer Middle School, and H.B. duPont Middle School.
The project, which is spearheaded by the Administrative Office of the Courts, is a cooperative effort with the Attorney General’s Office and the Office of the Public Defender. It originated last year as part of the Delaware Supreme Court’s racial and ethnic fairness initiative, which is co-chaired by Justice Henry duPont Ridgely of the Supreme Court and Chief Judge Alex J. Smalls of the Court of Common Pleas.
For further information contact Kirsten Morris by e-mail at Kirsten.firstname.lastname@example.org or by phone at 302-255-0094.

Member Comment Sought on Draft National Science and Mathematics Curriculum
In 2008 all Australian governments agreed that a quality education for all young Australians is critical to maintaining Australia’s productivity and quality of life. They agreed that a national curriculum would play a key role in delivering quality education and committed to the development of a K–12 national curriculum, initially in the areas of English, mathematics, science and history.
The Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) was formed to develop a national curriculum from Kindergarten to Year 12 in specified learning areas.
ACARA released discussion papers on the development of the new curriculum. Following member consultation Engineers Australia compiled a submission making comments on the proposed structure of the science and mathematics curriculum.
ACARA then released the Shape of the Australian Curriculum documents in the second half of 2009. Engineers Australia in partnership with APESMA and ACEA provided further comments to ACARA outlining concerns that a clear understanding of engineering was not being successfully built into the science school curriculum.
Now, Engineers Australia has been given the opportunity to provide further comments on the draft Mathematics and Science curriculum.
To view the submission and curriculum documents or to make a comment, please click here (note: you must be logged in to view this page)

At Tebtunis public bathhouses
have been excavated, the oldest dating to the third century BCE. They had showers,
stone basins and a stove to heat the bathwater.
While a few bathrooms and tubs have been discovered most Egyptians seem to have
been content with cleaning themselves by aspersion or by a dip in a canal or the
river. They had wash basins and probably filled them with a natron solution from
jugs with spouts and used sand as a scouring agent. They washed after rising and
both before and after the main meals. As mouth wash they used another salt solution

Cortex Off, Consciousness Off
This dramatic reduction in brain activity after loss of consciousness is scarcely surprising. The link between consciousness and this organ is tight, as expressed in the adage “No brain: never mind!” Yet neuroscientists are trying to track the footprints of consciousness to its actual lair. Which region in the cortex, the thalamus or elsewhere is essential to be conscious at all? Consider the following two experiments.
Twenty-five patients with Parkinson's disease were anesthetized with propofol or sevoflurane while the electrical activity of both the cortex and thalamus was monitored by a group under François Gouin of the Timone University Hospital Center at the University of the Mediterranean in Marseille, France. Their neocortex was monitored by a conventional electroencephalographic (EEG) electrode placed on the scalp on top of the head, whereas thalamic activity was recorded by an electrode implanted deep inside the brain in the subthalamic nucleus. This electrode stimulates the brain to alleviate the shaking that is the hallmark of Parkinson's. Experimenters assessed consciousness by tapping patients on the shoulder and asking them every 20 seconds to open their eyes.
When consciousness was lost after anesthesia was initiated—that is, when the patients no longer opened their eyes following the command—the cortical EEG changed dramatically, switching from low amplitude and irregular activity into readings dominated by large and slow brain waves that occur about once every second. Such so-called delta band activity is characteristic of deep sleep. Furthermore, the complexity of the cortical EEG signal decreased significantly when patients stopped responding. None of these changes occurs in the thalamic electrode at the time that consciousness is lost.
Indeed, it is only several minutes later that the thalamic voltage signal matches that of the cortex. The data—consistent for two quite different anesthetic agents, one injected and the other one inhaled—argue that the drivers for the loss of consciousness are parts (or all) of the neocortex and that the thalamus follows.

The government's human rights record remained poor. Although there were no reports that the government or its agents committed politically motivated killings, security forces committed extrajudicial killings and acted with impunity. There was little political will to address the failure by government authorities to adhere to the rule of law. Detainees were abused, often to extract confessions, and prison conditions were harsh. Human rights monitors reported arbitrary arrests and prolonged pretrial detention, underscoring a weak judiciary and denial of the right to a fair trial. Land disputes and forced evictions, often accompanied by violence, were a continuing problem. The government restricted freedom of speech and the press through the use of defamation and disinformation suits, controlled or influenced the content of television and radio broadcasts, and at times interfered with freedom of assembly. Corruption was endemic and extended throughout all segments of society, including the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. Domestic violence and child abuse occurred, education of children was inadequate, and trafficking in women and children persisted. The government offered little assistance to persons with disabilities. Antiunion activity by employers and weak enforcement of labor laws continued, and child labor remained a problem.
In a positive turn, on June 12, the Extraordinary Chambers of the Courts in Cambodia for the Prosecution of Crimes Committed during the Period of Democratic Kampuchea adopted its internal rules to begin prosecuting senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge regime and those most responsible for committing serious crimes. On July 31, the ECCC charged Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, with crimes against humanity and subsequently charged four other senior officials; at year's end all were in detention awaiting trial. In addition, on December 10, the government permitted a Human Rights Day march of 500 human rights activists, monks, and other persons and rally of an estimated 2,500 persons in Phnom Penh.
RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
a. Arbitrary or Unlawful Deprivation of Life
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed politically motivated killings. However, human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported that extrajudicial killings continued to occur.
The Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) recorded 53 cases of extrajudicial killings, 14 of which were committed by police, nine by soldiers, six by fishery officials, and the remaining 24 by unidentified government forces. Police arrested perpetrators in four cases.
Political activists continued to be the victims of killings. On February 27, Eang Sok Thoeurn, a Khmer Kampuchea Krom monk, was found dead with his throat cut in the Tronum Chhroeung Monastery in Kandal Province. The deceased monk was discovered the morning after he participated in a demonstration in front of the Vietnamese embassy in Phnom Penh for the rights of Khmer Kampuchea Krom persons living in Vietnam. Police quickly declared the death a suicide and disposed of the body without further investigation. NGOs and Khmer Kampuchea Krom groups suspected the killing was politically motivated.
Active members of political parties were killed during the year, but NGOs and police could not confirm their deaths were politically motivated. On February 14, three unidentified persons killed Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) activist Chea Sovin, spouse of an SRP candidate for the April commune council elections in Battambang Province. On July 27, three unidentified persons shot and killed Kleb Un, SRP commune‑level vice party chairperson in Banteay Meanchey Province. A local police chief reported that the perpetrators fled without robbing the victim or taking anything from the scene. Police arrested one suspect in the case but released him after questioning. In both killings, police stated that investigations continued.
On April 4, police officer Siv Soeun allegedly shot and killed a person he claimed was illegally fishing on private property in the Kompong Siem District of Kampong Cham Province. The victim's family filed a complaint against the police officer but later withdrew the complaint after Siv Soeun allegedly paid the family $3,000 (12 million riel) in compensation. At year's end Siv Soeun had not been charged or arrested.
On November 15, during the eviction of squatters from state land in Choam Ksan commune, Preah Vihear Province, unidentified government forces killed two villagers who protested the eviction. Approximately 150 police, military police, and soldiers evicted 317 families. There was no official investigation into the killings. Police arrested 18 of the squatters, including a deputy governor, on charges of encroachment on state land. The 18 villagers were imprisoned and awaited trial at year's end.
In June the Prey Veng Provincial Court sentenced one suspect in the November 2006 killing of SRP activist Man Meth to 10 years in prison and two others to six months in prison for conspiring in the killing.
On July 18, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced Heng Pov, former Phnom Penh police commissioner and under secretary of state of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), to an additional 22.5 years in prison for the 2005 illegal detention of a person, use of illegal weapons, and possession of counterfeit currency. Heng Pov was already serving an 18‑year sentence for the 2003 murder of Judge Sok Sethamony, multiple counts of premeditated killings, and involvement in illegal arrests and detentions. During his July trial, Heng Pov stated that Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun, the two suspects he ordered arrested in 2005 and who later were convicted for the killing of union activist Chea Vichea, were innocent of the crime. On April 12, the appeals court had upheld 20‑year sentences each for Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun. Their lawyers submitted grievances to the Supreme Court, and at year's end they awaited Supreme Court action.
There were no developments in the 2006 cases of SRP activists Koent Chhuon and Thoeung Thear, killed in Preah Vihear and Kampong Cham provinces, respectively. Likewise, there were no developments in the cases of Pao Rum and Khat Thoeun, who died in police custody in Kandal Province in 2006, or the 2006 cases of attempted prison breaks in Kampong Thom and Battambang that left 10 inmates dead. In the case of Nong Sam, who reportedly died June 2006 in a Siem Reap hospital from head injuries received during a beating by police officers, a provincial court prosecutor closed the case, declaring Nong Sam's death a suicide.
There were no developments in the 2005 killings of five SRP activists or in the 2005 case of an attempted escape from Trapoeung Phlong Prison in which 19 prisoners and the prison director were killed. The appeals court took no action in the 2005 deaths of five villagers and injuries to others by government security forces during a mass eviction from disputed land in the village of Kbal Spean in Banteay Meanchey Province.
On February 8, in Prey Veng Province, district‑ and commune‑level deputy police chiefs Bun Samphea, Suos Bunthat, and Hay Chivon, charged in a 2000 killing, failed to appear for their provincial court trial, reportedly stating they were too busy. The court rescheduled the trial to June but postponed it again after the officers said they were too busy to come to the June trial. A new trial date was not set.
Mines dating from the Indochina conflict and Khmer Rouge period continued to cause casualties. According to the Cambodia Mine/UXO Victim Information System, during the year mines and unexploded ordnance caused 63 deaths, 56 amputations, and 222 other injuries.
Vigilante justice and mob killings persisted. ADHOC reported that mobs killed five persons during the year. Few suspects were arrested. In some instances authorities could not protect suspects from angry mobs. NGOs noted that a majority of mob killings were related to thefts, robberies, or suspected witchcraft. On June 9, Yos Chor villagers in Kampong Speu Province killed a person for stealing a neighbor's chickens. On June 21, a mob killed a traditional healer in the Boribo District of Kampong Chhnang Province because they suspected him of witchcraft. Police made no arrests in either case.
On June 27, the Kratie Provincial Court sentenced six persons to sentences ranging from seven to 10 months in prison for the 2006 vigilante justice killing of Sam Roeun. The court convicted them on charges of causing injury, reduced from investigation findings of murder. There were no developments in the February 2006 case of a person beaten and killed for allegedly practicing witchcraft.
On June 30, Khmer Kampuchea Krom monk Tim Sakhorn, head of a pagoda in the Kirivong District of Takeo Province for more than 10 years, disappeared. Previously, on orders of the country's top Buddhist leader, Great Supreme Patriarch Tep Vong, monks from Phnom Penh had defrocked Tim Sakhorn, after which unidentified persons believed to be attached to the MOI pushed him into a vehicle and drove away. The defrocking order stated Tim Sakhorn "broke the solidarity" between Cambodia and Vietnam by using pagodas to spread propaganda that affects the dignity of Buddhism. The monk was known locally for providing food and shelter to Khmer Kampuchea Krom coming from Vietnam. The MOI stated that Tim Sakhorn volunteered to go to Vietnam after he was defrocked, and ministry officials produced a document stating this intent. While signed by Tim Sakhorn, the handwritten document appeared not to be in his writing. On August 2, Tim Sakhorn reappeared in court custody in Vietnam, held on charges of destroying political solidarity. In September the Information Ministry stated that the Cambodian consulate in Ho Chi Minh City was investigating Tim Sakhorn's condition in detention. On November 8, a Vietnamese newspaper reported that a court in Vietnam convicted Tim Sakhorn of undermining solidarity between Cambodia and Vietnam and sentenced him to one year in prison.
On August 10, Land Border Protection Unit 504 soldier Im Bun Ny disappeared in Pailin. According to witnesses, that night four soldiers from his unit invited him to a rubber plantation owned by their unit commander, Brigadier General Pol Sinuon. After Im Bun Ny arrived, the four soldiers beat him and accused him of stealing a gun. Unconfirmed witness reports said Im Bun Ny died from the beating and the soldiers buried his body. At year's end Im Bun Ny was still missing. According to a human rights NGO, local police completed an investigation and submitted findings to the court. The court took no action, and the four soldiers remained at large.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
The constitution such practices; however, beatings and other forms of physical mistreatment of police detainees and prison inmates continued to be a serious problem.
There were credible reports that military and civilian police officials used physical and psychological torture and severely beat criminal detainees, particularly during interrogation. Based on interviews with 1,293 detainees from 18 of the country's 26 prisons, the Cambodian League for the Prevention and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) reported that during the year authorities tortured 155 prisoners, of whom 125 were tortured in police custody and 30 in prisons. Kicking, punching, and pistol whipping were the most common methods of physical abuse, but techniques also included electric shocks, suffocation, caning, and whipping with wire. NGOs reported that it was not uncommon for police to torture detained suspects until they confessed to a crime. Courts used forced confessions as legal evidence during trial despite admissibility prohibitions under the law.
NGOs noted that during the year there were 180 cases of physical assaults by local authorities, government agents, or private bodyguards, compared with 164 cases in 2006 and 154 cases in 2005.
On May 27, military police officer Prak Vutha of Phnom Sruoch District, Kampong Speu Province, reportedly arrested Sok Soeun after a small scuffle at a restaurant, kept him in military detention overnight without a warrant, and beat him unconscious. According to ADHOC, Sok Soeun's family gave Prak Vutha two cases of beer in return for Sok Soeun's release. Sok Soeun later filed a complaint with local police that the police did not accept. There was no investigation into the case or legal action against Prak Vutha.
No legal action was taken against two policemen from Border Protection Unit 701 implicated in a February 2006 beating of a 13‑year‑old boy. Likewise, there was no action against officials and no progress in the police investigation of an April 2006 case involving Police Commissioner Team Sangkriem in Preah Vihear Province and three other police agents who detained Kong Salath without a warrant and beat him. No disciplinary or legal action was taken against abusive officers in the April 2006 beating of a motorist by Battambang military police. Regarding the December 2006 case of Tous Sdoeung, whom two military police officers allegedly tortured to death while in detention, early in the year a provincial court prosecutor completed an investigation and forwarded it to an investigating judge. The court investigation continued. The two alleged perpetrators continued to work in their positions as military police officers.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions did not meet international standards. Conditions remained harsh and at times were life threatening. Government efforts to improve them continued to be hampered by a lack of funds and weak enforcement. Human rights organizations cited a number of serious problems, including overcrowding, medical and sanitation problems, food and water shortages, malnutrition, and poor security. According to LICADHO, the 18 prisons they monitored had a designed capacity of approximately 6,440 inmates but held a total 9,582 inmates.
There were reports at some prisons that cells of 40 by 20 feet held up to 110 prisoners. At CC1 prison, cells of 26 by 26 feet held an average of 50 prisoners. In some prisons authorities used shackles and held prisoners in small, dark cells as a form of harsher punishment.
LICADHO reported that 56 prisoners in 18 of the country's prisons died during the year.
Government ration allowances for purchasing prisoners' food routinely were misappropriated and remained inadequate, exacerbating malnutrition and disease. One NGO claimed that in some cases prison authorities sold the NGO's donations of supplemental food intended for prisoners. According to rights organizations, families had to bribe prison officials in order to visit prisoners or provide them food and other necessities. NGOs reported that prisoners whose families bribed prison authorities received preferential treatment including access to visitors, transfer to better cells, and the opportunity to leave cells during the day.
There were reports that officials demanded bribes before allowing prisoners to attend trials or appeal hearings and before releasing inmates who had served full jail terms.
In most prisons there was no separation of adult and juvenile prisoners, of male and female prisoners, or of persons convicted of serious crimes and persons detained for minor offenses. Pretrial detainees were routinely held together with convicted prisoners. LICADHO reported that there were 622 incarcerated minors ages 13 to 17, many of whom were held in prisons that did not have facilities to separate minors from adult prisoners.
The government generally continued to allow international and domestic human rights groups, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, to visit prisons and provide human rights training to prison guards. However, NGOs reported that at times cooperation from local authorities was limited. Authorities curtailed access to pretrial detainees, in particular. The MOI continued to require that lawyers, human rights monitors, and other visitors obtain permission prior to visiting prisoners. The MOI withheld such permission in some politically sensitive cases. NGOs were not allowed to interview prisoners in private.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention; however, at times the government did not respect these prohibitions. On June 7, the National Assembly passed a criminal procedures code, and in August the king signed the law into effect. The new code went allows for pretrial detention of up to six months for misdemeanors and 18 months for felonies. Prior to enactment of this code, the maximum length of pretrial detention for an adult person was six months under the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) code, although the government sometimes held pretrial detainees for longer periods. ADHOC reported that at least 100 persons were illegally arrested and detained during the year. ADHOC stated that 32 of those illegally detained were subsequently freed following detainee complaints, interventions by human rights NGOs, or payment of bribes. ADHOC believed that the actual number of arbitrary arrests and detentions was somewhat higher, because some victims in rural areas did not file complaints due to difficulty in traveling to the NGO's offices or out of fear for their family's security. According to ADHOC, no legal or disciplinary actions were taken against the persons responsible for the illegal actions.
Role of the Police and Security Apparatus
The General Commissariat of the National Police, which is under the supervision of the MOI, manages all civilian police units. The police forces are divided into those who have the authority to make arrests, those without such authority, and the judicial police. Military police are permitted to arrest civilians on military property or when authorized by local governments.
Police officers acted with impunity, and in most cases the government took little or no action. There were reports that police, prosecutors, investigating judges, and presiding judges received bribes from owners of illegal businesses.
The law requires police, prosecutors, and judges to investigate all complaints, including those of police abuses; however, in practice judges and prosecutors rarely conducted an independent investigation prior to a public trial. Presiding judges passed down verdicts based only on written reports from police and witness testimonies. In general police received little professional training. Police who failed to prevent or respond to societal violence were rarely disciplined.
There were no developments in the April 2006 case of an antidrug department and military police officer who shot and injured a well‑known singer, Sovansocheata. No legal action was taken in the April 2006 case of two Brigade 70 military unit officers who shot and injured a person in Phnom Penh. There were no developments in the June 2006 case in which a military officer shot and injured a garment factory worker. In February an investigating judge in Siem Reap Province issued a warrant for the arrest of three police officers who allegedly raped a 12‑year‑old girl in November 2006; however, the suspects remained at large. There were no developments in the pending appeal of the April 2006 acquittal of three judges, two deputy prosecutors, and two court clerks originally convicted, then retried after appeal on finding of a mistrial, on charges of corruption and corruption‑related conspiracy.
Arrest and Detention
The law requires police to obtain a warrant from an investigating judge prior to making an arrest, but police may arrest without a warrant anyone caught in the act of committing a crime. The law allows police to take a person into custody and conduct an investigation for 48 hours, excluding weekends and government holidays, before charges must be filed. In felony cases of exceptional circumstances prescribed by law, police may detain a suspect for an additional 24 hours with the approval of a prosecutor. However, authorities routinely held persons for extended periods before charging them. Many prisoners, particularly those without legal representation, had no opportunity to seek release on bail. Under the new criminal procedures code, accused persons may be arrested and detained for up to 24 hours before meeting with a lawyer, but prisoners routinely were held for several days before gaining access to a lawyer or family members. According to government officials, such prolonged detention largely was a result of the limited capacity of the court system.
LICADHO reported that as of midyear at least 101 pretrial detainees had been detained longer than the six‑month limit. Under the allowable pretrial detainee periods stipulated by the new code, at year's end there were at least 34 such prisoners.
On May 19, two military police officers in Banteay Meanchey Province detained Kim Heang for three days after Kim Heang had a dispute with his neighbor, a regional military official. The two officers made the arrest without a warrant. After an NGO intervened, the officers' commander ordered Kim Heang released. No administrative or legal action was taken against the officers.
On May 25, the Ratanakiri Provincial Court sentenced a 13‑year‑old Jarai ethnic minority youth to eight months and 10 days in prison for stealing brass gongs. The youth was 12 years old when arrested, under the minimum age for imprisonment, but spent more than eight months in pretrial detention. According to ADHOC, on May 25, a prosecutor filed a suit with the appeals court, but at year's end the youth remained in jail.
On August 9, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted six persons and acquitted two charged with planning bombings at the November 2006 Water Festival. Two of the convicted were sentenced in absentia to 12 years in prison. The remaining four received six‑year sentences. Lawyers and NGOs maintained the police did not serve arrest warrants or tell the suspects the charges against them.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provides for an independent judiciary, but the government did not respect judicial independence. The courts were subject to influence and interference by the executive branch, and there was widespread corruption among judges, prosecutors, and court officials.
The court system consists of lower courts, an appeals court, and the Supreme Court. The constitution also mandates a constitutional council, which is empowered to review the constitutionality of laws, and a supreme council of the magistracy, which appoints, oversees, and disciplines judges. The composition of both councils heavily favored the CPP.
There is a separate military court system, which suffered from deficiencies similar to those of the civilian court system. While civilians may fall under military court jurisdiction in some cases, the legal distinction between the military and civil courts sometimes was ignored in practice. Civilians have been called for interrogation by military courts with no apparent jurisdiction in their cases.
On June 12, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) adopted its internal rules to begin prosecuting egregious crimes of the 1975‑79 Khmer Rouge regime. On July 31, the ECCC coinvestigating judges charged Kaing Guek Eav (alias Duch), former Khmer Rouge director of the S‑21 torture prison, or Tuol Sleng, for crimes against humanity and placed him in an ECCC provisional detention center. The ECCC later arrested and detained four more Khmer Rouge leaders and charged them with crimes against humanity and war crimes: Nuon Chea (also known as "Brother Number 2"), Khieu Samphan, Ieng Sary, and Ieng Thirith, who was charged only with crimes against humanity. In August Duch's lawyers filed an appeal against his provisional detention. On December 3, the ECCC pretrial chamber decided unanimously to affirm the detention order and dismiss the appeal.
Trials are public. Juries are not used; the presiding judge possesses the authority to pass a verdict. Defendants have the right to be present and consult with an attorney, confront and question witnesses against them, and present witnesses and evidence on their own behalf. If a defendant cannot afford an attorney, the court is required to provide the defendant with free legal representation; however, the judiciary lacked the resources to provide legal counsel, and most defendants sought assistance from NGOs or went without legal representation. Trials typically were perfunctory, and extensive cross‑examination usually did not take place. Defendants and their attorneys have the right to examine government‑held evidence relevant to their cases; however, at times it was difficult for them to obtain such access, especially if the case was political or involved a high‑ranking government official or well‑connected member of the elite.
Defendants are entitled by law to the presumption of innocence and the right of appeal, but due to pervasive corruption, defendants often were expected to bribe judges to secure a verdict. A citizen's right to appeal sometimes was limited by difficulty in transferring prisoners from provincial prisons to the appeals court in Phnom Penh. Many appeals thus were heard in the absence of the defendant.
A lack of resources, low salaries, and poor training contributed to a high level of corruption and inefficiency in the judicial branch, and the government did not ensure due process. From January through September, the Center for Social Development monitored 1,420 felony and misdemeanor hearings with 2,437 defendants and found trial procedure abuses in the Supreme Court, appeals court, and four lower courts. In a report of trials observed from January to March, the center stated that courts tried 34 percent of 740 defendants in absentia. At the appeals level, defendants were not present during trial in 69 percent of cases. Of defendants charged with felonies, 37 percent had legal representation, compared with 7 percent of those charged with misdemeanors.
Officials reported many suits were pending due to a shortage of judges and courtrooms. NGOs blamed the slow process on court officials who focused on cases from which they could gain financial benefits.
There remained a critical shortage of trained lawyers, particularly outside Phnom Penh. Persons without means to secure counsel often were effectively denied the right to a fair trial. According to the Bar Association, approximately 30 percent of the country's 573 lawyers provided legal counsel to poor persons, although this was inadequate to cover the basic legal rights of all of the country's poor.
Sworn written statements from witnesses and the accused usually constituted the only evidence presented at trials. The accused person's statements sometimes were coerced through beatings or threats, and illiterate defendants often were not informed of the content of written confessions that they were forced to sign. In cases involving military personnel, military officers often exerted pressure on judges of civilian criminal courts to have the defendants released without trial.
Court delays or corrupt practices often allowed accused persons to escape prosecution. Government officials or members of their families who committed crimes often enjoyed impunity.
Although the courts prosecuted some members of the security forces for human rights abuses, impunity for most of those who committed abuses remained a problem. In many criminal cases, rich or powerful accused individuals usually paid money to victims and authorities to drop the criminal charges against them. Authorities were known to urge victims or their families to accept financial restitution in exchange for dropping criminal charges.
Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun remained in prison for the murder of Chea Vichea. On April 12, an appeals court hearing upheld the Phnom Penh Municipal Court decision sentencing them to 20 years each in prison, despite new exculpatory evidence. On June 7, lawyers filed grievances with the Supreme Court and at year's end were awaiting action.
On June 7, the National Assembly passed a criminal procedures code, and in August the king signed the law into effect. As a cornerstone of national law also to be employed at the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, the new code was based on wide international consultation and was viewed as meeting an international standard suitable for the tribunal's trial judges.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
Civil Judicial Procedures and Remedies
The country has a judiciary in civil matters, and citizens are entitled to bring lawsuits seeking damages for human rights violations. Generally, there are both administrative and judicial remedies. However, the judiciary was generally viewed as corrupt, politically biased, and weak, and persons seldom filed complaints because they did not trust the judicial system. The public appeared especially distrusting of the judiciary to act in a transparent manner when a case was in conflict with the government. Enforcing a court order for a civil or criminal case was often problematic. Persons occasionally turned to vigilante justice.
f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence
The law provides for the privacy of residence and correspondence and prohibits illegal searches; however, police routinely conducted searches and seizures without warrants.
There continued to be reports of authorities entering private properties without proper judicial authorization. Due to the forced collectivization during Khmer Rouge rule and the return of thousands of refugees, land ownership often was unclear, and most landowners lacked adequate formal documentation of ownership. The 2001 land law states that any person who peacefully possessed private property without contention for five years prior to the 2001 promulgation of the law has the right to a definitive title to that property. Widespread land speculation fueled disputes and increased tensions between poor rural communities and speculators. The Cadastral Commission, which settles disputes over land that was not registered or where an owner was not given a land certificate, continued to perform its functions slowly. The courts remained responsible for resolving disputes in cases where land was registered or disputants were given land titles. The National Authority for Resolving Land Disputes, established in 2006 to adjudicate land cases, was ineffective.
Problems of inhabitants being forced to relocate continued to occur when officials or businesspersons colluded with local authorities. Some persons also used the court system to intimidate the poor and vulnerable into exchanging their land for compensation below market value. ADHOC reported receiving 382 land‑related cases affecting 19,329 families during the year. During the same period, LICADHO received 98 land‑related cases in Phnom Penh and 13 other provinces affecting a total of 6,048 persons. The poor often had no legal documents to support their land claims and lacked faith in the judicial system. Some of those expelled successfully contested these actions in court, but the majority lost their cases.
On January 23, 200 ethnic Jarai villagers in Ratanakiri Province filed a complaint with the provincial court and a criminal complaint with the provincial prosecutor against Keat Kolney, a well‑connected individual, for confiscation of 1,112 acres of their land in 2004. Many villagers rejected Keat Kolney's settlement offers. On June 19, Keat Kolney sent a letter to the Cambodian Bar Association alleging the legal aid NGO lawyers who represented the villagers trained the villagers to say false things to the media and asked the association to investigate the lawyers. On June 21, Keat Kolney filed criminal complaints accusing the villagers of fraud and the lawyers of inciting villagers to commit fraud. In late July 42 of the 200 villagers retracted earlier statements and said they willingly sold the land to Keat Kolney. At year's end a provincial court investigation continued.
On April 20, approximately 150 military police and police officers armed with guns, electric batons, and tear gas forcibly evicted 117 families from the Mittapheap District in Sihanoukville. Several villagers were injured, and their houses were demolished.
On May 4, 30 L'vea Em District villagers of Kandal Province approached the National Assembly to intervene in an economic land concession. Community families had been farming and inhabiting the disputed 1,730 acres when, on April 25, a Chinese company began digging up the land, acting on a 2006 government concession for development. The company reportedly suspended operations due to villagers' protests.
On May 29, 40 soldiers from ACO Tank Command Headquarters in Kampong Speu Province used an armored vehicle to destroy crops and fences on 60 acres of land occupied by 25 Phnom Srouch District families. Military officials stated the land was part of a shooting range and the villagers had illegally occupied the land. In 2002 the villagers had sought title to their land with the Cadastral Commission, and in 2006 they complained to the National Authority to Resolve Land Disputes, stating they had lived on the land since 1979. At year's end these requests had not resulted in any action.
Eviction notices were served without proper judicial authorization. On July 31, Sihanoukville City Hall issued an eviction notice ordering more than 100 families out of the city's Mittapheap District. Responding to villagers' plea for intervention, the prime minister ordered the Sihanoukville governor to reexamine the case. On May 8, representatives of 146 families of the Phnom Penh Tonle Bassac Group 78 (G78) area made public their own neighborhood development plan. The plan was in response to a June 2006 municipality eviction notice stating the land would be developed for beautification purposes. Many of the families had lived on the land since the 1980s and claimed ownership under the 2001 land law. G78 community members stated that the municipality offered compensation that was approximately equal to 2 percent of the independently assessed market value, plus one plot in a Phnom Penh eviction resettlement site per family. At year's end there were no decisions on these evictions.
On March 3, the CPP Central Committee granted the prime minister sole power to resolve land disputes involving CPP officials. The prime minister then announced a war against illegal land grabbers, warning CPP officials to surrender illegally obtained land or face removal from their positions. As a result, the government claimed that the director general of the military's technical and materials department, Chao Phirun, handed over 495 acres of land and an anonymous CPP official withdrew from a Kandal Province land dispute. Neither official faced reprimand. On March 10, authorities arrested CPP member and military Colonel Te Haing over a 2,500‑acre land dispute in Banteay Meanchey Province. At year's end Te Haing was awaiting trial. In November Tan Seng Hak, a former advisor to CPP Chairperson Chea Sim, was convicted for falsifying documents and giving false testimony in connection with his alleged efforts to take over 740 acres in Phnom Penh. He was sentenced to a total of five years and eight months in prison. There were no developments on the prime minister's May 2006 plan to redistribute 494,210 acres of land to 50,000 farmers in Sihanoukville.
Living conditions worsened at two of the resettlement sites for former residents of the two Phnom Penh communities of Tonle Bassac Sambok Chab and Preah Monivong Hospital areas, whose 1,200 and 168 families, respectively, were evicted in 2006, reportedly through a nontransparent process that may not have included proper judicial authorization. Authorities offered evicted residents relocation site plots, but plots at two of the sites were widely considered to be inadequate compensation. The sites lacked sufficient sanitation facilities, electricity, clean water, health facilities, schools, and central markets and were far from Phnom Penh's commercial center, where residents could earn an adequate income.
The appeals court took no action on a February 2006 complaint by SRP parliamentarian Son Chhay, who was directed by the Siem Reap Provincial Court to sell 7.8 acres of his land to a government agency for an amount below the market price. The appeals court took no action in the 2006 case of 12 persons convicted in connection with a Kampot Province confrontation between 2,000 squatters and local police over the squatters' rights to live on government land. In a 2006 eviction case in Peam Chor District, Prey Veng Province, that left one person dead and four others injured, police who were implicated in the killing accused some of the villagers of robbery, in what NGOs said was an attempt to intimidate the villagers. On November 1, the provincial court questioned seven of the villagers on the robbery charges, and the court investigation continued at year's end. However, there were no new developments in the investigation of the eviction killings and injuries. There were no new developments in the August 2006 Koh Kong Province land dispute in which the Ministry of Agriculture provided two adjacent land concessions to businessperson and CPP senator Ly Yong Phat in contravention of known legal standards.
There were no developments in a 2005 land dispute involving indigenous Phnong hill tribe members and a Chinese company in Mondulkiri Province.
Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
a. Freedom of Speech and Press
The constitution provides for freedom of speech and of the press; however, these rights were not always respected in practice.
The constitution implicitly limits free speech by requiring that it not adversely affect public security. The constitution also declares that the king is "inviolable." In December the Ministry of Information issued a directive that reiterates these limits and prohibits publishers and editors from running stories that insult or defame government leaders and institutions.
The 1995 press law prohibits prepublication censorship or imprisonment for expressing opinions. However, the government continued to use the older UNTAC law to prosecute journalists and others on defamation and disinformation charges. In 2006 the National Assembly amended the UNTAC law, eliminating imprisonment for defamation but not for spreading disinformation, which carries prison sentences of up to three years. In both types of cases, judges can order fines, which may lead to jail time if not paid.
The government and influential individuals used the weak and often politically biased judiciary to file defamation and disinformation suits, both civil and criminal, in an effort to silence critics. In February the Phnom Penh Municipal Court charged Sralanh Khmer of disinformation and insulting the court's director, Chiv Keng. Also in February Sihanoukville Municipal Governor Say Hak filed a defamation suit against pro‑Norodom Ranariddh Party (NRP) newspaper Samleng Yuveachun Khmer (Voice of Khmer Youth) over an article linking him to land grabbing. In July NRP Vice Secretary General Sao Rany filed a defamation suit against Sralahn Khmer for printing a report claiming his daughter had an affair with Prince Ranariddh. In November General Un Den lodged a defamation and disinformation lawsuit against Thach Keth, the publisher of Sralanh Khmer, for printing an article that accused the general of smuggling vehicles across the border from Thailand. At year's end there were no formal decisions in these cases.
In July Phnom Penh Municipality Governor Kep Chuktema filed a disinformation suit against the editor of Samleng Yuveachun Khmer for an article alleging the governor sold City Hall to a private developer. In November the editor paid bail of $500 (two million riel), and at year's end the case was pending with the court.
The constitution states that the country shall not invade any country nor interfere in any other country's internal affairs, directly or indirectly. Making a statement in contravention of this constitutional provision is considered a crime. In the case of at least one Khmer Kampuchea Krom activist, an arrest warrant was outstanding due to his statements about what the government considers to be sovereign Vietnamese territory.
Many interpreted a law passed in 2006 as limiting the right of members of Parliament (MPs) to speak freely. The law declares that MPs may not use their parliamentary immunity to abuse national security, social customs, or an individual's honor. In addition, the law allows an MP to be arrested, charged, and detained prior to the lifting of parliamentary immunity. At year's end no MP had been charged under this law.
All major political parties had reasonable and regular access to the print media. Although the press law does not specifically permit newspapers to receive financial support from political parties, all major Khmer‑language newspapers received such support and were politically aligned. There were an estimated 20 Khmer‑language newspapers published regularly; more than half were considered pro‑CPP, and at least two newspapers were considered to support each of the other main political parties--FUNCINPEC, the SRP, and the NRP. Although the three largest circulation newspapers were considered pro‑CPP, most newspapers criticized the government, particularly on corruption and land grabbing. The prime minister, NRP president Prince Norodom Ranariddh, FUNCINPEC party leaders, and opposition party leader Sam Rainsy frequently came under attack.
The government, military forces, and ruling political party continued to dominate the broadcast media and influence the content of broadcasts. There were approximately 50 radio stations and seven television stations. Most were controlled or strongly influenced by the CPP, although a few were independent or aligned with other parties. In August the Ministry of Information issued a broadcast license to a CPP government official to open a Phnom Penh radio station after denying similar requests since 2003 from the SRP and independent human rights advocacy organizations. In September the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) Voice of Democracy (VOD) again requested a license, but the ministry denied the application, restating previous claims that the media market was saturated. In February the Information Ministry ordered all television and radio stations not to transfer or sell licenses if unable to continue operating and to return the license to the ministry.
Despite being unable to obtain a broadcast license, the VOD radio program, which included independent and often antigovernment views, remained popular and continued broadcasting its program on several radio stations, including the SRP‑aligned radio station FM 93.5. In July CCHR announced that it had transferred management of VOD to the newly established Cambodian Center of Independent Media. Taped programming from Voice of America (VOA) and Radio Free Asia (RFA) Khmer‑language service was also regularly broadcast on Beehive/FM 105, the Women's Media Center FM 102, and Rota Angkor FM 95.5 (Siem Reap) radio stations. Four political parties were each broadcasting daily one‑hour shows on FM 105.
Journalists, publishers, and distributors were also subject to other forms of harassment and intimidation, including death threats. In June the Ministry of Information ordered the confiscation of printed copies of a report by the international NGO Global Witness accusing the prime minister and close relatives and associates of involvement in illegal logging. The report was freely available via the Internet, and local media made references to the report. A June 8 letter signed by Information Minister Khieu Kanharith to Sralanh Khmer demanded the newspaper immediately stop publishing a serialized version of the report or face legal action; the newspaper complied.
In the same period, French‑language newspaper Cambodge Soir closed down, reportedly due to bankruptcy. A few days prior, according to media reports, employees declared a strike because a reporter was dismissed for publishing a story about the Global Witness report. After a closure of several months, the newspaper resumed as a weekly publication.
In October Radio Beehive Director Mam Sonando suspended the NRP's radio show "Royalist Voices" for several days after the program criticized the prime minister. An RFA journalist fled the country reportedly after receiving death threats for his coverage of illegal logging in Kampong Thom Province. The reporter returned several weeks later and resumed work unharmed.
In February the Ministry of Information threatened to close pro‑NRP newspaper Khmer Amatak (Permanent Khmer) for printing an article alleged to have incited tension between the country's two main Buddhist sects, and in October the ministry suspended the newspaper for one month for failing to publish a "correction" the ministry requested regarding a September article involving two senior FUNCINPEC officials.
In early November authorities seized copies of the premier issue of foreign‑funded Free Press Magazine for criticizing retired king Norodom Sihanouk, the prime minister, and other government officials.
In May the prime minister publicly criticized an RFA reporter as "insolent" and "rude" for asking questions about the coalition between the CPP and FUNCINPEC. Purportedly fearing for his personal safety, the reporter went into hiding outside the country. He returned to work a few weeks later without incident.
In June three reporters from the newspapers Sarpotamean Ekkereach Kampuchea (Cambodian Independence News) and Sarpotamean Tasanak Khmer (Khmer Vision News) in Pursat Province alleged that provincial court official bodyguards beat them at gunpoint for trying to take photographs of a truck carrying illegal timber.
On August 4, Oeun Vannak, deputy commander of the Pursat Province military police, allegedly physically attacked journalist Heng Veasna over the journalist's investigation into claims of illegal use of firearms by two military police officers. Heng Veasna filed a complaint with the provincial prosecutor, but at year's end the court had not taken action in the case, and Oeun Vannak continued his military police duty.
In August the home of a Chhbas Ka (Accurate News) newspaper reporter was set on fire twice. The journalist claimed the first fire was set the day after he received a threatening telephone call over his report on illegal logging in Pursat Province. A few days later, provincial authorities charged two suspects with arson. The cases were pending before the court at year's end.
In November a man accused three journalists from the newspaper Samleng Santepheap (Voice of Peace) in Kampong Thom of stealing $1,050 (4.2 million riel) when the reporters visited his home to investigate allegations that he was illegally raising snakehead fish. Police arrested and questioned the reporters but eventually released them after the intervention of a senior official from the Ministry of Information.
In December a VOD reporter investigating the removal of a statue from a pagoda claimed to have been detained by military and police officers, who deleted photographs from his camera before releasing him.
Most reporters and editors privately admitted to some self‑censorship due to fear of government reprisals. In February two major daily Khmer newspapers refused to print advertisements demanding justice for the two men imprisoned for the killing of union leader Chea Vichea. Reporters for VOA, RFA, and some opposition newspapers worked from unmarked offices and reported stories using pseudonyms.
The government‑controlled national television and radio stations broadcast live or taped sessions of National Assembly debates; however, in several instances these broadcasts were censored. National radio and television stations broadcast some human rights, social action, public health, education, and civil society programming produced by domestic NGOs.
The government occasionally restricted media access to some government facilities. The constitution mandates media access to National Assembly sessions, and the National Assembly allowed reporters to enter its grounds upon clearance by its security office. In 2005 the Phnom Penh Municipal Court chief ordered that reporters must have written permission to bring recording devices into the courtroom and to interview court officials. Such permission rarely was sought, and there were no reports of the court denying permission. A July 2006 Council of Ministers directive prohibiting government officials and employees from speaking to the media or the public about government corruption remained in effect.
In August government authorities confiscated digital video discs with images of bodies in an airplane crash in Kampot Province, stating that the images would create fear among tourists. The video discs remained readily available in Phnom Penh and other areas of the country.
There were no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitored e‑mail or Internet chat rooms. Individuals and groups could engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e‑mail. Although the International Telecommunication Union estimated the country's Internet penetration was 0.3 percent in 2006, in urban areas Internet access was widely available through Internet cafes and home subscriptions.
Academic Freedom and Cultural Events
In general there were no legal impediments to academic freedom. However, scholars tended to be careful when teaching politically related subjects for fear of offending politicians. In February the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced Tieng Narith, a former professor at the Buddhist University of the Royal Academy of Preah Sihanouk Reach, to two and a half years in prison for teaching from a self‑published text containing antigovernment material. The verdict also ordered a fine of $1,250 (5.25 million riels) or two additional years in prison. Tieng Narith's family claimed that he was mentally ill, and during the trial the court ordered a psychiatric examination, the results of which were kept confidential. It was unclear how the medical exam results affected the case, if at all. At year's end the case was under appeal.
There were no government restrictions on cultural events.
b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
Freedom of Assembly
The constitution provides for freedom of peaceful assembly, but at times the government did not respect this right in practice. The government required that a permit be obtained in advance of a march or demonstration. The government routinely did not issue permits to groups critical of the ruling party or of nations with which the government had friendly relations. Authorities cited the need for stability and public security as reasons for denying permits. Police forcibly dispersed groups that assembled without a permit, often resulting in minor injuries to some demonstrators.
ADHOC reported that out of 98 protests--55 of which were related to land and 26 to labor disputes--police and military police dispersed 17 protests, three of which were by labor protesters, 10 by land rights protesters, and four by Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks. However, the government permitted some human rights‑related marches and demonstrations. On December 10, the government permitted a Human Rights Day march of 500 human rights activists, monks, and other persons and a rally of an estimated 2,500 persons in Phnom Penh. In the previous two years, such rallies without marches occurred in an enclosed space.
On February 27, police and military police dispersed 60 Khmer Kampuchea Krom Buddhist monks demonstrating at the Vietnamese embassy in Phnom Penh during a state visit by the Vietnamese president. Demonstrators assembled to support Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks in Vietnam who had been defrocked and arrested, urging their release and reinstatement as monks. The next morning one monk protester was found dead with his throat cut. On March 16, police and local authorities in Kandal Province prevented the deceased monk's Khmer Kampuchea Krom community members and monks from holding his funeral.
On April 20, police and municipal authorities dispersed 80 Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks assembled at the Vietnamese embassy trying to deliver a petition in protest of alleged Vietnamese government rights abuses of Khmer Kampuchea Krom living in Vietnam. The protesters decided to go to another embassy to present the petition. On the way a group of unidentified, non‑Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks and laypersons aggressively intercepted the demonstrators and attempted to disperse them. In the ensuing scuffle, one of the Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks was injured. Authorities did not intervene in the confrontation and did not conduct an investigation. On December 17, 40 monks sought again to deliver a petition to Vietnamese embassy officials for the release of Tim Sakhorn and other Khmer Kampuchea Krom monks imprisoned in Vietnam, and also for the return of land that they claimed the Vietnamese government seized from Khmer Kampuchea Krom persons in southern Vietnam. Police attempted to disperse the crowd, but the monks refused to disband, and violence broke out on part of both the police and the monks. A local NGO reported that six monks were injured; police stated that some of the police sustained minor injuries.
On November 26, Ratanakiri provincial police blocked the CCHR from holding a public forum in Kong Yu Village, where community members were embroiled in a land dispute with Keat Kolney. Police gave conflicting reasons for preventing the forum from taking place (see section 1.f.).
On June 8, Supreme Patriarch Non Ngeth and Minister of Cults and Religious Affairs Khun Haing signed a directive prohibiting monks from participating in protests, strikes, riots, or marches. According to media reports, a constitutional council member stated the ban violated the constitution.
Freedom of Association
The constitution provides for freedom of association, and the government generally respected this right in practice; however, the government did not effectively enforce the freedom of association provisions of the labor law.
Membership in the Khmer Rouge, which ruled the country from 1975 to 1979 and after its overthrow conducted an armed insurgency against the government, is illegal, as is membership in an armed group.
c. Freedom of Religion
The constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the government generally respected this right in practice. The constitution also prohibits discrimination based on religion, and minority religions experienced little or no official discrimination. Buddhism is the state religion, and more than 93 percent of the population is Buddhist. Ethnic Cham Muslims constitute most of the remaining population.
The law requires all religious groups, including Buddhists, to submit applications to the Ministry of Cults and Religious Affairs to construct places of worship and conduct religious activities. However, there is no penalty for failing to register. In July the Ministry of Cults and Religious Affairs issued a directive restating a 2003 order prohibiting public proselytizing, which continued to be loosely enforced. On August 10, authorities in Phnom Penh dispersed a gathering of approximately 3,000 Christians, stating that organizers did not have proper permits. Prior to the gathering, organizers obtained a permit from the MOI but had not received a response on a request pending with the Ministry of Cults and Religious Affairs.
Societal Abuses and Discrimination
Minority religions experienced little or no societal discrimination. There was no known Jewish community in the country, and there were no reports of anti‑Semitic acts.
For a more detailed discussion, see the 2007 International Religious Freedom Report.
d. Freedom of Movement, Internally Displaced Persons, Protection of Refugees, and Stateless Persons
The law provides for freedom of movement within the country, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these rights in practice.
The constitution prohibits forced exile, and the government did not employ it.
Protection of Refugees
The laws provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status in accordance with the 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 protocol, and the government has established a system for providing protection to refugees. The convention and its protocol have had the full force of the law in the country since accession in 1992. According to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the government abides by the convention and international customary law on refugees. The government allows the UNHCR to process asylum seekers and assist refugees while they are in the country.
A memorandum of understanding that the government signed in 2005 with the UNHCR and the government of Vietnam to resolve the situation of Montagnards under UNHCR protection remained in effect. Asylum seekers who reached the UNHCR Phnom Penh office were processed with government cooperation. During the year there were 449 new arrivals seeking asylum with the UNHCR. According to the UNHCR, 97 Montagnard and 20 non‑Montagnard refugees departed for a third country, while authorities deported 30 rejected Montagnard asylum seekers to Vietnam, and 33 Montagnards voluntarily returned to their country of origin. At year's end there were 467 Montagnards in UNHCR protection sites in Phnom Penh, which included 101 Montagnards who arrived in previous years. According to the UNHCR, during the year no refugees requested local integration.
In practice the government provided some protection against refoulement, the return of persons to a country where there is reason to believe they feared persecution. Through the assistance of the UNHCR, during the year the government provided temporary protection to individuals who may not qualify as refugees under the 1951 convention and the 1967 protocol, affording such protection to approximately 150 persons. However, an NGO based in Ratanakiri Province reported that local police unofficially returned 59 asylum-seeking Montagnards to Vietnam without UNHCR review.
On April 20, Ratanakiri provincial police arrested two persons on charges of human trafficking for their roles assisting Montagnards. NGOs claimed the suspects provided asylum seekers food, shelter, and transportation to the UNHCR office in Phnom Penh once they had crossed the border from Vietnam. At year's end the suspects had been released with charges against them dropped.
An NGO claimed that local authorities at the border with Vietnam continued searches for Montagnards when they received information about new arrivals of Montagnards. There were unconfirmed reports that Vietnamese authorities offered incentive awards to Cambodian border police who returned Vietnamese refugees to Vietnam and that Vietnamese secret police covertly conducted searches for Vietnamese refugees on the Cambodian side of the border.
The country had habitual residents who were de facto stateless, and the government had not effectively implemented laws or policies to provide such persons the opportunity to gain nationality. Under the nationality law, citizenship is derived by birth from a foreign mother and father who were born and living legally in the country, or from a mother or father who has Cambodian citizenship. A study commissioned by the UNHCR estimated that several thousand potentially stateless persons lived in the country. However, the study's estimated number of such persons came from anecdotal evidence of NGOs that provided services to disenfranchised communities, including persons with no proof of nationality, and not from a survey of stateless persons; therefore, local UNHCR representatives did not consider the figure conclusive.
The UNHCR stated that the country's potentially stateless population included mostly ethnic Vietnamese. According to an NGO that worked with ethnic Vietnamese, individuals without proof of nationality often did not have access to formal employment, education, marriage registration, the courts, and land ownership. The most common reason for statelessness was lack of proper documents from the country of origin.
Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Government
The constitution provides citizens the right to change their government peacefully, and citizens generally exercised this right in practice through periodic elections on the basis of universal suffrage. Suffrage is voluntary for all citizens age 18 years and older.
Elections and Political Participation
On April 1, the country held elections for 11,353 chiefs, first deputies, second deputies, and councilors for 1,621 commune councils. The CPP won 70.4 percent of the positions, the SRP 23.4 percent, NRP 3.7 percent, and FUNCINPEC 2.4 percent.
Most observers agreed the commune council elections were the least violent and best organized elections ever held in the country. While there were problems at some polling stations, NGOs, opposition parties, monitors, and others disagreed as to how and whether the problems affected the overall outcome of the elections. Three NGOs reported that election officials did not allow some registered voters to vote because of voter registration list discrepancies such as mistyped and misspelled names or absence of names from the voter list, often due to names transferred to different polling stations without informing the voter. Additionally, NGOs and opposition parties complained that the CPP started advertising weeks or months in advance through the mostly CPP‑dominated media without reprisal. NGOs reported that on election day, some ruling party incumbents illegally issued voter registration documents, stood watch in some polling station areas where local authorities were prohibited, and provided assistance to voters in these prohibited areas.
Parties and individuals were free to be candidates without restrictions. On March 13, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced NRP president Prince Norodom Ranariddh in absentia to 18 months in prison and a $150,000 (600 million riel) fine on charges of breach of trust. The prince chose self‑exile during the election campaign and on election day rather than face the charges. On October 3, the appeals court rejected his appeal of the Phnom Penh court's decision. Plans to appeal this decision had not been realized by year's end.
Some NGOs and political parties alleged that membership in the dominant CPP party provided advantages, such as gifts or access to government emergency aid.
Traditional culture limited the role of women in government; however, women took an active part in the 2003 national elections. The number of women increased in the National Assembly, Senate, and senior government positions. There were 22 women in the 123‑seat National Assembly, nine women in the 61‑seat Senate, and 24 women working as ministers, secretaries of state, undersecretaries of state, and National Election Commission officials. Women also served as advisors, and there were 13 female judges in the municipal and provincial courts, appeals court, and Supreme Court. In the April commune council elections, 14.6 percent of the elected councillors were women, of whom 67 were elected as chiefs. This was an increase from the 2002 commune council elections, when women won 9 percent of the total positions.
There were four members of minorities--two Cham and two other ethnic minorities--in the National Assembly. There also were six members of minorities in the Senate. At least eight officials in senior positions in the government were from minority groups.
Government Corruption and Transparency
There is no anticorruption law, and only a few provisions of other laws provide criminal penalties for official corruption. Officials frequently engaged in corrupt practices with impunity. The World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators reflected that corruption was a severe problem.
In 2005 the prime minister instructed the Ministry of National Assembly‑Senate Relations and Inspection to prepare a draft anticorruption law. As of year's end, observers had not seen a revised draft since September 2006, and the issue was pending with the Council of Ministers.
Corruption was considered endemic and extended throughout all segments of society, including the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. Public perception of corruption was widespread. A 2006 Economic Institute of Cambodia assessment found that the private sector perceived the judiciary to be the most corrupt institution in the country, followed by the tax and customs services, public health care, and police. Meager salaries contributed to "survival corruption" among low‑level public servants, while a culture of impunity enabled corruption to flourish among senior officials.
The Economic Institute's 2006 assessment of corruption in the private sector estimated that in 2005 private sector unofficial payments to public officials totaled $330 million riels. The assessment also found that the larger the private firm, the larger the payments required by government officials. The same study found that approximately 25 percent of potential taxes were collected from the private sector in 2005, representing a loss to the government of approximately $400 million riels. In June Global Witness published a report charging high‑level government officials with corruption related to illegal logging. Some observers and many government officials criticized the report as noncredible based on its heavy reliance on anonymous sources.
The National Archives Law allows unlimited access to informational documents in the public archive. However, the law grants access to other unspecified government documents only after 20 years, and documents affecting national security and preservation of personal lives would be released after 40 and 120 years, respectively. In practice the government occasionally denied access to information, citing reasons of confidentiality or national security.
Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials often cooperated with human rights workers in performing their investigations; however, there were numerous reports of lack of cooperation or even intimidation by local authorities throughout the country.
There were approximately 40 human rights NGOs in the country, but only a small portion of them were actively involved in organizing training programs or investigating abuses.
Domestic and international human rights organizations faced threats and harassment from local officials. These took the form of restrictions on and disruptions during gatherings sponsored by NGOs, verbal intimidation, threats of legal action, and bureaucratic obstruction.
On May 15, a CCHR coordinator went into hiding claiming that Sihanoukville authorities threatened to arrest him on charges of forming an illegal armed force for his role organizing a resistance effort to a forced eviction in Sihanoukville's Mittapheap District. He returned to work a few weeks later without incident.
There were no developments in the May 2006 case of an ADHOC activist temporarily detained in Koh Kong Province for photographing a confrontation between villagers and officials.
In January the UN Special Representative of the Secretary‑General for human rights in Cambodia, Yash Ghai, submitted to the UN Human Rights Council a report on his March 2006 visit expressing concerns about land grabbing and government land concessions. Afterward the prime minister publicly called the special representative derogatory names, refusing to meet with him ever again. In December Yash Ghai made a 10‑day assessment visit to the country during which the prime minister reiterated his opinions and no government official granted him a meeting.
The Cambodian National Human Rights Commission remained largely inactive. The committee did not have regular meetings or a transparent operating process.
Section 5 Discrimination, Societal Abuses, and Trafficking in Persons
The constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, color, or language; however, the government did not generally protect these rights.
The law prohibits rape and assault; nevertheless, local and international NGOs reported that violence against women, including domestic violence and rape, was common. Rape is a criminal offense and punishable by a prison sentence of between five and 10 years, according to the UNTAC law. Spousal rape and domestic abuse are not recognized as separate crimes. A case of spousal rape could be prosecuted as "rape," "causing injury," or "indecent assault," but such charges were rare. The domestic violence law criminalizes domestic violence but does not specifically set out penalties. However, the UNTAC law on battery and injury can be used to penalize domestic violence offenses, with penalties ranging from two months to five years' imprisonment.
According to one NGO, there were 1,025 cases of domestic violence and 221 cases of rape reported in three provinces. Of these cases, courts tried 104 and 28, respectively, resulting in successful conviction in five cases of domestic violence and 20 cases of rape. LICADHO documented 209 cases of domestic violence affecting 213 victims in 12 provinces during the same time period. The MOI's antitrafficking department investigated 529 cases of violence against women and children, resulting in the arrest of 582 perpetrators and rescue of 771 victims. Of the 582 arrests, 458 were for rape and attempted rape. Twelve cases of rape resulted in the death of the victims. A legal advocacy NGO reported receiving 84 cases of domestic violence, 34 of which went to trial during the year. The number of cases likely underreported the scope of the problem, due to ineffective enforcement and the fact that women were afraid to make complaints against perpetrators. NGOs reported that enforcement of the domestic violence law was weak, authorities continued to avoid involvement in domestic disputes, and victims frequently were reluctant to pursue formal complaints.
The government supported NGOs that provided training for poor women vulnerable to spousal abuse, prostitution, and trafficking. A local media center, an NGO, and the Ministry of Women's Affairs produced programming on women's issues. NGOs provided shelters for women in crisis.
The constitution prohibits prostitution; however, there is no specific legislation against working as a prostitute. Trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution was a serious problem, despite laws against procuring and kidnapping for purposes of sexual exploitation. There were reports that police abused prostitutes. Despite sporadic crackdowns on brothel operators in Phnom Penh, prostitution and related trafficking persisted. Estimates of the number of working prostitutes ranged from 14,725 to 18,250. Sex tourism was a problem, fueled by pervasive poverty and the perception of impunity.
The labor law has provisions against sexual harassment in the workplace but does not specify penalties. The International Labor Organization (ILO) reported that sexual harassment in the industrial sector was rare.
The constitution contains explicit language providing for equal rights for women, equal pay for equal work, and equal status in marriage. In practice women had equal property rights, the same legal status to bring divorce proceedings, and equal access to education and some jobs; however, cultural traditions continued to limit the ability of women to reach senior positions in business and other areas. Women often were concentrated in low‑paying jobs and largely were excluded from management positions. Men made up the vast majority of the military, police, and civil service.
The Ministry of Women's Affairs, mandated to protect the rights of women and promote gender equality in society, continued its Neary Ratanak (Women as Precious Gems) program. The program aimed to improve the image of women through gender mainstreaming, enhanced participation of women in economic and political life, and protection of women's rights.
The constitution provides for children's rights, and the government made the welfare of children a specific goal. The government relied on international aid to fund most child social welfare programs, resulting in only modest funds for problems that affect children.
In 2002 the government instituted a modernized birth registration system administered by the MOI, which reported the program successfully registered 91 percent of births in 2006. The system did not include special outreach to minority communities. The government failed to register all births, resulting in discrimination, including the denial of public services. A study commissioned by the UNHCR on statelessness in the country stated that the birth registration process often excludes children of ethnic minorities and stateless persons. NGOs that provided services to disenfranchised communities reported that children without birth registration were often denied access to education and healthcare. They stated that later in life the same individuals may be unable to access employment, own property, vote, and use the legal system.
Children were affected adversely by an inadequate educational system. Education was free, but not compulsory, through grade nine. Many children left school to help their families in subsistence agriculture, began school at a late age, or did not attend school at all. In 2005 the Ministry of Education reported that 91 percent of eligible children were enrolled in primary school, but this number did not reflect attendance. After primary school, 26 percent of eligible students attended junior high and 9 percent attended high school. Despite a school construction program, schools were overcrowded and lacked sufficient equipment. In rural areas schools often provided only a few years of education. According to ministry data, 46 percent of schools lacked drinking water and 37 percent had no toilets. Teacher salaries were irregularly paid and inadequate to support a decent standard of living, leading to demands for unofficial payments from parents, which poor families could not afford. The government did not deny girls equal access to education; however, families with limited resources often gave priority to boys. In many areas schools were remote and transportation was a problem. This especially affected girls due to safety concerns in traveling between their homes and schools.
Boys and girls had equal access to state‑provided medical care.
Child abuse was believed to be common, although statistics were not available. Child rape remained a serious problem; a local NGO reported 199 cases of rape and attempted rape committed on persons under age 18, two of which resulted in death. Twenty‑nine of the cases involved children below age five. Sexual intercourse with a person under age 15 is illegal; however, child prostitution and trafficking in children occurred. During the year raids on brothels rescued underage girls trafficked for prostitution. The MOI reported arrests of seven foreign pedophiles. Some children were engaged in prostitution for survival, without third‑party involvement.
A domestic NGO estimated that more than 1,200 street children in Phnom Penh had no relationship with their families and more than 10,000 children worked on the streets but returned to families in the evenings. An estimated 500 to 1,500 children lived with their families on the streets in provincial towns. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Youth Rehabilitations provided lower statistics, reporting 3,084 street children nationwide in 2005.
A study conducted by a local NGO stated that in September 2006 there were 37 children under the age of six living with their mothers in prison, and those children were subjected to mistreatment by prison guards and faced physical dangers from adult criminal cellmates. The children generally lacked proper nutrition and education.
Child labor was a problem in the informal sector of the economy.
Trafficking in Persons
The law prohibits trafficking in persons; however, the country was a source, destination, and transit country for men, women, and children trafficked for sexual exploitation and labor. A 2003 study estimated the number of trafficking victims in the sex industry to be 2,000, approximately 80 percent of whom were ethnic Vietnamese women and girls. Children were trafficked domestically for sexual exploitation and labor. Some Vietnamese women and girls were trafficked through the country for exploitation in the commercial sex trade in other Asian countries.
Children were trafficked to Thailand and Vietnam for begging, soliciting, street vending, and flower selling. The children frequently were placed into debt bondage to beg or sell, or they formed part of organized begging rings even when there was no debt or economic hardship involved. Women as well as children were trafficked to Malaysia and Thailand for sexual exploitation and forced labor in factories or as domestic servants, while men were trafficked for forced labor in the agriculture, fishing, and construction sectors.
Trafficking victims, especially those trafficked for sexual exploitation, faced the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. In some cases victims were detained and physically and mentally abused by traffickers, brothel owners, and clients.
Local traffickers covered specific small geographic areas and acted as middlemen for larger trafficking networks. Organized crime groups, employment agencies, and marriage brokers were believed to have some degree of involvement. Traffickers used a variety of methods to acquire victims. In many cases victims were lured by promises of legitimate employment or travel documents. In other cases acquaintances, friends, and family members sold the victims or received payment for helping deceive them. Young children, the majority of them girls, were often "pledged" as collateral for loans by desperately poor parents; the children were responsible for repaying the loan and the accumulating interest. A September report by the International Organization for Migration (IOM) stated that child domestic workers, particularly those used as collateral or placed into debt bondage, were more likely to be trafficked and to enter commercial sexually exploitive activities.
The law establishes a prison sentence of 15 to 20 years for a person convicted of trafficking in persons under 15 years of age; the penalty is 10 to 15 years for trafficking persons age 15 or older. According to the MOI, police investigated 529 cases of violence against women and children, including child sexual exploitation, rape, debauchery, and human trafficking. The investigations resulted in the arrest of 582 offenders, of whom 46 were arrested for cross border and domestic trafficking. However, NGOs continued to report the general failure of law enforcement and other government officials to act on tip‑offs.
The Ministries of Interior, Women's Affairs, and Justice had primary responsibility to combat trafficking in persons. In April the government established a National Task Force to serve as an interministerial antitrafficking coordination body. The task force included an oversight body involving the top government officials. There was a Department of Anti‑Human Trafficking and Juvenile Protection, and the MOI operated specialized antitrafficking divisions in all provinces and municipalities. While the government arrested and prosecuted traffickers and continued its support for prevention and protection programs through collaboration with foreign and domestic NGOs and international organizations, its antitrafficking efforts continued to be hampered by corruption and a weak judicial system. It was widely believed that some law enforcement and other government officials received bribes that facilitated the sex trade and trafficking in persons.
On March 16, the Sihanoukville Municipal Court acquitted the owner of O Pi Guesthouse and an employee of all charges and convicted another employee of a lesser charge of pimping, sentencing her to a two‑year imprisonment plus a three‑year suspended sentence. Erratic official behavior during the trial and the light penalty raised concerns that there was an exchange of bribes in return for light treatment of the case.
On March 21, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court acquitted Meng Say, former chief of the Phnom Penh antitrafficking unit, who was suspended in 2006 for extorting money from South Korean nationals. One police officer remained in jail in connection with the 2006 Phnom Penh Municipal Court case of three police officers sentenced to five to seven years in prison for trafficking‑related corruption. Two of the officers appealed their cases; there was no court action on the appeal, and the two officers had not started serving their sentences.
On August 1, the Sihanoukville Municipal Court tried a pimping case but acquitted the suspect, citing lack of evidence. Observers reported irregularities in the case hearing, and the case was under appeal at year's end.
On August 9, a royal decree directed the Supreme Council of the Magistracy to dismiss Appeals Court President Ly Vouch Leng. The directive was issued for her alleged acceptance of bribes in exchange for the release of human traffickers who were running the Chhay Hour II brothel in Phnom Penh. Three Supreme Council of Magistracy officials were also removed in connection with the case, and three appeals court judges and one deputy prosecutor received official letters of reprimand. Ly Vouch Leng was transferred to an unknown position in the Ministry of Justice; no charges were brought against her. The Ministries of Interior and Justice reported their investigations continued.
A legal advocacy NGO reported that five trafficking cases went to trial during the year, resulting in two convictions. For the same period, the MOI reported five convictions on human trafficking charges with sentences ranging from four to 15 years in prison. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court reported 49 convictions of human trafficking offenders from January to October. Police, court officials, and judges often did not separate victims from perpetrators during raids, arrests, and trials. In some cases officials spoke and acted as though victims were perpetrators. During a March 9 Sihanoukville trafficking trial, the presiding judge spoke harshly to underage trafficking victims in the courtroom and acquitted two of the alleged perpetrators.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Youth Rehabilitations (MOSAVY) referred trafficking victims to NGOs, which provided most assistance to victims. The government participated as a partner in a number of these efforts; however, its contributions were severely hampered by limited resources. NGOs provided intake screening services to identify trafficking victims. Some victims were encouraged by NGOs and the MOI to file complaints against perpetrators; however, in the general climate of impunity, victim protection was problematic, and victims were known to be intimidated into abandoning their cases. Social stigma against women who were prostitutes, victims of sexual assault, or victims of sex trafficking made it difficult for victims to reintegrate into families, communities, and society.
The trafficking law contains no provisions to protect foreign victims from being charged under immigration laws, but during the year there were no reported cases of trafficking victims being treated as illegal immigrants. The MOSAVY worked with the IOM to repatriate trafficked victims from Thailand and Vietnam to Cambodia, and from Cambodia to Vietnam. However, repatriation to Vietnam continued to be a long and arduous process.
The MOSAVY repatriated from Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia 845 child and adult victims, as well as others vulnerable to becoming victims, and reintegrated them with their families. With financial and technical support from the IOM, the MOSAVY repatriated eight trafficked Vietnamese girls to Vietnam.
Both the government and international donors had programs to prevent child labor or remove children from labor. The country is a signatory to the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking, whose activities include ensuring the legal, social, and community protection of victims of trafficking; strengthening law enforcement capacity to combat trafficking; and building a comprehensive response involving all relevant ministries. Several ministries--including the Ministry of Women's Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism--had antitrafficking initiatives to reduce child labor. Donors supported programs to combat child labor implemented by the ILO and World Education, among others.
The MOSAVY worked with the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) and local NGOs to manage community‑based networks aimed at preventing trafficking.
Persons with Disabilities
There is no law explicitly prohibiting discrimination against persons with disabilities. The government does not require that buildings or government services be accessible to persons with disabilities. The government prohibits persons with disabilities from being teachers in public schools. On October 1, the government signed the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Programs administered by various NGOs brought about substantial improvements in the treatment and rehabilitation of persons who had lost limbs, but they faced considerable societal discrimination, especially in obtaining skilled employment.
There are no legal limitations on the rights of persons with disabilities to vote or participate in civic affairs, but the government did not make any concerted effort to assist them in becoming more civically engaged. The MOSAVY is responsible for making policy to protect the rights of persons with disabilities and for rehabilitation and vocational skill training for persons with disabilities.
The rights of minorities under the 1996 nationality law are not explicit; constitutional protections are extended only to "Khmer people." Citizens of Chinese and Vietnamese ethnicity constituted the largest ethnic minorities. Ethnic Chinese citizens were accepted in society, but animosity continued toward ethnic Vietnamese, who were seen as a threat to the nation and culture. Some groups continued to make strong anti‑Vietnamese statements. They complained of political control of the CPP by the Vietnamese government, border encroachment, and other problems for which they held ethnic Vietnamese at least partially responsible.
The government often ignored efforts by indigenous communities to protect their ancestral lands and natural resources. In spite of the 2001 land law, which calls for the registration of communal lands of indigenous people, little was done to implement communal land titling. NGOs called for a moratorium on land sales and land concessions affecting indigenous communities. International and local NGOs were active in educating the indigenous communities about their land rights and providing legal representation in disputes.
On March 9, more than 200 indigenous villagers in Stung Treng Province protested the clearing of community forest land by four companies to which the government allegedly illegitimately granted timber concessions. The land had long been used by indigenous villagers for subsistence farming, hunting, and resin production. In May provincial authorities created a special committee to resolve the problem, but the committee did not take any action.
On March 15, more than 500 Jarai indigenous families in Ratanakiri Province demanded the removal of local officials who they alleged were involved in the fraudulent sale of more than 3,000 acres of their communal land. In September 2006 the villagers learned their land had been sold when they saw workers demarcating it as private property. The villagers submitted a complaint to provincial authorities, but authorities did not respond to the complaint.
In early August a Ratanakiri provincial official prevented Tampoun indigenous villagers from burying their dead on land that had served as their traditional burial ground since 1979. The provincial court stated it would arrest anyone who tried to bury bodies there, claiming the land belonged to the provincial finance department director. Authorities sanctioned a new burial ground approximately 500 yards from the traditional plot. The villagers enlisted the help of an NGO and planned to file a suit with the provincial court.
During the August 9 commemoration of the International Day for Indigenous Peoples, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights noted the government's failure to protect and implement the rights of indigenous people to their lands, territories, and natural resources. The UN commissioner called for swift action to halt land grabbing in tribal areas, particularly the growing number of economic land concessions and mining licenses granted without community consultation.
Other Societal Abuses and Discrimination
Societal discrimination against those infected with HIV/AIDS remained a problem in rural areas; however, discrimination was moderated by HIV/AIDS awareness programs. There was no official discrimination against those infected with HIV/AIDS. There were no reported cases of sexual orientation discrimination in employment, housing, statelessness, or access to education or health care. However, homosexuality was typically treated with fear and suspicion, and there were few support groups based on sexual orientation where such cases could have been reported.
Section 6 Worker Rights
a. The Right of Association
The labor law provides private-sector workers in the formal economy the right to join the trade union of their choice without prior authorization. However, the government's enforcement of this right was selective. Membership in trade unions or employee associations is not compulsory, and workers are free to withdraw from such organizations, although a few unions attempted to intimidate workers who wanted to withdraw. Unions may affiliate freely, but the law does not address explicitly their right to affiliate internationally. While the law applies to foreign workers, it does not apply to civil servants, including teachers, judges, and military personnel, or to workers in the informal sector. Personnel in the air and maritime transportation industries are not entitled to the full protections of the law but are free to form unions.
The vast majority of the country worked in the informal sector, primarily as subsistence rice farmers, vendors, or skilled or unskilled laborers. Only a small fraction, estimated at less than 1 percent, of the labor force was unionized. Unions were concentrated in the garment and footwear industries, where approximately 40 to 50 percent of the 350,000 workers were union members. The Cambodian Tourism and Service Workers Federation represented 4,000 hotel, casino, and airport workers. Of the 31 national labor federations and confederations, 26 were allied with the government, four were independent, and one had pro‑opposition leanings.
The Cambodia Independent Teachers Association (CITA), registered as an "association" due to prohibitions on public sector unions, represented 8,150 of the country's 89,000 teachers. CITA marches and other protests were often forbidden, although the union reported no direct government interference in day‑to‑day activities. Some members feared that CITA affiliation could hamper their chance of career advancement, according to union officials. Another public sector association, the Cambodian Independent Civil Servants' Association (CICA), represented approximately 500 officials from ministries, provincial departments, and commune councils, out of approximately 100,000 civil servants nationwide. CICA leaders alleged that fears of harassment or demotion prevented other civil servants from joining.
Some independent and pro‑opposition unions and federations complained of unnecessary delays and costs in registering with the government.
Unions were generally seen as slowly gaining strength, but many were not able to adequately represent member interests due to insufficient resources, training, and experience. In addition, corruption plagued unions, employers, and government officials, hampering legitimate industrial relations. Violence, harassment, and intimidation between rival unions were common.
On February 24, two unidentified men shot and killed local union leader Hy Vuthy as he left the Suntex garment factory after completing his night shift. Since 2005 Suntex and Bright Sky factories, which share a compound, have been the scene of fierce interunion rivalry and violence. Hy Vuthy was a member of the country's largest union, the Free Trade Union of Workers in the Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC), which alleged that he might have been killed because of his labor work. No suspects were arrested. Two other FTUWKC leaders--national FTUWKC president Chea Vichea and local union leader Ros Sovannareth--were killed in 2004.
In some factories persons employed in management appeared to have established their own unions, supported promanagement unions, or compromised union leaders. Union leaders from across the political spectrum complained that the Khmer Youth Federation of Trade Unions habitually threatened strikes to extort money from management and threatened and harassed workers from other unions. Independent union leaders complained that the progovernment Cambodian Coalition of Trade Unions frequently intervened in the affairs of other unions, extorted money from management in exchange for discouraging workers from conducting legal strikes and demonstrations, and threatened rival union leaders.
Enforcement of the right of association and freedom from antiunion discrimination was poor. Government enforcement was hampered by a lack of political will and by confused financial and political relationships with employers and union leaders. The government also suffered from a lack of resources, including trained, experienced labor inspectors, in part because it did not pay staff adequate salaries. The Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training (MOLVT) often decided in favor of employees but rarely used its legal authority to penalize employers who defied its orders, instead referring many cases to an arbitration council.
There were credible reports of antiunion harassment by employers, including the dismissal of union leaders, in garment factories and other enterprises. Employers sometimes used the courts to dismiss or punish union leaders. In two cases union leaders were charged with inciting workers to strike, destroying private property, and attempting to incite workers to commit assault. At year's end the cases were pending. On several occasions dismissed union leaders accepted cash settlements after unsuccessfully appealing to the government to enforce laws requiring their reinstatement. At other times the government upheld labor rights. For example, the MOLVT formally warned 1,032 companies of legal violations, fined 10 companies, and charged five companies with violation of the labor law and regulations. The MOLVT sent 83 cases of unresolved labor disputes to the Arbitration Council.
b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
The law provides for the right to organize and bargain collectively, but the government's enforcement of these rights was inconsistent. Wages were generally set by market forces, except in the case of civil servants, whose wages were set by the government. Garment-sector workers were guaranteed a minimum wage of $50 per month (210,000 riels).
During the year there were 19 collective bargaining agreements registered with the MOLVT. Most were conciliation agreements that did not meet international collective bargaining standards. Only six genuine collective bargaining agreements existed within the garment industry, 10 at hotels, and one covering contract workers at the two international airports.
A 2001 regulation establishes procedures to allow unions to demonstrate that they represent workers for purposes of collective bargaining. The regulation also establishes requirements for employers and unions regarding collective bargaining and provides union leaders with additional protection from dismissal. The Bureau of Labor Relations is responsible for facilitating the process of union registration and certification of "most representative status" for unions, which entitles a union representing an absolute majority of workers in a given enterprise to represent all of the workers in that establishment. However, the "most representative" registration process was considered cumbersome, and international observers reported that government lists of "most representative unions" included management‑controlled unions and unions whose "most representative" status should have expired years before. The government began reexamining its "most representative" certification process with support from international organizations and a diplomatic mission.
The law provides for the right to strike and protects strikers from reprisal. The law stipulates that strikes can be held only after several requirements have been met, including the failure of other methods of dispute resolution (such as negotiation, conciliation, and arbitration), a secret-ballot vote of union membership, and a seven‑day advance notice to the employer and the MOLVT.
The MOLVT reported that 82 strikes occurred during the year. International observers, employers, and many union leaders agreed that almost no strikes fulfilled all prestrike legal requirements. Other unions complained that a severe lack of MOLVT involvement led to industrial strikes.
The government allowed most strikes held at factories but denied worker requests to hold protest marches outside of the factory district. Police intervention in strikes generally was minimal and restrained, even in those cases where property damage occurred. Police presence at the few marches that occurred tended to be excessive and often included a specialized police intervention unit.
On May 4, four workers and five security guards were injured when security guards inside the L.A. garment factory tried to prevent workers from leaving the factory to strike. The strike, which involved 4,000 workers, began two days earlier when workers demanded that a manager be dismissed for insulting and mistreating them.
On May 21, more than 100 provincial police officers violently dispersed approximately 200 striking workers at the River Rich garment factory in Kandal Province. Workers said police beat several protesters, but police denied causing any injuries. The strike began when management reneged on a promise to rehire 10 union activists whose contracts had not been renewed. Following the strike, management threatened to sue three union representatives for inciting workers to hold an illegal strike and for discrimination but later dropped the case.
On November 29, approximately 200 police officers violently dispersed a strike by more than 2,000 Fortune garment factory workers who protested reductions in bonuses and short‑term contracts. Police accused the strikers of blocking a road, creating disorder, throwing stones, and injuring police officers. Workers said their strike was peaceful and that violent police repression--including firing guns into the air and using tear gas--resulted in three injured workers. Police detained four workers, releasing them later the same day.
There were no developments in the August 2006 case of three factory‑level union leaders affiliated with the FTUWKC convicted of charges of illegal human confinement. After spending one month and four days in jail in 2006, the workers were released.
In spite of legal provisions protecting strikers from reprisals, there were credible reports that workers were dismissed on spurious grounds after organizing or participating in strikes. While most strikes were illegal, participating in an illegal strike was not by itself a legally acceptable reason for dismissal. In some cases strikers were pressured by employers to accept compensation and leave their employment. There are potential remedies for such dismissals, although none was particularly effective. The MOLVT can issue reinstatement orders, but these often provoked management efforts to pressure workers into resigning in exchange for a settlement. Collective disputes, such as when multiple employees are dismissed, can be brought before the Arbitration Council for a nonbinding decision. Individual disputes can be bought before the courts, although the judicial system was neither impartial nor transparent. Some unions urged the government to expand the role of the Arbitration Council to include individual and collective interest disputes and to make its decisions binding.
There continued to be confusion about the overlapping roles of labor unions and elected shop stewards. According to regulation, trade union leaders have roles comparable to those of shop stewards, and certain union officers have protection from dismissal within an enterprise. However, employers did not always respect these protections.
There were no special laws or exemptions from regular labor laws in export processing zones (known as special economic zones).
c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
The law prohibits forced or compulsory labor, including by children, but there were reports that such practices occurred, almost exclusively in the informal sector. There were reports of isolated cases of forced labor by domestic servants. Forced child labor was a serious problem in the commercial sex industry.
Involuntary overtime remained widespread. Under the law, legal overtime work cannot exceed two hours daily and must be voluntary; however, in practice overtime was often extended beyond the legal limit, and employers used coercion to force employees to work. Workers often faced fines, dismissal, or loss of premium pay if they refused to work overtime.
d. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for Employment
The government has adopted laws to protect children from exploitation in the workplace; however, enforcement was often weak. The law establishes 15 years as the minimum age for employment and 18 years as the minimum age for hazardous work. The law permits children between 12 and 15 to engage in "light work" that is not hazardous to their health and does not affect school attendance. A 2006 study by the World Bank, the ILO, and UNICEF estimated that there were 1.5 million children engaged in illegal labor, including 750,000 children younger than 12 years, 500,000 children ages 12 to 14 engaged in "nonlight" economic activity, and more than 250,000 children ages 15 to 17 working in prohibited hazardous sectors or working more than 43 hours per week.
No aspect of the law prohibiting child labor was adequately enforced in the formal employment sector. No employer was prosecuted for violating laws against child labor. The MOLVT has responsibility for child labor issues in both the formal and informal sectors of the economy, but its labor inspectors played no role in the informal sector or in enforcing the law in illegal industries. Within the formal sector, labor inspectors conducted routine inspections of some industries, such as garment manufacturing (where the incidence of child labor is negligible), but in some industries with the highest child labor risk, labor inspections were entirely complaint driven.
The constitution prohibits forced or bonded child labor; however, forced child labor was a serious problem in the commercial sex industry. Law enforcement agencies failed to combat child prostitution in a sustained, consistent manner. Widespread corruption, lack of transparency, inadequate resources, and staffing shortages remained the most challenging obstacles.
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
The law requires the MOLVT to establish a garment‑sector minimum wage based on recommendations from the Labor Advisory Committee. There was no minimum wage for any other industry. The minimum wage for the sector was $45 to $50 (189,000 to 210,000 riels) per month. Garment-sector employers almost universally paid regular workers at least the minimum wage, although casual workers were often paid less. Garment workers earned an average wage of $70 to $80 (294,000 to 336,000 riels) per month, including overtime and bonuses. Prevailing monthly wages in the garment sector and many other professions were insufficient to provide a worker and family with a decent standard of living, although garment-sector wages were generally higher than wages in the informal economy. Civil service salaries also were insufficient to provide a decent standard of living, requiring government officials to secure outside sources of income, in many cases by obtaining second jobs or accepting bribes.
On June 8, despite strong protests from some unions, the National Assembly amended the labor law to establish a nightshift rate of 130 percent of daytime wages. Before this amendment, customary practice was to pay nightshift workers 200 percent of daytime wages, and few factories operated night shifts due to the high salary cost.
The law provides for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours, not to exceed eight hours per day. The law stipulates time‑and‑a‑half for overtime and double time if overtime occurs at night, on Sunday, or on a holiday. Employees are allowed to work up to two hours of overtime each day. However, the government did not enforce these standards effectively. Workers reported that overtime was frequently excessive and sometimes mandatory. Similarly, outside the garment industry, regulations on working hours were rarely enforced.
The law states that the workplace should have health and safety standards adequate to ensure workers' well‑being. The government enforced existing standards selectively, in part because it lacked trained staff and equipment. Work‑related injuries and health problems were common. Most large garment factories producing for markets in developed countries met relatively high health and safety standards as conditions of their contracts with buyers. Working conditions in some small‑scale factories and cottage industries were poor and often did not meet international standards. Penalties are specified in the law, but there are no specific provisions to protect workers who complain about unsafe or unhealthy conditions. Workers who removed themselves from unsafe working conditions risked loss of employment.

|Liftoff to Learning: Lets Talk Robotics - NASA; Johnson Space Center|
This episode of Liftoff to Learning examines some of NASA’s robotic research and how robots are used in space exploration. Classroom scenes show robot study at the intermediate and high school level. Astronauts from STS-85 and STS-87 host the show. The program is intended for grades 5-12. To license this film and get a higher quality version for broadcast/film purposes, contact A/V Geeks LLC.
Keywords: NASA; robotics; STS-85; STS-87

General best practices for performance
You must plan for every feature in your app, and the same is true for performance. Planning for performance consists of determining what your performance-critical scenarios will be, defining what good performance means, and measuring early enough in the development process to ensure that you can be confident in your ability to hit your goals.
You don't need to completely understand the platform to reason about where you might need to improve performance. By knowing what parts of your code execute most frequently, you can determine the best places to optimize your app.
The users' experience is a basic way to define good performance. For example, an app's startup time can influence a user's perception of its performance. A user might consider the performance of an app's launch time of less than one second to be excellent, less than 5 seconds to be good, and greater than 5 seconds to be poor.
Sometimes you also have to consider other metrics that don't have a direct impact on the user experience. An example of this is memory consumption. When an app uses large amounts of memory, it takes it from the rest of the system, causing the system as a whole to appear sluggish to the user. It is difficult to have a goal on overall sluggishness of the system, so having a goal on memory consumption is reasonable.
When defining your performance goals, take into consideration the perceived size of your app. Users’ expectations for the performance of your app may be influenced by their qualitative perception of how big your app is, and you should take into account whether your users will consider your app to be small, medium, or large. As an example, you might want a small app that doesn't use a lot of media to consume less than 100MB of memory.
As part of your plan, you define all of the points during development where you will measure performance. Measuring performance serve different purposes depending on whether measure during the prototyping, development, or deployment phase of your project. In all cases, measure on a representative device so that you get accurate info. For more info about how to measure your app’s performance in Visual Studio, see Analyzing the performance of Windows Windows Store apps.
Measuring your app’s performance during the early stages of prototyping can add tremendous value to your project. We recommend that you measure performance as soon as you have code that does meaningful work. Early measurements give you a good idea of where the important costs are in your app, and inform design decisions. This results in high performing apps that scale well. It can be very costly to change design decisions later on in the project. Measuring performance too late in the product cycle can result in last minute hacks and poor performance.
Measuring your app’s performance during development time helps you:
- Determine if you are on track to meet your goals.
- If you are not on track, find out early if you need to make structural changes, such as data representation, in order to get back on track.
You don't need to optimize every part of your app, and performance improvements to the majority of your code usually don't result in a material difference to the user. Measure your app's performance to identify the high traffic areas in your code, and focus on getting good performance in only those areas. Often, there is a trade-off between creating software that follows good design practices and writing code that performs at the highest optimization. It is generally better to prioritize developer productivity and good software design in areas where performance is not a concern.
Windows 8 can run on many devices under a variety of circumstances and it is impossible for you to simulate all the conditions in which your app will run. Collecting telemetry about your app's performance on user machines can help you understand what your end-users are experiencing. This can be accomplished by adding instrumentation to various parts of your application and occasionally uploading the data to a web service. From this info, you can determine what the average user sees and what the worst and best case performance of your app is. This will help you decide which aspects of performance to focus on for the next version of your app.
Let's look at a few key performance best practices that are specific to Windows Store apps.
When you create an app, be aware that the type of computer that your users have might have significantly less power than your development environment. Windows 8 was designed with low power devices, such as tablets, in mind. Also, Windows RT uses these same design principles to take advantage of the low power consumption characteristics of ARM-based platforms. Windows Store apps need to do their part to ensure that they perform well on these devices. Operations that seem to run fast on your development machine can have a big impact to the user-experience on a low power device. As a heuristic, expect that a low power device is about 4 times slower than a desktop computer and set your goals accordingly.
Testing your app early and often on the type of computer that you expect the user to have allows you to form a realistic understanding of how your users will experience your app.
Most of the performance work you do naturally reduces the amount of power your app consumes. The CPU is a major consumer of battery power on devices, even at low utilization. Windows 8 tries to keep the CPU in a low power state when it is idle, but activates it every time you schedule work. You can further reduce your app's consumption of battery power by ensuring that your app doesn't have timers unnecessarily schedule work on the CPU when it is idle. For example, an app might poll for data from web services and sensors (such as the GPS). Consider battery consumption when deciding how often you poll for data.
This is also an important consideration for animations that require constant updates to the screen and keep the CPU and graphics pipeline active. Animations can be an effective in delivering a great user experience, but make a conscious choice about when you use them. This is particularly important for data-driven apps where the user may be looking at your app but not interacting with it. For example, a user may spend a while looking at content in a news reader or photo viewer without interacting with the app. It can also be wasteful to use animations in snap mode because the user is not giving the app their full attention.
Many apps connect to web services to get new info for the user. Reducing the frequency at which you poll for new info can improve your battery consumption.
Reducing memory helps avoid sluggishness and is even more important for Windows Store apps because of the Process Lifetime Management (PLM) system. The PLM system determines which apps to terminate, in part, by the app's memory footprint. By keeping your app's memory footprint low, you reduce the chance of it getting terminated when it is not being used. For example, you can reduce your app’s memory footprint by releasing unnecessary resources such as images on suspend.
The PLM system may also choose to swap out your app to disk, and swap it back into memory the next time it is switched to. If you lower the memory footprint of your app it will resume faster.
The related topics contain more in-depth performance best-practices for developing Windows Store apps. These best practices cover topics that are likely to be the source of performance issues in your app. But these best practices will only make a difference if they are on performance critical paths of your app. We recommend that you follow the principles on this page and determine if applying these best practices will help you achieve your performance goals.
Build date: 11/29/2012

A new smartphone app aims to provide a cheaper alternative to ultrasound in Africa by bringing an old technique into the 21st century.
"We couldn't hear anything,” says Aaron Tushabe, recounting a trip with two friends to the maternity ward of the main hospital in the Ugandan capital, Kampala. The student had been handed an ear-trumpet-like device called a Pinard horn, used to listen for the vital signs of a baby in a mother’s abdomen. Despite straining to hear against the murmur of the ward, Tushabe couldn’t hear any signs.
Luckily, the problem was not with the baby, but the combination of what he calls a “rather primitive device”, and his lack of training. In fact, the Pinard horn, named after the French doctor who invented it back in the 19th Century, can be very effective in the right hands. It can determine the age, position and heart rate of the foetus, along with an indication of its overall health. But to do this consistently can take many years of practice.
Meanwhile, in developing countries, “a woman dies from complications in childbirth every minute”, according to the UN, while every year “eight million babies die before or during delivery or in the first week of life”. The key to saving those lives, the UN says, is “access to skilled care during pregnancy, childbirth and the first month after delivery”.
These kinds of statistics, along with their experience of using the Pinard horn, got the three computer science students thinking about whether they could improve the design. “We saw that technology gap and started thinking about how we might bridge it.”
In developed countries, ultrasound is the answer. But these machines – responsible for those fuzzy black and white pictures that are liberally posted on Facebook, brought out at parties, and waived at co-workers when someone becomes pregnant – are expensive. Even if a hospital could afford one, few expectant mothers can afford the $10 scan in countries where many live below the poverty line.
And so, a new project called WinSenga was born to build what Joshua Okello, one of the other students who visited the hospital, calls "an enhancement" to the Pinard horn. The new device still consists of a plastic trumpet, but with a highly sensitive microphone inside. The souped-up device, which is placed on a women's abdomen just like a regular horn, connects to a Windows-based phone running an app that, as Okello says, "plays the part of the midwife's ear." The system picks up the foetal heart rate, transmits it to the phone, and then the phone runs an analysis. The app, developed in conjunction with medics for the UN agency Unicef then recommends a course of action, if any, for the mother and her unborn child.
"When I first heard the idea, I thought it was brilliant," says Davis Musinguzi, a medic and Unicef advisor. "But being software developers, they needed guidance on the medical component of the application." The doctor says he advised on the medical parameters, procedures and standards that needed to be part of the software. He also says he tried to ensure that the new device wouldn't disrupt the normal workflow of an antenatal visit, but rather help eliminate the bottlenecks.
The value of going mobile is pretty clear, allowing carers to visit mothers wherever they are. "We envision a midwife being able to travel to rural areas on specific days, and then mothers could gather in, for example, a local church,” Tushabe says. “Then, the midwife could administer the antenatal diagnosis to all the mothers."
Okello, Tushabe and their partner Josiah Kuvuma presented their idea earlier this year at an event sponsored by Microsoft called the Imagine Cup, which aims to solve pressing problems, particularly in the developing world. The event partly inspired the name. The “Win” part comes from the software giant’s own products, Okello tells me, while "Senga" refers to the local name for the aunt who used to help village mothers-to-be with their antenatal care and their births.
The team went on to win the regional competition before losing out in the finals held at Sydney. However, the loss has not held them back. The team says they have since been approached for potential partnerships and are currently looking for funding to launch a six-month field trial of their system. If that's successful, then WinSenga could launch as a product. The team says its too early to talk about pricing, but they are heartened by the fact that the cost of smartphone handsets is rapidly dropping across Africa, making their system much more attractive to potential clients.
While they wait for funding, the WinSenga team is far from idle. Despite the fact that all three team members still have busy university schedules, they have already launched an expanded version of the software designed to assist healthcare workers and mothers during labour. The group's website also promises a version called "WinSenga Plus", which would assist with postnatal care as well. And as if that isn't enough, WinSenga say they are almost ready to launch an Android version of their application, and will then start work on a version for iOS.
The apps are all part of a new movement, says Dr Musinguzi, which is gathering momentum.
"The use of mobile technology is a relatively new intervention to improving health services," he says. WinSenga and other devices and apps that are coming on to the market, he says, will have to prove themselves to healthcare professionals by "reducing the burden of doing what they have always done."
It will take training and investment, he says, but it "will pay off in the long run”.
It is a sentiment that Okello agrees with. "Communities that have healthy mothers are generally much more productive. It's all tied in."

Written By Dan Suthers based on explanations by Scott Ferguson, June Firing, Kyle Hogrefe, and Danny Merritt.
Physical Oceanography studies the movement of ocean water (ranging from small scale oscillations to basin-wide flows) and the physical and chemical characteristics of that water (e.g., temperature and salinity). Most research on currents and water characteristics has focused on large scale patterns, such as gyres that flow around ocean basins . Water of different densities does not mix easily. Density depends on temperature and salinity. Therefore, if you measure the temperature and salinity of water at different depths you can track the same body of water as it moves around an ocean basin (e.g., the North Pacific) and even around the globe.
In this research, measurements are often taken on a large scale. For example, during a transect a ship might make measurements of water temperature and salinity at different depths, but do so only at every degree of longitude or latitude: about every 60 miles. One square kilometer is a standard resolution for satellites that calculate sea surface temperature. This research helps us understand major influences on reef life, such as transport of warm or cold water, nutrients, and possibly organisms from one region to another. However, the data gathered for oceanography at this scale is not detailed enough to understand how water characteristics influence life at a local level.
Reef-specific oceanography studies the currents and water characteristics on a local scale. The topography of a reef--where it's shallow and deep; how it's situated relative to ocean currents and prevailing winds--can influence water temperature and the distribution of nutrients beyond what can be predicted by looking only at large scale currents in the region of the reef. Marine biologists such as those on this expedition study the distribution of marine life on a local scale, comparing for example life at different depths and within and outside an atoll, as well comparing reefs at different locations in the island chain. In order to understand the distribution of life they are seeing, they need reef-specific oceanographic data.
Data for reef-specific oceanography is being gathered by taking direct measurements while we are up here, by leaving sensors in place that send their data back by satellite or are retrieved later, and by satellite imagery. The first two forms of data, measured directly on site, help scientists to "ground truth" satellite data: observations in the field are compared to what the satellite sees so that we know how to interpret the images.
Reef Oceanography data is being gathered on this expedition by two teams: Night Operations (Scott Ferguson, assisted by Drew Rapp), who operate off the Hi`ialakai; and the Mooring Team (Elizabeth Keenan, Danny Merritt, Stephani Holzwarth, and team leader Kyle Hogrefe), who operate off of the jet boat HI-2. The instruments they use and what they measure are described below. As we consider this diverse collection of instruments we should keep in mind that they are all contributing to the same objective: to have an empirically based model of how ocean water characteristics are distributed across space and time. The most important water characteristic studied from the point of view of reef health is temperature. See our article on coral bleaching for a discussion of how temperature can affect the symbiotic relationship between coral and algae. Reef life is also strongly affected by the availability of nutrients. Both temperature and nutrients, in turn, are affected by the movement of water, so some of the measurements made are intended to give a profile of the bodies of water surrounding reefs.
Yearly Water Column Measurements
Some measurements are only taken about once a year, when researchers can come up to the locations where the measurements are made.
Ship-based CTDs. The Night Operations team conduct Conductivity, Temperature and Depth or "CTD" measurements at several locations around the reef. (They also make observations with a Towed Optical Assessment Device, but this is for unrelated purposes: see the September 18th journal for a brief description.) The CTD deployed by Night Operations is a large device that can reach 500 meters in depth, taking up to five water samples at different depths, and making other measurements on a continuous basis on the the way down and up. Temperature and pressure are measured directly. Salinity is measured indirectly by measuring the conductivity of water to electricity. Chlorophyll is measured indirectly by a fluorometer that emits purple light ("black light") and measures fluorescence in response to that light. These measurements are made continuously, providing a profile of temperature, salinity, and chlorophyll as a function of depth. The photograph shows the dta from a test run of the CTD, including temperature (blue), salinity (red) and density (green).
Analysis of the water samples will tell scientists how much chlorophyll is actually in the water. This information can then be compared to the measurements of the flurometer to see how well it predicts levels of chlorophyll. The presence of chlorophyll is a good sign of producivity: the food chain is built on phytoplankton (microscopic plants) that produce food energy from light energy. They are eaten by microscopic zooplankton (floating animals), which in turn are eaten by larger animals, and so on.
Shipboard CTD measurements are typically taken at three locations around a given island or atoll: the windward and leeward sides, and at a standard oceanographic "station" assigned to each island or atoll that is being surveyed over a long period of time. There is one such station per each major island or atoll in the NWHI: Nihoa, Necker, French Frigate Shoals, Gardner, Maro Reef, Laysan, Lisanski, Pearl and Hermes, Midway, and Kure.
Shallow water CTDs. In order to understand the local reef ecosystem, we need measurements at more locations than just three, and we need to sample in shallower water than the ship can operate in. For these reasons, the oceanographers aboard make other measurements from the HI-2 jetboat. These measurements are taken every mile or two around the island/atoll between the 80 and 120 foot isobath and inside the atolls in a few places as well, providing greater resolution.
A handheld CTD device is pictured. Like its big brother, it includes a temperature sensor, a depth sensor, and a conductivity sensor (for salinity). The handheld device also has transmissometer that measures the level of particulate matter in the water (a proxy for turbidity). It does so by shining a light at a sensor and seeing how much of that light gets through the water. These measurements are also made continuously as the device descends and ascends. Unlike the larger version, the small boat CTD does not take water samples and does not have a fluormeter. Separate devices are used for these purposes.
Water samples are taken by a handheld device consisting of a tube with spring loaded caps at both ends. The caps are set in the open position so water can flow through the tube as it descends. A weight is then slid down the supporting rope to hit a trigger and close the caps. The sampler is then taken to the surface, where the water is used to first rinse out a sample bottle (to avoid contamination from other water), and then the sample bottle is filled. The bottle is opaque to prevent further modification of the chlorophyll content by light. (Water from the large CTD is also stored in these same bottles.) Water samples are typically taken at three depths, 5, 30 and 60 feet, measured out by marks on the rope holding the sampling device.
A radiometer on the small boat plays the role of the fluorometer, and also gives important information about available solar radiation. Two radiometers are coupled together to take readings above and below water. A instrument on the boat reads the amount of light arriving at the ocean surface. Another instrument is put in the water to read the light reflected back from the water. This is compared to the former surface measurement for reference. These measurements are made at light frequencies relevant to photosynthesis. By reading reflected light at certain wavelenghths, scientists can tell how much chlorophyll is in the water.
Time Series Measurements
The measurements just described provide a lot of detail about the water at a given location and different depths, but only at one or a few points in time: when the scientists can come up here. To fully understand an ecosystem, we need to monitor it over many years. The instruments described in this section record a series of measurements of water characteristics over time. They include CREWS buoys, SST buoys, and SST "pipe bombs."
CREWS Buoys. These are large buoys (pictured) that are anchored at a specific location and can send data back daily to scientists via satellite. CREWS stands for Coral Reef Early Warning System, reflecting a major function of these buoys: to warn scientists as soon as possible of an unusual change taking place in the environment of a coral reef ecosystem. These buoys have sensors both in and above the water that measure water and air temperature, water salinity (via conductivity), wind speed, and barometric pressure. A few of them also have radiometers, but these can only be located where staff can get to them every few weeks to clean the sensors. There is one at French Frigate Shoals, serviced by USGS staff on Tern Island.
SST Buoys and Pipes. CREWS buoys are large and expensive, so other instruments are also used that measure fewer parameters but can be deployed in more locations. Sea Surface Temperature (SST) buoys are round floating buoys that are anchored in a specific location. They measure water temperature and send this data back at regular intervals via satellite. The "pipe bombs of science" are strapped to the reef at different depths and locations around an atoll. These are set to measure temperature every half an hour, and record it on a data chip. Scientists must come up to the NWHI and retrieve these devices in order to obtain the data.
Tracking Water Movement
Currents, tides and waves also affect reef life. The mooring team installs two further kinds of instruments to track these parameters. Now we can appreciate why they are always so busy!
Wave and Tide Recorders (WTDs), record water pressure with high sensitivity, providing information about waves and tides. (When a wave passes over, or when the tide comes in, there is more water over the instrument and hence more pressure on it.) This instrument measures the tide 48 times a day, and records wave height 8 times a day in the process. Each measurement involves recording the pressure for 18 minutes, and then estimating wave and tide values based on changes in the pressure. They are deployed at 50 to 100 feet.
The Ocean Data Platform (ODP) contains temperature and salinity sensors, as well as an Acoustic Doppler Profiler (ADP). The ADP can measure current speed and direction in multiple directions and at different depths. These are placed at 60-100 feet, "hopefully deeper than the wave energy you are trying to study," as Kyle put it after a day of trying to extract an ODP that had somehow flipped and gotten wedged in the rocks!
Other instruments used by reef oceanographers are not described here because we don't have them on this expedition. Drifting buoys that follow water at 15 meters depth, measuring GPS position and water temperature over time, were not delivered to Honolulu in time for the expedition due to the hurricanes in Florida. Two other sensors will be installed on the Hi`ialakai later this year: an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler that measures current velocity using the Doppler effect, and a sonar that measures biomass in the water column.
Putting It All Together into a Model of the NWHI
Visualize, if you will, a three dimensional model of the Northwestern Hawaiian Island chain. Imagine that we have represented this model in a computer such that we can attach the data gathered by the various devices just discussed to the corresponding location in the model. Now imagine that we can move a slider or use a play/fast forward/rewind control like on a video recorder to move this model through time, so we can store data taken at different times as well as different places. In other words, we have organized all the data collected in a four dimensional "space," where the first three dimensions are for the location of the various sensors discussed above (latitude, longitude, and depth) and the fourth dimension is for time.
In some places in this model, we will have detailed information such as temperature, salinity, chlorophyll and light levels, etc., measured continuously over a number of years. In other places we will have only temperature, and in some places we have measurements only once a year. Finally, in most places we have no measurements at all! But we have taken our measurements at enough locations that we can "interpolate" or predict mathematically the values the measures would be at the points in between those we actually took.
In some places and times we have different measures of the same thing. For example, we have the actual chlorophyll content of water and the estimate of that content taken by a radiometer or fluorometer; or we have the actual temperature and the estimated temperature taken by satellite. We can see how close these measurements are to each other, to better understand how we can use less expensive measures (such as a satellite) to estimate parameters that otherwise would require more expensive measures (sending people to the actual locations).
All of this data organized in space and time provides a physical model of the ocean environment of reef ecosystems. Marine biologists can use this model to understand what is affecting the prevalence and health of the various organisms of the reef. We will see how marine biologists find out what organisms are present in another article.
 Garrison (2002)

Preprocessing of Educational Institution Web Log Data for Finding Frequent Patterns Using Weighted Association Rule Mining Technique
In the Internet world, web search is mandatory to all. Millions of searches performed for each second in a web and that search information are stored in Web Server Log. Web Log data are massive and erroneous stream data. Handling huge data and incorrect data processing are two significant problems in Web Data Mining. Processing of huge data is a complex task, which increases processing time and memory occupation that will reduce the performance of the system. Incorrect data sometimes produce an erroneous result that reduces the quality of data. To handle this problem web Miner's has introduced several preprocessing methods to reduce the log data size and to eliminate incorrect records, which lead to improved quality, quantity and performance.

Games, Interactivity, and Playable Media
Games, Interactivity, and Playable Media spans offerings in visual arts, film and media, and computer science to foster technical and digital literacy in the arts. Designed for experimentation, this initiative helps students establish digital proficiency while supporting the exploration of a wide range of new media forms and technologies. Courses of study might include visual programming, artificial intelligence, gaming, robotics, experimental animation, computer arts, experimental media design, data visualization, real-time interactivity, digital signal processing, cross-platform media environments, and mobile media development. Students are encouraged to coordinate these project-based investigations of the digital throughout their studies in the humanities, including literature, philosophy, politics, sociology, theatre, and writing.

What is Bereavement?
Bereavement coincides with the imminent dying and death of the individual and consists of two stages: separation and mourning.
Separation occurs when the loved one’s consciousness diminishes and awareness of the environment vanishes. At this time, the family fully experiences their loss and the loneliness of separation. Self-absorption is the hurdle for the family to overcome now. Hospice intervention is directed toward promoting intimacy, if family members are to be supported in their ability to grieve within their family network.
Mourning begins when the reality of impending death hits. The obstacle for the family to overcome here is guilt. Human grief is as strong and as unique as the relationship that has been severed. Grief is a personal experience, different for each member of a family who is grieving over the loss of the same person.
Hospice intervention is geared toward fostering relief expressed through mourning. The family members may have reached the limits of their own endurance and may initially confess relief that their loved one has died and that they remained with the person through that time. Echoes from previous losses may then surface, and these mournings, if uncompleted, may hinder relief. The mourning process is relieved only when the deceased person enriches the continued family life.
Hospice provides bereavement services for the patient’s family/caregiver. This includes telephone calls, visits, letters, support groups, and an annual memorial service. The family needs continuing support to help move through their mourning process.
A special bereavement program offered to the general community is Wings! Camp for Grieving Children. Because of their limited life experiences, and lack of coping skills, children may find the grief process very difficult. At Wings!, children between the ages of 8 and 17 learn, in a safe and caring environment, that their feelings are normal and an important part of the healing process. Grief-related activities are conducted in small groups led by trained counselors. Children are encouraged to express themselves through arts and crafts.

Jump to:Page Content
Susan Greenhalgh, , Professor of Anthropology, Harvard
Since the introduction of the 1-child policy in 1980, the gender gap among Chinese infants has soared, leaving China with a huge surplus of boys and deficit of girls. Today, as the first generation of singletons begins to marry in large numbers, 10 percent of men – mostly rural, ill-educated peasants – will not be able to find brides. How has the PRC regime sought to address these problems? What framings and measures has it used, and with what effect? In this talk, anthropologist Greenhalgh argues that state policy on the gender gap has been heavily biased in favor of rural women, with the result that older rural men, dubbed "bare sticks," now face social marginalization, political exclusion from the category of deserving citizens, and the prospect of reproductive extinction. In Chinese population politics, the woman question has become a serious man question, to the benefit of none.
Lunch will be provided. An RSVP is not required as this is an open event.

Biochemical Conversion Processes
The diagram below depicts a high-level view of the primary units of operation in the biochemical conversion process. Specific process operation conditions, and inputs and outputs within and between each unit, vary in practice. These process variations can impact the key performance outcomes (titer, rate, and yield), which determine economic viability when the process is scaled up. The following descriptions highlight issues in each key process step.
During pretreatment, biomass feedstock undergoes a process to mechanically or chemically fractionate the lignocellulosic complex into soluble and insoluble components. Soluble components include mixtures of five- and six-carbon sugars (mainly xylose, arabinose, mannose, galactose, and glucose) and some sugars oligomers. Insoluble components include cellulosic polymers and oligomers and lignin (and any other components that may be linked to the constituents). Depending on the exact chemistry chosen for this step, variable amounts of the biomass may be solubilized. The main purpose of this step is to open up the physical structure of the plant cell walls to permit further deconstruction during the hydrolysis stepyea. The more open structure of the resulting material makes the remaining carbohydrate polymers more accessible for hydrolytic conversion to soluble sugars by enzymes or chemicals. The specific mix of sugars and oligomers released depends on the feedstock used and the pretreatment technology employed.
In some process configurations, the pretreated material goes through a hydrolysate conditioning and/or neutralization process to adjust the pH of the biomass slurry and remove undesirable by-product from pretreatment that are toxic to the downstream fermenting microorganism. In some cases, this step and hydrolysis, the next step, are combined into a single process.
In hydrolysis, the pretreated material, with the remaining solid carbohydrate fraction, primarily cellulose, is guided through a chemical reaction that releases the readily fermentable sugar, glucose. This can be accomplished with enzymes, such as cellulases, or with strong acids. Addition of other enzymes in this step, such as xylanases, may allow for less severe pretreatment conditions, potentially resulting in a reduced overall pretreatment and hydrolysis cost. Depending on the process design, enzymatic hydrolysis requires several hours to several days, after which the mixture of sugars and any unreacted cellulose is transferred to the fermenter. Current processes use purchased enzymes or enzymes manufactured on site, based on the economics of the specific process. For technologies using strong acids, acid recovery is important for the economics to be viable.
Currently, the most common approach to biological processing is to employ a fermentation step, wherein an inoculum of a fermenting microorganism is added to the biomass hydrolysates. Fermentation of all sugars is then carried out, and after a few days of continued saccharification and fermentation, nearly all of the sugars are converted to biofuels or other chemicals of interest. The resulting aqueous mixture or two-phase broth is sent to product recovery. Some processes combine the hydrolysis and fermentation steps (i.e., simultaneous saccharification and fermentation [SSF]).
Chemical or catalytic conversion can be used in place of, or in addition to, fermentation to convert the hydrolysis products, such as sugars, alcohols, or a variety of other stable oxygenates, to desired end products. The addition of a catalyst makes the reaction less energy intensive, thus making the entire process more efficient. Different reactions achieve different yields and intermediates while targeting different end fuels and chemicals, so current research is aimed at identifying optimal process combinations with respect to efficiency, feedstock utilization, cost, sustainability, finished product characteristics, and anticipated market demands.
Product Upgrading and Recovery
Product upgrading and recovery varies based on the type of conversion used and the type of product generated, but in general, involves any biological and chemical transformations, distillation or any other separation and recovery method, and some cleanup processes to separate the fuel from the water and residual solids. Residual solids are composed primarily of lignin, which can be burned for combined heat and power generation or chemically converted to intermediate chemicals or intermediates for other uses.

By ANAHAD O'CONNOR
Published: November 21, 2006
THE CLAIM -- Pricking a stroke victim's fingers can help delay symptoms.
THE FACTS -- A recent, widely circulated e-mail message proposes an unusual way to help the victim of a stroke. ''Help the victim sit up to prevent him from falling over,'' the message states. ''Then sterilize a needle and use it to prick the tip of the person's finger. After a few minutes, the victim should regain consciousness.''
The message says that doing this somehow relieves blood pressure and eases symptoms.
Like most medical advice dispensed in the form of a chain e-mail message, it has no scientific basis. In fact, following its advice can do harm.
Forcing a stroke victim to sit up is never a good idea, because it can cause a drop in blood pressure, says Dr. Larry B. Goldstein, director of the Duke Stroke Center.
It would be better to help the person lie down.
Pricking the victim's finger is also a bad idea, not only because it is futile, but because doing so can delay medical treatment, which is the only thing that can help.
THE BOTTOM LINE -- Only emergency medical treatment can help a stroke victim. ANAHAD O'CONNOR
Drawing (Drawing by Leif Parsons)

Science Fair Project Encyclopedia
He joined the Parcham faction of the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) in 1965. Despite being regarded as an intelligent man, he was referred to as Najib-e Gaw (the Bull) by his opponents due to his physique. The PDPA staged a successful coup in 1978, but the Khalq faction of the PDPA gained supremacy, and after a brief stint as ambassador in Tehran, Najibullah was dismissed from government and went into exile in Europe.
He returned to Kabul after the Soviet invasion in 1979. In 1980, he was appointed the head of KHAD, the secret police. Under Najibullah's control, it is claimed that KHAD arrested, tortured and executed tens of thousands of Afghans. Najibullah replaced Babrak Karmal as Afghanistan's President in 1986.
After the Soviet withdrawal in 1989, he withstood a coup headed by his defence minister in 1990 and relaxed his autocratic control to gain support. But by 1992 Najibullah agreed to step down in favor of a transitional government. Najibullah tried to flee Kabul, but his departure was blocked by Abdul Rashid Dostum. Najibullah sought sanctuary in the UN compound in Kabul. He remained there until September 1996 when the Taliban captured Kabul. The Taliban dragged Najibullah from the UN compound and hanged him from a traffic light post in the streets of the capital.
The contents of this article is licensed from www.wikipedia.org under the GNU Free Documentation License. Click here to see the transparent copy and copyright details

December 19, 2012
Share Email Print
Kate Wong is an editor and writer at Scientific American covering paleontology, archaeology and life sciences. Follow on Twitter
PALEO DIET: Analyses of tartar on the teeth of Australopithecus sediba show that this early human species ate bark and other unexpected foods. Image: Kate Wong
Recent years have brought considerable riches for those of us interested in human evolution and 2012 proved no exception. New fossils, archaeological finds and genetic analyses yielded thrilling insights into the shape of the family tree, the diets of our ancient predecessors, the origins of art and advanced weaponry, the interactions between early Homo sapiens and other human species, and other facets of our ancestors’ lives. The list below highlights the discoveries that most captivated me in a year of revelations about the way we were. Did I miss your favorite? Let me know in the comments.
- A 3.4 million-year-old fossil foot suggests a second lineage of hominins (creatures more closely related to us than to our closest living relatives, chimpanzees) may have lived alongside Lucy’s kind and spent more time in the trees than on the ground.
- Fossils from Kenya dating to between 1.87 million and 1.95 million years ago rekindle debate over whether our own genus, Homo, split into multiple lineages early on.
- Analysis of tartar, molar wear and tooth chemistry in the nearly two-million-year-old hominin known as Australopithecus sediba shows that it had an unexpected diet, including tree bark.
- A shift in the technology and diet of early Homo around two million years ago may have doomed large carnivores
- Tiny bits of burned plants and bone from a South African cave show that humans had tamed fire by 1 million years ago–some 600,000 year earlier than had previously been documented.
- Our ancestors began making multicomponent tools in the form of deadly stone-tipped spears 500,000 years ago—200,000 years earlier than previously thought.
- Cave paintings in Spain are the oldest in the world and are sufficiently ancient to be the creations of Neandertals.
- Neandertals hunted birds for their fashionable feathers for thousands of years and may have exploited certain plants for their medicinal properties–compelling evidence that our hominin cousins were cognitively sophisticated.
- Reconstructed genome of the Denisovans–an enigmatic group of archaic hominins—confirms that early Homo sapiens interbred with them and reveals new details of their genetic legacy.
- Whole-genome sequencing of modern hunter-gatherers from Africa turns up loads of previously unknown genetic variants and indicates that early Homo sapiens interbred with another hominin species long ago in Africa.
- Paleoanthropology’s hobbit, a tiny hominin species called Homo floresiensis, gets a new face thanks to forensic reconstruction–and the result is startlingly familiar.
- Stone tools and preserved poop from Oregon add to mounting evidence that the early human colonization of the Americas was more complex than scholars once envisioned.
- Study finds that mom’s metabolism—not the size of the pelvis—limits gestation length to nine months, providing a new explanation for why humans give birth to helpless babies.
About the Author:
Kate Wong is an editor and writer at Scientific American covering paleontology, archaeology and life sciences. Follow on Twitter @katewong
Rights & Permissions

Balmoral Castle is in Aberdeenshire – and is usually known as The Queen’s private residence in Scotland – while the rest of the family enjoy the estate with their grandparents.
|Balmoral Castle in 1854 painted|
by Queen Victoria during its
Queen Victoria had, in 1848, found the house “small but pretty”, and recorded in her diary that: “All seemed to breathe freedom and peace, and to make one forget the world and its sad turmoils”.
Prince Albert, Queen Victoria’s Prince Consort, bought it in 1852 and in the following years had it rebuilt in white granite as a castellated mansion in Scottish baronial style.
The grounds were laid out by Prince Albert in the 1850s and planted out as parterre gardens with rare conifers, while plantations were established around the house.
|South front of Balmoral Castle|
The couple took a great interest in their staff setting up a lending library; while they also encouraged new ideas ... developed a model dairy, which was completed by the Queen after her husband’s death in 1861.
Near the Castle the Queen created her cottage garden around a private house, known as the Garden Cottage, while later in the 1920s Queen Mary, George V’s wife, altered it to include a sunken garden.
|Edward VII relaxing at Balmoral|
photographed by his wife, Alexandra
In our present Queen’s reign (1952 - ....) the Duke of Edinburgh, her husband, has improved the gardens – redesigning the herbaceous borders, planting up a shrubbery around the river and adding a water garden near Victoria’s Garden Cottage.
|North-West corner of Balmoral Castle|
Today it is a working estate – deer stalking, grouse shoots, forestry and farming are the main land uses, while there are tours to be booked, and cottages to rent.
The Castle, gardens and exhibitions (especially in this Diamond Jubilee Year) are open to the public from April to July.
Queen Victoria (1837 - 1901) in her journals described Balmoral as “my dear paradise in the Highlands” ...
That is B for Balmoral Castle ... a Scottish baronial castellated mansion built for Queen Victoria in the 1850s; now managed by the Balmoral Estates ... part of the ABC series Aspects of British Castles
By the way I meant to add yesterday - that Bob Scotney is also doing Castles - his A was for Amberley - should you wish to visit ...
Positive Letters Inspirational Stories

Mount Hope Cemetery: Restoring history
If you visit the Chinese Immigrant Memorial at Mount Hope Cemetery in Mattapan, Mass, you will notice that a lot of the headstones are in poor condition. This is due to aging, but it is also because of vandalism and lack of care for many years. Many of these headstones belong to the Chinese immigrants that created the Chinatown that we are able to enjoy today.
The first Chinese settlers of Boston Chinatown came from San Francisco, Ca, to North Adams, MA around the 1870s. These settlers consisted of about 75 workers who started working at the Sampson Shoe Factory in North Adams and later traveled to Boston. Chinese laundries and Chinese restaurants were soon established along Harrison Avenue. Overtime, Chinatown slowly began to evolve to include many other infamous streets such as Kneeland Street and Hudson Street.
Like many immigrants, the Chinese Settlers came to the United States for a better life for themselves and their family. Unfortunately, many of the early settlers were bachelors who did not have families in the United States nor were they able to have a family before they deceased. Many of these settlers that passed away were buried in Mount Hope.
Without family members, these headstones remained in Mount Hope Cemetery for decades without proper care. As any item with age, the heads stone deteriorated and some were even vandalized. Perhaps, it was fate for us to keep our history when the cemetery experienced financial burden which led the city to contact the Chinatown community. This attention was brought to two active members of the Chinatown community, Davis Woo and David S.Y. Wong, in 1989. And in 1992, when The Chinese Historical Society of New England (CHSNE) was established, they began the project to restore history. CHSNE and along with many efforts of volunteers had started a project in hopes to restore these burial grounds, build a memorial alter, and find a way to restore the damaged tombstones. With ambition and hard work, CHSNE and volunteers alike were able to raise an amazing amount of money.
On March 2007, the Chinese Immigrant Memorial was complete.
Although the Chinese Immigrant Memorial is complete, many efforts are still involved in this project. Every year, a group of students from UMASS Boston (UMB), led by Peter Kiang, Director of the Asian American Studies Program at UMB and co-president of CHSNE, try to maintain and clean the Chinese Immigrant Memorial. In addition, since the tombstones are privately owned by the descendants of the Chinese setters, it is considered private property. Currently, efforts are being made to contact these descendants. However, if efforts has been made but failed, these tombstones could be replaced.
For more information or if you would like to volunteer, please contact CHSNE: (617)338-4339 or email@example.com.
This post is also available in: Chinese

Lier Psychiatric Hospital (Lier Psykiatriske Sykehus or Lier Asyl in Norweigan) in Norway, has a long history as an institution. The sickest people in the society was stowed away here and went from being people to be test subjects in the pharmaceutical industry’s search for new and better drugs. The massive buildings house the memory of a grim chapter in Norwegian psychiatric history the authorities would rather forget.
UPDATE: When you have read this post you might be interested in reading my report one year later!
The buildings welcome you
Many of the patients never came out again alive and many died as a result of the reprehensible treatment. It was said that the treatment was carried out voluntarily, but in reality the patients had no self-determination and the opportunity to make their own decisions.
Must be creepy at night
There is little available information about the former activities at Lier Hospital. On this page (In Norwegian) you can read more about the experiments that were carried out on this Norwegian mental hospital in the postwar period from 1945 to 1975. It’s about the use of LSD, electroshock, brain research funded by the U.S. Department of Defense and drug research sponsored by major pharmaceutical companies. It is perhaps not surprising that they try to forget this place and the events taking place here.
Chair in room
One of many rooms
Things that is left behind including bath tub
It was also performed lobotomy here. That’s a procedure that involves knocking a needle-like object into the eye socket and into the patients head to cut the connection between the anterior brain lobes and the rest of the brain. Lobotomy was primarily used to treat schizophrenia but also as a soothing treatment for other disorders. The patients who survived were often quiet, but generally this surgery made the patients worse. Today lobotomy is considered barbaric and it is not practiced in Norway.
From a window
Lier Psyciatric Hospital, or Lier Asylum as it was called originally, was built in 1926 and had room for nearly 700 patients at the most. In 1986, many of the buildings were closed and abandoned and they still stand empty to this day. Some of the buildings are still in operation today for psychiatric patients.
Exterior of the A building
Desinfection bath tub
These photos are from my visit there as a curios photographer. The place was clearly ravaged by the youths, the homeless and drug addicts who have infiltrated the buildings during its 23 years of abandonment. On net forums people has written up and down about ghost stories and the creepy atmosphere. I was curious how I would experience the place myself. But I found it was pretty quiet and peaceful. I went there during the day so I understand that during nighttime, one should look far for a more sinister place. The floor consisted of a lot of broken glass and other debris.
View through window
A pile with electrical boxes or something
These days, there has been provided money to demolish the. 15 million NOKs is the price. Neighbors cheer but the historic, photographers and ghost hunting kids think it’s sad. This is the most visited, and just about the only and largest urban exploration site in Norway.
I have read and recommend Ingvar Ambjørnsen first novel, “23-Salen”, which is about when he worked as a nurse at Lier Psychiatric Hospital for one year. The book provides insight into how life for patients and nurses turned out in one of the worst wards.
The famous motorized wheelchair
Doorways and peeling paint
Top floor, view to the roof and empty windows
Disused stairs outside

Seven miles to the south west of Sheffield there's a piece of wild moorland surrounded by roads. It's called Big Moor. I estimate that if you circumnavigated it on foot by the boundary roads it would take you over seven hours. In spite of its wild appearance, Big Moor was once home to generations of neolithic people. They built at least three significant stone circles, several cairns, dwelling houses and field systems. This was in days when there were still wolves in the British Isles, long before the Romans introduced rabbits and horse chestnut trees and in a time when there were no horses or wheat or potatoes. Life must have been very hard.
By the middle ages, the stone circle builders had gone but the country had very few roads and most travel was still on foot. Trading tracks began to criss-cross the land and on Big Moor several stone posts or stoops were erected to guide travellers and traders across the difficult terrain with its bogs and dips, rivulets and hardy moorland vegetation. Mick Jagger's surname harks back to the jaggers of yesteryear - hardy men who carried heavy packs - they were pedlars and hawkers. The verb "to jag" meant to pack or to carry. When good roads were built and roadworthy coaches developed, the jaggers disappeared but their paths and their guideposts were left behind.
In the nineteenth century, as the importance of clean, reliable water supplies became more obvious, many reservoirs were constructed across England and on Big Moor you can see the location of Barbrook Reservoir which is now disused.
|Barbrook II stone circle|
|Highland cattle avoiding the hot British sunshine|
|One of the remote guideposts on Big Moor|
|Another one - taller, more weathered|
|Perhaps an old cross in the middle of the moor - not marked on maps|

The unity between a man and a woman in marriage is an expression of the spiritual relationship that God desires His creation to realize with Him. The first marriage occurred nearly 6,000 years ago in the Garden of Eden, in the area of the world that we now know as the Middle East. The first couple was Adam and Eve, and the Lord Jesus specified that it was male and female that God joined together in marriage for life. (Matthew 19:4-6)
Marriage has been practised as such in most cultures across geography and time. Marriage is a life-long commitment, and typically this involves a public ceremony (a wedding) in which vows are exchanged by the parties and before God. Approximately half of all traditional marriages in America end in divorce, many due to Facebook and other liberal activities.
Dinesh D'Souza wrote:
- Marriage requires a) two people who are b) of legal age and c) not closely related to each other who are d) one male and one female. Note that this definition excludes people who want to marry children, or guys who want to marry their sisters, or Muslims who want to take four wives, or that strange guy who wants to marry his dog.
Bill Bennett wrote:
- Based as it is on the principle of complementarity, marriage is also about a great deal more than love. That "great deal" encompasses, above all, procreation. The timeless function of marriage is childbearing and child-rearing, and the best arrangement ever developed to that end is the marital union between one man and one woman ... 
What Bennett's words ultimately imply is that, in terms of the value of marriage to anything which stands outside of it, marriage is most principally for the production of additional marriages, and, thus, is a progressive type of scale-invariance such as the Mandelbrot fractal.
So, marriage is the most glorious kind of relation between human individuals because it alone is what most essentially defines humanity. The good of humanity is defined as an integration of all naturally enduring mutual benefits between all free individuals. But, all those benefits are created-and-sustained by the existence of marriage as that one relation for the preservation of which is invoked the most special legal recognition, because...
...Marriage not only historically is the very first form of human society, it is logically the most beautiful, perfect, simple, and potentially productive human institution possible.
Biblical marriage advice
1 Corinthians 7:1-16:
|“||Now concerning the things about which you wrote, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. But because of immoralities, each man is to have his own wife, and each woman is to have her own husband. The husband must fulfill his duty to his wife, and likewise also the wife to her husband. The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does; and likewise also the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does. Stop depriving one another, except by agreement for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer, and come together again so that Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. But this I say by way of concession, not of command. Yet I wish that all men were even as I myself am However, each man has his own gift from God, one in this manner, and another in that. But I say to the unmarried and to widows that it is good for them if they remain even as I. But if they do not have self-control, let them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn with passion. But to the married I give instructions, not I, but the Lord, that the wife should not leave her husband (but if she does leave, she must remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband should not divorce his wife. But to the rest I say, not the Lord, that if any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he must not divorce her. And a woman who has an unbelieving husband, and he consents to live with her, she must not send her husband away. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified through her believing husband; for otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy. Yet if the unbelieving one leaves, let him leave; the brother or the sister is not under bondage in such cases, but God has called us to peace. For how do you know, O wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, O husband, whether you will save your wife?||”|
Modern marriage licenses
In the present-day United States, "getting married" typically involves a marriage license issued by the state government or a subdivision thereof (e.g., a county). However, marriage licenses are nowhere mentioned in Scripture; in fact, they are a relatively recent innovation and originally applied only to marriages that were otherwise forbidden.
Definition of marriage
For Christians, marriage has traditionally been seen as "a union that takes its distinctive character from being founded, unlike other friendships, on bodily unity of the kind that sometimes generates new life." As such, marriage is the one and only form of companionship from which all other forms spring: it is the single irreducible core of society.
Modern history of marriage law
- 1724 - blacks, with permission of their slave owner, given the right to marry (formerly, under British law, only whites could legally marry)
- 1769 - women no longer considered property of their husbands
- 1899 - polygamy outlawed in the US
- 1967 - interracial marriage legalized in all states
- 1981 - rise of community property laws as men no longer seen as the sole owner of all marital assets
Attacks on the institution of marriage
Any society which has lessened the sanctity of marriage has perished, whereas those that have upheld the sanctity of marriage have endured. It has been argued that Ancient Rome's decline and its eventual fall in A.D. 476 were due in no small part to a growing tolerance of extramarital sex, particularly of homosexual acts, beginning in the Late Republic period ending in 27 B.C.
Since the middle of the 20th century, Liberalism has sought to dismantle the societal pressures that dissuade people from engaging in extramarital and premarital sex. Removing the stigma from these behaviors, creating no-fault divorce laws, exalting adultery as liberating, rejuvenating, and "stimulating", and especially the de-stigmatizing of homosexuality all weaken the institution of marriage.
A recent Newsweek article complained that Biblical figures have not provided good historical examples of marriage, noting that Abraham begat Ishmael by a maidservant and Jacob had two wives and had sons with both of their servants. The article also criticizes Jesus and St. Paul for remaining single. 
- ↑ Marriage between the sexes is a covenant, not a contract. Since time immemorial, some men disposed of a wife (woman) after her childbearing years to pursue a younger female consort. God, being a defender of women, ordained marriage by his perfect will to protect women's rights and not allow a man (male) to abandon them to homelessness and poverty with no marketable job skills other than homemaking or child rearing. This however, is not the only reason the covenant of marriage evolved between the sexes.
- ↑ See also Perfect will of God vs Permissive will of God.
- ↑ Article 7, "The sacrament of matrimony"
- ↑ "Basic Beliefs," Southern Baptist Convention
- ↑ "Marriage"
- ↑ Albert Barnes, Matthew 19
- ↑ Matthew Henry, Matthew 19
- ↑ "Because there is a natural complementarity between men and women - sexual, emotional, temperamental, spiritual - marriage allows for a wholeness and a completeness that cannot be won in any other way. (Bill Bennett, The Broken Hearth, Page 197)
- ↑ Divorce is within the permissive will of God, Deut. 22:13; divorce however, is due to sin entering the world, which God is willing to redeem. God himself in fact is divorced from Israel (Jer. 3:8-14; see also Is. 54:5), or for that matter, all unredeemed sinners.
- ↑ Gay Rights vs. Democracy
- ↑ The Broken Hearth, Page 197)
- ↑ Scale-invariance as a unifying psychological principle; 1999
- ↑ Information on marriage licenses from Mercy Seat Christian Church 
- ↑ Gay Marriage, Democracy, and the Courts
- ↑ Is there anyone left to defend traditional marriage?
- ↑ http://www.newsweek.com/id/172653/page/1
- Form of Solemnization of Matrimony, an example of a traditional marriage service
- Civil marriage
- Marriage in the Unification Church
- Essay: The Irreducible Core of Politics

Juvenile striped bass spawned in the Chesapeake Bay were at a record low at the end of the summer. The Maryland Department of Natural Resources recently completed its annual young of the year survey and found far fewer juvenile fish than a year ago.
Scientists believe the factors are more tied to unusually warm weather conditions in the Chesapeake than to the number of adult fish spawning in the bay.
The annual survey of fish spawned in the summer is called the young of the year index, and is used to gauge the health of stocks born in that year. The annual index, collected over more than 50 years, has had many highs and lows. This year’s index, the lowest recorded, was .89. Last year’s index of 11.9 was the fourth highest.
Nearly all striped bass found in Vineyard waters come from the Chesapeake. It can take from four to six years for a female striped bass to reach sexual maturity.
Dan McKiernan, deputy director of the state Division of Marine Fisheries, called the low index troubling and said it may be tied to environmental factors, since the water temperature in Chesapeake Bay was especially high this summer. Mr. McKiernan said the number of adults spawning in the bay didn’t change that much from last year. He said the index shows how well those juvenile fish survived by the end of the summer, not how many fish were spawned.
“What it tells you is that there is high variability. You see a swinging pendulum. I am not a climatologist, but it would seem that the wild swings are tied to the environment,” Mr. McKiernan said. “Whether you look at the temperature of the water or the amount of rainfall, you’ve got dramatic swings . . . the Chesapeake Bay had one of the hottest years,” he added.
Mike Armstrong, a fisheries biologist and assistant director of the Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries, underscored the significance of the striped bass fishery. “It is the recreational fishery in Massachusetts,” he said. “We live and die by the health of striped bass, so we are watching the stocks like hawks.”
The Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, a regional government agency, has been monitoring the striped bass fishery closely since stocks collapsed 30 years ago. Recently, the commission decided to take steps to tighten controls on management of the fishery.
The abundance of striped bass is not determined by a single year class, Mr. Armstrong said, but by watching larger trends. “We are not pushing the panic button. But if we have three years in a row like this, then we push the panic button,” the fisheries biologist said.
Also, new trends were observed this summer. Mr. Armstrong said fishermen saw many more schoolie-sized striped bass in Massachusetts waters than would normally be expected.
He said scientists are wondering whether the large 2011 year class still swimming in the Chesapeake Bay had something to do with the change by pushing the larger juvenile fish out into the Atlantic.
Janet Messineo of Vineyard Haven, an avid fisherman and past president of the Martha’s Vineyard Surfcasters Association, confirmed the trend from her experience fishing the derby this fall. “There were more small fish out there,” she said. “We should be concerned [about the low index] but I think we really need to make sure that the fish are in a healthy ecosystem,” she added. “Right from the get-go, we should be thinking of the bait, from microorgansims to bunker [menhaden, a valuable bait fish that has been characterized as overfished and in need of restoration]. We cannot go crazy over just one species. We have to look at the whole picture if we want a healthy fishery.”
She continued: “The good thing I saw [this year] was that there were bunker. I haven’t seen bunker in a lot of years. One of the problems with striped bass we’ve seen in the past is that they were skinny and emaciated. This year we saw healthier fish. My concern isn’t that there be a large number of fish out there. I think we should be concerned that they have food to eat.”

Hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) is an uncommon condition characterized by frequent, persistent, and severe vomiting and nausea during pregnancy. As a result, you may be unable to take in a sufficient amount of food and fluids. It can cause a weight loss of more than 5% of your pre-pregnancy body weight. This can also cause dehydration and vitamin and mineral deficiencies. Treatment may require hospitalization.
HG is a more severe form of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP), also called morning sickness. Morning sickness affects anywhere between 50% to 90% of pregnant women. HG is estimated to occur in 0.5%-2% of pregnancies.
There are many theories about the causes of HG, but none have been confirmed. HG is a complex disease that is likely caused by many factors. Some of these include:
The Brain May Be Cause of Nausea
Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, Inc.
Some researchers have found that the following factors increase your chance of developing HG. If you have any of these risk factors, tell your doctor:
The following list of symptoms are general and may be caused by other, less serious health conditions. However, if you experience any one of them, call your physician to discuss your condition. Symptoms may include:
Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. Tests may include the following:
Treating HG symptoms early in pregnancy can make you less sick in the long run and can decrease recovery time. Because HG is caused by many factors that vary among women, it is difficult to find a treatment that works for everyone. Talk with your doctor about the best treatment plan for you. Treatment options include the following:
Try to eat frequent, small meals, bland or dry foods, high-protein choices.
Reducing nausea, and thus allowing eating and drinking, will hasten recovery. Due to the risk of stating that a drug is safe for use during pregnancy, very few pharmaceutical manufacturers will say that their drugs are intended for a pregnancy condition like HG (examples: promethazine or prochlorperazine). However, doctors often recommend that women with HG take certain anti-nausea medicines, balancing the potential benefits and risks. Talk to your doctor about the right medicines for you.
A common and safe remedy is to take supplemental vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), to a maximum of 100 mg/day. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that first-line treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy should start with pyridoxine with or without doxylamine. Pyridoxine has been found to be effective in significantly reducing severe vomiting.
In urgent visit situations, HG can be managed by IV fluids and vitamins. This can sometimes be done without hospitalization. Very rarely, some people require IV fluids throughout the entire pregnancy.
If you are unable to tolerate food by mouth, you may need to receive nutrition by vein. This is called parenteral nutrition. A special kind of catheter is placed in a large vein and liquid nutrition is given. This can sometimes be done without hospitalization.
In extreme cases, induced abortion may be considered.
If you are diagnosed with HG, follow your doctor's instructions.
Many of the conditions that lead to HG are not preventable. It is unknown why some women without those conditions develop HG. You can try to reduce your nausea during pregnancy by:
The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation
National Organization for Rare Diseases
The Canadian Women's Health Network
The Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC)
ACOG issues guidance on the treatment of morning sickness during pregnancy. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology website. Available at: http://www.acog.org/About_ACOG/News_Room/News_Releases/2004/ACOG_Issues_Guidance_on_Treatment_of_Morning_Sickness_During_Pregnancy. Accessed August 20, 2011.
Acupuncture. EBSCO Natural and Alternative Treatments website. Available at: http://www.ebscohost.com/healthLibrary. Updated January 2009. Accessed January 19, 2009.
Beers MH, Berkow R, eds. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 17th ed. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories; 1999.
Burrow GN, Duffy TP, eds. Medical Complications During Pregnancy. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Company; 1999.
Cunningham FG, Gilstrap LC, Gant NF, Hauth JC, Leveno KJ, Wenstrom KD, eds. Williams Obstetrics. 21st ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2001.
Ferri, Fred, ed. Ferri’s Clinical Advisor 2010. 1st ed. Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier, 2009.
Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL. Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies. 5th ed. United Kingdom: Churchill Livingstone; 2007.
Gastroenterology Clinics of North America. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation website. Available at: http://www.helpher.org.
Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 16th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2005.
Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S, eds. Krause’s Food, Nutrition, and Diet Therapy. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Company; 2000.
Marx J, et al. Rosen's Emergency Medicine. 7th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Inc., 2009.
National Organization for Rare Diseases website. Available at: http://www.rarediseases.org
Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: https://dynamed.ebscohost.com. Updated October 2010. Accessed October 25, 2010.
Quinlan JD, Hill DA. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Am Fam Physician. 2003;68:121-128. American Family Physician website. Available at: http://www.aafp.org/afp/20030701/121.html. Accessed August 12, 2005.
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan and Sadock’s Synopsis of Psychiatry: Behavioral Sciences/Clinical Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2003.
Wise MG, Rundell JR, eds. The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry: Psychiatry in the Medically Ill. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 2002.
Last reviewed September 2012 by Andrea Chisholm
Please be aware that this information is provided to supplement the care provided by your physician. It is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. CALL YOUR HEALTHCARE PROVIDER IMMEDIATELY IF YOU THINK YOU MAY HAVE A MEDICAL EMERGENCY. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition.
Copyright © 2012 EBSCO Publishing All rights reserved.
What can we help you find?close ×

Three-dimensional printing is being used to make metal parts for aircraft and space vehicles, as well as industrial uses. Now NASA is building engine parts with this technique for its next-generation heavy-lift rocket.
The agency says that its Space Launch System (SLS) will deliver new abilities for science and human exploration outside Earth's orbit by carrying the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew vehicle, plus cargo, equipment, and instruments for science experiments. It will also supply backup transportation to the International Space Station, and it will even go to Mars.
NASA is using 3D printing to build engine parts for its next-generation Space Launch System. Shown here is the first test piece produced on the M2 Cusing Machine at the Marshall Space Flight Center.
(Source: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center/Andy Hardin)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center is using a selective laser melting (SLM) process to produce intricate metal parts for the SLS rocket engines with powdered metals and the M2 Cusing machine, built by Concept Laser of Germany. NASA expects to save millions in manufacturing costs and reduce manufacturing time. SLM, a version of selective laser sintering, is known for its ability to create metal parts with complex geometries and precise mechanical properties.
The SLS will weigh 5.5 million pounds, stand 321 feet tall, and provide 8.4 million pounds of thrust at liftoff. Its propulsion system will include liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. Its mission will launch Orion without a crew in 2017; the second will launch Orion with up to four astronauts in 2021. NASA's goal is to use SLM to manufacture parts that will be used on the first mission.
The rocket's development and operations costs will be reduced using tooling and manufacturing technology from programs such as the space shuttle. For example, the J-2X engine, an advanced version of J-2 Saturn engines, will be used as the SLS upper stage engine. Some SLM-produced engine parts will be structurally tested this year and used in J-2X hot-fire tests.
In a NASA video, Andy Hardin, engine integration hardware lead for the Marshall Space Flight Center SLS engines office, discusses the initial testing and building stages:
We do a lot of engineering builds first to make sure we have the process [worked] out. There's always weld problems that you have to deal with, and there's going to be problems with this that we will have to work out, too. But this has the potential to eliminate a lot of those problems, and it will have the potential to reduce the cost by as much as half in some cases on a lot of parts.
Since final parts won't be welded, they are structurally stronger and more reliable, which also makes for a safer vehicle.
Ken Cooper, advanced manufacturing team lead at the Marshall Space Flight Center, says in the video that the technique is especially useful for making very complex shapes that can't be built in other ways, or for simplifying the building of complex shapes. But geometry is not the deciding factor; whether the machine can do it or not is decided by the size of the part.

Tim the Plumber wrote:
The idea that you can predict the climate based on it's temperature behaviour between 1970 and 1998 is silly. Just as the statement that the absence of warming since 1998 and 2011 cannot utterly disproove AGW the rise between 1970 and 1998 cannot 100% proove the theory that CO2 is a significant greenhouse gas at the levels we have today.
Nobody is trying to predict temperatures based on historically temperatures over the last 40 or so. The predictions are based on our understanding of earth's climate over hundreds of millions of years and particularly the last 4 million years of recurring ice ages. The climate while complicated has to obey some very simple basic physical rules that is the energy coming in has over time to equal the energy going out. Change that simple relationship in some way and the temperature will change change until such time as the equation is back in balance. It is certain that greenhouse gases reduce the amount of energy that leaves the earth.
Northern Europe is having a wet and cool summer, it's just America which is having a long, hot and dry one.
No my original statement is correct
According to NOAA:-http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/2012/6
The Northern Hemisphere land and ocean average surface temperature for June 2012 was the all-time warmest June on record, at 1.30°C (2.34°F) above average.
The Northern Hemisphere average land temperature, where the majority of Earth's land is located, was record warmest for June. This makes three months in a row — April, May, and June — in which record-high monthly land temperature records were set. Most areas experienced much higher-than-average monthly temperatures, including most of North America and Eurasia, and northern Africa. Only northern and western Europe, and the northwestern United States were notably cooler than average.
Tim the Plumber wrote:
When thinking about such climatic events it is vital to have a sense of proportion and not see a tiny change over 3 decades as a reason to think that there will be a drastic "exponential" continuation of this.
The temperatures changes over the last 3 decades simply confirms our basic understanding of the climate.
It is akin to having a graph of the speed of your car traveling along a highway. When the speed is 55mph your pasenger is happy, when the graph plots up to 57 mph the pasenger panics because the car is about to accelerate untill the machine disintergrates at the sound barrier. When the graph shows a slowing to 53mph the panic is of the sudden stopping of the car and the trafic behind slamming into the back of the car.
No it is more being in a car where the cruise control is stuck and the speed just keeps increasing.
Climate varies about quiote a lot.
Because we live fairly short lives we do not rember the droughts of the dust bowl. We do not rember the medevil warm period. We do not rember the frost fairs on the frozen Thames.
This is why we maintain weather data which shows that the current conditions are both worst and different.
We should take these dire warnings with a big pinch of salt.
Dire warnings should be assessed on the merits and action taken if necessary but never ignored
The sea level rose by 18cm last centuary, how many cities flooded because of this? This centuary looks like it could be twice as bad, maybe.
So as long as we split the sea level rises into 18 cm chunks it will be no problem ?
I am reminded of camels transporting straw.

by Frederick B. Reitz, Ph.C.
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington Illustrations by Marian Parry
I report here the first evidence that domestic cats exhibit quantum tunneling.
Subatomic particles can make seemingly impossible, instantaneous "jumps" from one place to another. This has been known in theory for well over half a century. Numerous examples of it have been observed and meticulously documented. Known as "quantum tunneling," this strange phenomenon had previously been thought to occur only on very small scales.
In this paper I report instances of the spontaneous relocation of entire cats. Though cats are arguably quantal to the extent that they tend to exist as discrete entities, the appreciable magnitude of some of the cats in question constitutes a novel aspect of the tunneling phenomenon.
The physical literature contains many reports of electrons and similar particles spontaneously jumping or "tunneling" from one place to another via so-called "forbidden" routes. This phenomenon has enjoyed much attention since the advent of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). In all reports to date, the particles in question have ranged in size from extremely small to very, very small, with rare cases involving particles that are merely quite small.
House pets have also frequently been observed to exhibit unusual behavior. Dogs circle many times before sitting down. Cats forget to retract their tongues after bathing, and hamsters sleep in their food dishes.
Non-Newtonian House Pets
Pets are rarely attributed with exotic, non-Newtonian physical behavior. However, cats and dogs that are especially long-haired can exhibit a wavelike appearance. Furthermore, animals clearly interfere with each other, sometimes destructively (as with cats and dogs, or with cats and humans that are attempting to read a newspaper), sometimes constructively (as with rabbits and rabbits).
Erwin Schr?dinger alluded, in a famous thought experiment, to the general question of the quantum behavior of cats. However, I believe that my report presents the first documented instances of the spontaneous tunneling of cats, and also the first documented reports of related quasi-electromagnetic cat phenomena.
Cat Tunneling: Case 1
In my own residence, I and several other party guests personally observed the case of Chloe, a large black Himalayan. Though the extent of the cat's fur decreased the certainty with which one could specify the cat's position and momentum (c.f., the Himalyan Uncertainty Principle), and our garage door is only a few inches thick, the tunneling event was no less remarkable in light of her prodigious girth (she weighed 15 pounds, frequently intimidating our German Shepherd into sharing his dinner). The cat was initially observed sleeping in the driveway. When next observed several minutes later, the cat was nowhere to be seen. We opened the garage door, at which point Chloe left the garage, obviously having tunneled through the closed door. We marveled at this phenomenon, and, as we closed the side door to the garage, discussed plans for further study.
Cat Tunneling: Case 2
The next such instance brought to my attention was one Snuggles Jr. of Lansing, Michigan, who was found on June 10, 1995, at 10:31 AM resting comfortably amidst a fresh batch of clothing, inside an automatic clothes dryer. As the dryer door was closed, and the owners did not remember having let the cat in, the transition was judged to be spontaneous. Discussion with the owners, regarding house policies pertaining to where the cat was and was not allowed to go, established the forbidden nature of this transition. Given that the cat was not even allowed in the laundry room, the span of the forbidden transition of the 6 pound cat was at least than 7 linear feet-clearly this constitutes tunneling on an unprecedented scale.
Cat Tunneling: Case 3
Finally, there is the case of "Giggles," a largish calico of uncertain dimensions who was remarkable for his repeated and unsuccessful attempts to violate the Pauli Exclusion Principle with the neighbor's tabby (who in turn might have been more cooperative had she not been spayed). Though arguably the tunneling that Giggles did to get under the fence between his yard and the neighbor's was of a conventional sort, his consistent failure to include any other similar cat in his proximity and same state of excitation is compellingly consistent with previous results found on smaller scales.
Given these data, I am led to the following conclusions:
- Cats do exhibit the sort of tunneling behavior previously attributed only to subatomic particles, car keys, and socks;
- Despite the finite probability of a cat tunneling spontaneously through a door, the probability of this event is low enough that leaving the cat closed in one's bedroom for a prolonged period of time is inadvisable; and
- One's cat should indeed be blamed for the majority of stools found in inappropriate locations.
Copyright © 1998 The Annals of Improbable Research (AIR). All rights reserved.
_____________________This article is republished with permission from the March-April 1998 issue of the Annals of Improbable Research. You can download or purchase back issues of the magazine, or subscribe to receive future issues. Or get a subscription for someone as a gift!
Visit their website for more research that makes people LAUGH and then THINK.

American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The chance happening of fortunate or adverse events; fortune: They met one day out of pure luck.
- n. Good fortune or prosperity; success: We wish you luck.
- n. One's personal fate or lot: It was just my luck to win a trip I couldn't take.
- v. Informal To gain success or something desirable by chance: lucked into a good apartment; lucked out in finding that rare book.
- idiom. as luck would have it As it turned out; as it happened: As luck would have it, it rained the day of the picnic.
- idiom. in luck Enjoying success; fortunate.
- idiom. out of luck Lacking good fortune.
- idiom. press To risk one's good fortune, often by acting overconfidently.
- idiom. try (one's) luck To attempt something without knowing if one will be successful.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. Fortune; hap; that which happens to a person by chance, conceived as having a real tendency to be favorable or unfavorable, or as if there were an inward connection between a succes sion of fortuitous occurrences having the same character as favorable or unfavorable. Thus, gamesters say that one ought to continue to play while the luck is in one's favor and leave off when the luck turns against one.
- n. Good fortune; favorable hap; a supposed something, pertaining to a person, at least for a time, giving to fortuitous events a favorable character; also, in a weakened sense, a fortuitous combination of favorable occurrences.
- n. An object with which good fortune is thought to be connected; especially, a vessel for holding liquid, as a drinking-cup. There are several such vessels surviving in England, as the Luck of Edenhall, preserved in a manor-house in the county of Cumberland.
- n. Synonyms See happy.
- To be lucky.
- To make lucky.
- n. A lock of wool twisted on the finger of a spinner.
- n. Something that happens to someone by chance, a chance occurrence.
- n. A superstitious feeling that brings fortune or success.
- n. success
- v. intransitive To succeed by chance.
- v. intransitive To rely on luck.
- v. transitive To carry out relying on luck.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. That which happens to a person; an event, good or ill, affecting one's interests or happiness, and which is deemed casual; a course or series of such events regarded as occurring by chance; chance; hap; fate; fortune; often, one's habitual or characteristic fortune.
Luckis often used by itself to mean good luck.
- n. your overall circumstances or condition in life (including everything that happens to you)
- n. an unknown and unpredictable phenomenon that causes an event to result one way rather than another
- n. an unknown and unpredictable phenomenon that leads to a favorable outcome
- From Middle English luk, lukke, related to Old Frisian luk ("luck"), West Frisian gelok ("luck"), Dutch geluk ("luck"), Low German luk ("luck"), German Glück ("luck, good fortune, happiness"), Danish lykke ("luck"), Swedish lycka ("luck"), Icelandic lukka ("luck"). (Wiktionary)
- Middle English lucke, from Middle Dutch luc, short for gheluc. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“While the romantic side of me would like to believe in "luck" - the karmic, cosmic smiling-upon-me type of luck, the scientific side of me completely agrees with Lena West.”
“And then, turning to leave him, 'An' will ye say a mass if the luck is against me? ”
“Well, your luck is about to change with a little assistance from Lavish Lifestyles, LLC.”
“MAATHAI: They say that what we call luck is opportunity that meets preparedness.”
“I sometimes wonder if what we call luck is merely the will of God, " Otero observed sadly, -and that therefore Cochrane has been sent to scourge Spain for a reason.”
“Whenever you hear any one expatiating upon what he calls the luck of some one else, you may be sure that he is a person entirely deficient in those qualities which could attract what he calls luck, but what is really, in the majority of cases, merely the result of hard work based upon a reasoned poise.”
“Well, this is what I call luck!" exclaimed Ferd Stowing.”
“Well, this is what I call luck -- pure, unadulterated luck, with sugar on it," drawled Ham as he surveyed the house.”
“Ephraim, my son!" said the old gambler, with a cunning smile, "I'll tell you something -- There are persons whose whole powers are devoted to one object -- how to win a fortune; in the same way as there are some who study to become doctors, and the like, so these study what we call luck ... and from them I've learned it.”
“This is certainly what I call luck," cried Allen excitedly, as he gazed at the scrap of paper Levine had passed over.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘luck’.
all sorts of ...
Very basic words for ESL students.
short, sweet, epic, catchy, sassy, sexy & sizzling.
( personal list, randomness )
Much of my life has had healthy doses of this, so I pay homage.
Looking for tweets for luck.

One of the most frequently asked questions here at Jacob Lake Inn is, “Where is the lake?” Many people who visit this area from wetter climates may not consider our lake to be a lake, but this small accumulation of water, supplied by rain and snow melt, is one of the only permanent water sources on top of the Kaibab Plateau. Known as the “waterless mountain”, meaning there are no streams or running water, the Kaibab Plateau contains several small lakes comparable to Jacob Lake. Many of these lakes are formed in the beds of sink holes, plugged up by organic material, and filled with rain and melted snow.
These lakes, and in particular, Jacob Lake, as small as it may be, were often the difference between life and death for Native, immigrant and traveler. The Piute Indians who inhabited the Kaibab Plateau told Jacob Hamblin, Mormon pioneer and explorer, about this little known water supply, and he in turn told other pioneers traveling through the area. The Honeymoon Trail, a route traveled by settlers and couples from settlements in southern Arizona on their way to the Mormon temple in St. George, snaked around the base of the plateau. The new route over the plateau, with the stop at Jacob Lake, cut off a significant portion of their journey, thus establishing the trail and Jacob Lake as a valuable resource. The Piutes held Jacob Hamblin in high regard, due to his honest trading practices and peacemaking abilities with the local tribes and white pioneers, and named the lake after him. The concept of land ownership was absent from the Piute culture. They did not give Hamblin the lake, but rather they honored him by giving this priceless body of water his name.
The size of Jacob Lake has changed over the years. In the past, especially in a wet year it could nearly reach the fence that surrounds it, but due to recent droughts and mild winters the lake has decreased in size. Jacob Lake stands as an example of the value placed on water in this dry region and though this water source no longer supplies water to thirsty travelers; it does provide wildlife with a dependable water supply throughout the year.
When Harold and Nina N. Bowman established Jacob Lake Inn in 1923, their families had been involved in the exploration and settling of much of southern Utah and the Arizona Strip. Nina's grandfather, Franklin B. Woolley, wrote the 1866 cavalry exploration report of the territory from St. George to the Kaibab Plateau to the mouth of the Green River. The report included the first official descriptions and map of the area. Harold's father, Henry E. Bowman, engineered and supplied the cable tram that crossed the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon. Henry also built (with a lot of help from the people of Kanab, Glendale, and Orderville) the first road from Kanab, Utah to Mt. Carmel. This made the area more accessible to travelers and tourists.
Franklin B.'s brother, Edwin D. Woolley Jr was one of the first white men to see the Grand Canyon from the North Rim. Upon seeing it he almost fell off his horse and exclaimed "This is one of the wonders of the world! People will come from all corners of the globe and pay large sums of money to gaze at what we now behold." As a local community leader and a man of wonderful vision, Woolley saw the importance of tourism in the growth of Southern Utah and the Grand Canyon area. Due to the lack of water for large scale agriculture, this region had limited economic potential.
Edwin D. continually sought to plan and develop ways to open Southern Utah and the North Rim area to people from around the world. He organized many expeditions to the North Rim, bring- ing groups of dignitaries, important businessmen and important politicians to the area. Some of his more illustrious guests included Buffalo Bill Cody and Zane Grey. In 1890 Edwin D. convinced a group of English noblemen accompanied by Buffalo Bill to invest in developing this prime hunting ground. However, the lack of adequate roads spoiled the deal.
After riding in an automobile for the first time in 1908, Edwin D. planned and guided the first automobile trip in 1913 to the North Rim. This incredible feat was accomplished by building the road as they went. This also required gas to be shipped 320 miles from the closest gas station which was in Salt Lake City. President Teddy Roosevelt also frequented the Kaibab. In 1903, Roosevelt, with his two older sons and nephew, made an expedition from the South Rim to the North Rim. Roosevelt's impressions of the Grand Canyon, together with his hunting experiences on the Kaibab, led him to push for a change in the status of the Grand Canyon. In 1908 this national forest and game reserve became a national monument, which led to its eventual designation as a National Park in 1919.
In 1923, Harold and Nina Bowman, realizing the improved mobility the automobile afforded travelers, started a business selling gas from a fifty-gallon barrel in the back of a truck. This venture, originally located on the "shores" of Jacob Lake, began a short two years after their marriage. They each had a heritage of pioneering men and women and neither was daunted by this enterprise.
The first lodge was built a year later on the ridge above the lake (across from what is now the Kaibab Kamper Village) at the head of Jacob Canyon. As Harold stated in his personal history "Jacob Lake Inn was quite an experiment at first. We built a two room cabin, and Nina moved out there and just used quilts for doors. She took care of the place and her brother Ezra Nixon ran the service station. If we could sell a barrel of gas in one day, we thought we had had good business." As described before, the first lodge had two rooms, a main room in which root beer and Native American crafts were sold and a kitchen where meals were prepared for visitors, family and staff. This lodge remained by Jacob Lake unti11929 when the highway, which had come up through the narrow Jacob Canyon, was moved. This old road was an enlargement of the original trail used by Jacob Hamblin and the Piutes as they trekked the shortest distance to water at Jacob Lake. With the increase in travel, thanks to the automobile, a highway was engineered and constructed to allow safe travel up the spine of the mountain. With this new highway changing the route of travel, the Bowmans built the new Jacob Lake Inn at its present location, what is now the junction of Highway 89a and Highway 67. When Harold learned that the location of the new highway junction was positioned at the base of a large hill, and that it would be an inconvenient location for travelers headed to the Grand Canyon, Harold borrowed a BPR grader and built a better road. This shifted the junction of the road from the base of the hill to the flatter land right in front of the Jacob Lake Inn. Harold's road became the more traveled route, and when the highway was paved In the mid thirties, it became the official highway.
Effie Dean Bowman (Rich) was born in 1923, the same year as Jacob Lake Inn, so to speak. Harold Jr. was born in 1927. In 1929, Effie Dean and Harold began the lifestyle of spending summers at Jacob Lake and winters in Salt Lake City when Effie Dean entered the first grade. On the Kaibab they had dogs, squirrels and porcupines for pets and each other for friends as they watched their parents work hard. Nina would start the day doing laundry, then move to baking and cooking, then working in the gift shop. Harold Sr. was always building onto the lodge, greeting customers (if a car stopped out in the road, he would go out and give directions and invite the guests in), and helped to keep things running smoothly. Effie Dean and Harold Jr. started working at a young age. Effie Dean, at age seven, started the very important job of emptying slop jars in the rooms. Harold Jr. started at age four taking firewood to all the cabins. They washed dishes, cleaned rooms, emptied slop jars, gathered firewood, and moved on to other jobs. Effie Dean began waitressing at thirteen, and Harold started in the service station at eight.
As more people traveled to see the Grand Canyon North Rim, Jacob Lake Inn's reputation for hospitality and good food began to grow. The Prince of Siam and his entourage stopped on their way to the Canyon and even though he was a reluctant subject, Nina captured his likeness for posterity. The lodge also expanded with the growing number of tourists, adding a dining room, new motel units, and even relocating the gas station twice. The staff kept growing too, and soon it grew beyond the scope of family and friends. Annual pilgrimages to regional colleges and universities or any place they could find good employees began bringing bright, friendly young people to the Inn to help care for their children and serve their guests.
Effie Dean and Harold Jr. continued working with the family after pursuing an education, military service, and their respective marriages (Effie Dean married John P. Rich and Harold married Afton Kunz). Soon the third generation began. John Jr. and Bonnie, Nina, Steve, Harold III, Chris, Kent, Kim, Genene, Mary Lynne, and Matt all helped keep the business going.
They started out by showing guests to their cabins, washing headlights (they couldn't reach the windshields), bussing tables, crushing and bagging ice, slicing bread, washing dishes, hauling trash, chopping wood, herding cattle, fixing fences, and any number of jobs that needed doing. During these summers they worked alongside the young people, explored the Kaibab Forest roads on their days off, and traveled back home to Salt Lake for the fall and winter to attend school. Harold Jr. once stated he was neither a country hick nor a city slicker, he had the best of both, and now the fourth generation of the Bowman family has experienced this fortunate life as well.
As time went on, Harold Jr.'s wife and children pursued other interests and professions, while Effie Dean, her children, their spouses, and grandchildren, continue the seasonal trek to the Kaibab.They manage the lodge, hire personnel, and perform the tasks regular employees won't do. As Jacob Lake's founding generations pass on, (Nina N. in 1959, Harold Jr. in 1961, Harold Sr. in 1974, and John Rich Sr. in 1995), those that remain acknowledge the heritage that their pioneering ancestors set forth. This legacy of hard work, friendly knowledgeable service, excellent products, and a love for the Kaibab, the Grand Canyon, and the red rock deserts they call home.

50 years ago, President John F. Kennedy told the United States that man would go to the moon. Soon, another American president may announce that the same celestial body will serve as a waypoint for manned space exploration. The Verge has learned that NASA intends to deploy a robotic lunar rover on the Moon in 2017 to search for water and other resources necessary for space travel, and that NASA may have secured support from the White House for an actual manned outpost — a space station — floating above the far side of the moon.
We spoke to Logsdon as well, and he said that the administration is planning a shift in policy that could make the Moon and its surrounding space a more important part of the equation.
And our source tells us that part of that plan is deploying RESOLVE on the lunar surface in 2017. It’s a payload designed to be mounted on a robotic rover and driven across the moon to find water and other useful materials for space travel, “Cheaper than lifting water off the Earth” such that spaceships won’t have the tremendous expense of lifting them from Earth in order to bring them along. They could theoretically travel from Earth to the lunar waypoint and find resources waiting for them before undertaking a journey further abroad. 2017 also happens to be the target date for the first unmanned mission for NASA’s new Space Launch System and Orion capsule, which will make a loop around the moon, but our source wasn’t sure whether that craft would be the one to drop the lunar rover. In fact, they suggested that instead, the rover would be deployed as part of a commercial partnership, and that the mission would “lay the groundwork for commercial lunar transport.”
Private firms have been working on commercial space travel for a while, with the SpaceX Dragon capsule successfully completing its first resupply mission to the International Space Station just last month, but recently there’s been some interest in space mining as well: Planetary Resources, a company backed by James Cameron, Larry Page and Eric Schmidt, plans to launch a spaceship within two years and begin mining asteroids by 2022.
When we asked NASA about the possibilities of a moon base, a representative wouldn’t confirm or deny the plans. “We are pursuing a range of possible destinations on route to an eventual trip to Mars,” they explained, but admitted that a lunar waypoint would be “in the range of possibilities that have been discussed” and could be “a potential stepping stone to Mars.”
At present, NASA could only confirm that the Space Launch System’s first unmanned mission (Exploration Mission 1) is still slated for 2017 and a second manned mission (Exploration Mission 2) with a crew of four would likely occur in 2021, that astronauts would attempt to land on an asteroid by 2025, and arrive at Mars sometime in the 2030s. NASA did caution, however, that there’s no current plan to land people on the Moon itself.
“Neither EM1 nor EM2 would put boots on the surface of the Moon,” NASA told us.
Rumors of such a deep-space outpost surfaced as early as February of this year, when a leaked memo from a NASA administrator detailed an idea to build a “human-tended waypoint” at Earth-Moon Lagrange Point 2 (EML-2): a point in space where balanced gravitational forces allow an object to remain in stationary orbit relative to both the Earth and the Moon. From there, NASA could launch missions deeper into space — say, to Mars, or a near-Earth asteroid — using the base as a stepping stone.
In September, the Orlando Sentinel revealed that the “gateway spacecraft” wasn’t just a crazy idea. The publication reported that the White House had been pitched on a plan to begin construction as early as 2019, possibly defraying the to-be-determined expense by using parts left over from the International Space Station and components from international partners, including Russia — which has committed to a moon base of its own — and Italy. At the time, the Sentinel reported that it was unclear whether the Obama Administration would support the move.
Now, space policy expert John Logsdon told Space.com that the White House is indeed interested in the idea, and had merely been “holding off announcing that until after the election.” In 2010, President Obama told the nation that we would send men to an asteroid for the first time, and then on to Mars by the mid-2030s, but suggested that the Moon itself wasn’t part of the plan:

Translates words or phrases from French, German or Spanish to
English and English to Spanish, French, German, Italian, or Portuguese
using machine translation technology. Allows the user to get the
"gist" of the message.
The Internet Acronym Server
This site can be used to look up the meaning of an acronym (abbreviations
constructed from the first letters of several words, such as ADA for
American Dental Association). You can also type in a word to get a list
of acronyms that are associated with it. Sponsored by University College,
Cork in Ireland.
Explorers Picture Dictionary with Links
Enchanted Learning, a producer of children’s educational websites,
provides this picture dictionary of more than 1,800 illustrated dictionary
entries. Most entries have links to additional information, activities,
and child-friendly, related websites. There are links to English-French,
English-German, English-Portuguese, or the English-Spanish versions.
Merriam-Webster has put their Collegiate Dictionary and Thesaurus online,
along with word games, contests, and other features.
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary
Sponsored by the National Library of Medicine, this site includes
links to encyclopedias, glossaries, and dictionaries of medical terms
in English as well as eight European languages.
For those times when you can remember the meaning of a word but not
the word itself, the OneLook Reverse Dictionary can help. The site indexes
hundreds of online dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference
sites for words that have definitions similar to the words you search
for. Developed in 1996 by Robert K. Ware, president of Study Technologies.
Oxford English Dictionary |
Definitions, pronunciations, and word histories. Usage of modern and historical words traced through 2.5 million quotations.
Enter any word and this site, using published reference books, provides
rhymes, synonyms, antonyms, definitions, related words and more for
virtually every word. Even includes examples of how the word was used
in Shakespeare’s works.
Wordsmyth: The Educational Dictionary-Thesaurus
Wordsmyth is an American English Dictionary with an integrated
thesaurus. It includes 50,000 headwords along with interactive, hyperlinked
synonyms. Many additional features are included such as crossword solvers,
anagram solvers, and vocabulary quiz makers.
Return to top
Snap Shots enhances links with visual previews. Learn More
February 13, 2012

What is Encryption?
Encryption is a process by which we use software to scramble sensitive information while it is in transit to Dell.
Please take a moment to read about the steps that we have taken to help protect your information and make your online transmissions safer. We also invite you to review the steps you can take to help protect yourself further.
How Does Encryption Work?
Encryption is based on a key that has two different parts. The public part and the private part. The public part of the key is distributed to those you want to communicate with. The private part is for the recipient's use only.
When you send personal information to dell.com, you use Dell's public key to encrypt your personal information. That means, if at any point during the transmission your information is intercepted, it is scrambled and very difficult to decrypt. Once Dell receives your encrypted personal information, we use the private part of our key to decode it.
What Kind of Encryption Software Does Dell Use?
Dell currently uses the industry-standard SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) encryption. But we continue to keep up with the current technologies in an effort to protect the security of your information.
What Information Does Dell Encrypt?
Dell encrypts all personal information you give us when you place an order online. Remember, if you feel uncomfortable providing any of this information online, please feel free to call one of our representatives at 1-800-WWW-DELL.
How Safe is Encryption Really?
Providing encrypted information online is as safe as doing it over the phone.

At left, undated handout image provided by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) shows a clump of Staphylococcus epidermidis bacteria (green) in the extracellular matrix, which connects cells and tissue, taken with a scanning electron microscope, showing. At right, undated handout image provided by the Agriculture Department showing the bacterium, Enterococcus faecalis, which lives in the human gut, is just one type of microbe that will be studied as part of NIH's Human Microbiome Project. They live on your skin, up your nose, in your gut _ enough bacteria, fungi and other microbes that collected together could weigh, amazingly, a few pounds. Now scientists have mapped just which critters normally live in or on us and where, calculating that healthy people can share their bodies with more than 10,000 species of microbes. (AP Photo/NIAID, Agriculture Department)
Seven scientists have won prestigious medical awards for their contributions to biomedicine, including the development of liver transplants.
The awards were announced Monday by the Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation. Each prize is worth $250,000.
The award for clinical medical research goes to Dr. Thomas Starzl of the University of Pittsburgh and Dr. Roy Calne, an emeritus professor at Cambridge University, for developing liver transplantation.
An award for basic medical research is split among three scientists for discoveries about biological machines that make muscles contract and carry out other jobs within cells. A third award is shared by two scientists for their genetic discoveries and efforts to promote research in biomedicine.

Skip to Main Content
Physics Boot Camp & Interactive Lecture Demonstrations - A Professional Development Recipe for Success Feature Summary
Physics Boot Camp & Interactive Lecture Demonstrations
- This workshop was presented at the 2011 PhysTEC conference. Interactive Lecture Demonstrations (ILDs) provide a pedagogical tool that has been shown to improve college and pre-college student's conceptual understanding of ideas in classical physics. Teachers in this PD showed fractional gains in concept understanding ranging from .44 to .75 with participants in every comparison group showing strong gains. Just as encouraging, these gains showed no decay over time. In this highly interactive presentation findings were presented along with a model of how the Interactive Lecture Demonstration 8-step methodology is used as a tool to both engage and prepare teachers.
- June 9, 2011 - July 9, 2014

It’s a big enough feat to ship much-needed vaccines to rural areas of the developing world. Finding a way to keep those vaccines refrigerated in places that have spotty access to electricity? An even bigger accomplishment. Rogers Feng, a mechanical engineering student at Northwestern University, has come up with a way to make the latter issue a bit easier to deal with.
His invention, the Human-Powered Refrigeration System for Developing Nation Vaccine Field Distribution, was announced this month as the U.S. winner of the James Dyson Award.
Feng attributes his idea to a friend who heard about the problem of keeping vaccines refrigerated in developing nations. The friend didn’t have time to pursue a project, so Feng ran with it. His creation: a refrigerator that can be charged with a hand crank. The crank powers a DC generator that in turn juices up a nine-volt rechargeable lithium ion battery. The battery then powers a Peltier unit to generate thermoelectric cooling.
According to Feng, there are three big advantages to the refrigerator over its developing-world competitors: It has circuitry to prevent sudden drops in temperature (these can destroy vaccines), it lacks toxic refrigerant fluids, and it’s relatively cheap--Feng tells us that he spent $150 on the unit, but that it would cost approximately $50 with scaled-up production.
Feng doesn’t have any immediate plans to commercialize the device, but he does plan to talk to companies that work at the intersection of health care and design. "Right now my main focus is graduating a quarter early and finding a job," says the rising college senior.
Armed with a $1,400 prize for winning the U.S. competition, Feng is now a competitor in the international James Dyson competition. The winner will be announced in November.

Nanocrystals May Provide Boost for Solar Cells, Solar Hydrogen Production
5 January 2006
Los Alamos National Laboratory scientists have discovered that a phenomenon called carrier multiplication, in which the absorption of a single photon by a nanocrystal quantum dot can generate multiple electrons, is applicable to a broader array of materials that previously thought.
The discovery increases the potential for the use of nanoscrystals as solar cell materials to produce higher electrical outputs than current solar cells, as well as possible application for the photocatalytic production of hydrogen.
In papers published recently in the journals Nature Physics and Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrate that carrier multiplication is not unique to lead selenide nanocrystals, but also occurs with very high efficiency in nanocrystals of other compositions, such as cadmium selenide.
These new results also shed light on the mechanism for carrier multiplication, which likely occurs via the instantaneous photoexcitation of multiple electrons. Such a process has never been observed in macroscopic materials and it explicitly relies on the unique physics of the nanoscale size regime.
Carrier multiplication actually relies upon very strong interactions between electrons squeezed within the tiny volume of a nanoscale semiconductor particle. That is why it is the particle size, not its composition that mostly determines the efficiency of the effect. In nanosize crystals, strong electron-electron interactions make a high-energy electron unstable. This electron only exists in its so-called 'virtual state' for an instant before rapidly transforming into a more stable state comprising two or more electrons.—Lead project scientist Victor Klimov
The Los Alamos findings point toward practical photovoltaic technologies that may utilize such traditional solar cell materials as cadmium telluride, which is very similar to cadmium selenide.
Other interesting opportunities may also be associated with the use of carrier multiplication in solar-fuel technologies and specifically, the production of hydrogen by photo-catalytic water splitting. The latter process requires four electrons per water molecule and its efficiency can be dramatically enhanced if these multiple electrons can be produced via a single-photon absorption event.
Research on carrier multiplication at Los Alamos is funded by the DOE’s Office of Basic Energy Sciences and by Los Alamos’ Laboratory-Directed Research and Development (LDRD) program.
"High-efficiency carrier multiplication through direct photogeneration of multi-excitons via virtual single-exciton states; Richard D. Schaller, Vladimir M. Agranovich and Victor I. Klimov; Nature Physics 1, 189-194 (2005) doi:10.1038/nphys151
"Effect of electronic structure on carrier multiplication efficiency: Comparative study of PbSe and CdSe nanocrystals"; Richard D. Schaller, Melissa A. Petruska, and Victor I. Klimov; Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 253102 (2005)
LANL Quantum Dot Research website
TrackBack URL for this entry:
Listed below are links to weblogs that reference Nanocrystals May Provide Boost for Solar Cells, Solar Hydrogen Production:

OAKLAND OUTDOORS: Oakland County residents can visit the ‘Arctic Circle’ right in Royal Oak
The date of the winter solstice on Dec. 21 draws near.
What better time than now to plan an adventuresome trek into the Arctic — a journey to the cryosphere, a land of ice, snow and frozen sea water. The Arctic is a landscape of mountains, fjords, tundra and beautiful glaciers that spawn crystal-colored icebergs. It is the land of Inuit hunters, polar bears and seals and is rich with mysteries that science is still working to unravel. Those wishing to reach the Arctic must travel north of the Arctic Circle.
And just where is the Arctic Circle?
The climatologists at the National Snow and Ice Data Center define the Arctic Circle as the imaginary line that marks the latitude at which the sun does not set on the day of the summer solstice and fails to rise on the day of the winter solstice, a day that is just around the corner. Arctic researchers describe the circle as the northern limit of tree growth. The circle is also defined as the 10 Degree Celsius Isotherm, the zone at which the average daily summer temperature fails to rise above 50 degrees Fahrenheit.
Polar bears are hungry in this foreboding landscape where the mercury can plunge quickly to 60 degrees below zero and winds are ferocious.
Perhaps it is time to stop reading my words, bundle up the kids and hike into the Arctic. Why not today! Children will almost certainly see seals just yards away and, if the timing is right, go nose to nose with a mighty polar bear that may swim their way and give a glance that could be interpreted as a one-word question: “Tasty?”
And here is the rest of the story, a special trail tale that takes visitors to a one-of-a-kind place.
I am amazed at how many residents of Oakland County have yet to hike through an acrylic tunnel known as the Polar Passage — a public portal to the watery world beneath the land above the Arctic Circle.
The 70-foot long tunnel is the highlight of a 4.2-acre living exhibit at the Detroit Zoo, the Arctic Ring of Life. And a hike through that exhibit and underwater viewing tunnel brings encounters with three polar bears, a gray seal, two harbor seals, one harp seal and three arctic fox.
A visit to the Arctic Ring of Life is more than a fun hike. It opens our eyes to the life of the Inuit people and introduces visitors to a fragile world in danger from events that can no longer be denied — climate change, global warming and rising sea waters. Continued...
Upon entering the park, check a map for the location. It’s easy to find and is rich with historical, cultural and natural information of the Inuit, the Arctic people. Before Europeans arrived, they had never even heard the word, “Eskimo.” The arrival of Europeans in the early 1800s was not good news for the pale-skinned strangers. They carried foreign diseases, and missionaries followed that sadly enticed the trusting Intuits to give up their own religion and become Christians. The native people were encouraged, and sometimes forced, to abandon their traditional lifestyles and live in the village. The jury may still be out, but some historians claimed that the Inuit were eager to embrace the new ways to forgo the harsh reality of nomadic life. Today, the Arctic Ring of Life’s Nunavut Gallery gives visitors a glimpse of a disappearing culture torn between the old and the new, but still rich with tradition, folk art, spirituality and creativity.
The Inuit once existed almost exclusively on meat and fat with only limited availability of seasonal plants. The Inuits hunted for survival and considered it disrespectful to hunt for sport. And as I dug deeper into their history to prepare for my tunnel trek, I discovered that metal for their early tools were chipped flake by flake from large meteorites and then pounded into tools like harpoon points.
The fascinating relationship between the Inuit, their environment and creatures that dwell above the Arctic Circle is more deeply understood when visitors trek through the highlight of the exhibit, the polar passage tunnel. A polar bear on a tundra hill, built high to afford the bears a wide range of smells, may be sniffing the air for zoo visitors.
The tunnel has acrylic walls four inches thick, is 12 feet wide, eight feet high and offers great views when a seal or polar bear swims. About 294,000 gallons of saltwater surround visitors.
Some wonder why the polar bears do not eat the seals. They can’t. A Lexan wall separates the species.
Be sure to take the time to explore the Exploration Station of the Arctic Ring of Life. It contains many of the accoutrements of a working research station complete with telemetry equipment, computers and displays of snowshoes and parkas from the arctic. Portholes provide views of the seals and bears.
Visitors may want to do what I did — enter through the tunnel a second time and then read all the well placed interpretive signs above ground. Stories of the hunters and the hunted await and include myth-busting facts on mass suicides of lemmings that have been alleged to jump off cliffs into the sea. And be sure to let a child put his or her foot in the imprint of the polar bear track on the pathway. And, of course, save time to hike the rest of the zoo. Cold weather is a perfect time to explore minus the summer crowds.
Jonathan Schechter’s column appears on Sundays. Look for his Earth’s Almanac blog at www.earthsalmanac.blogspot.com Twitter: OaklandNature E-mail:email@example.com.
For more information about the Detroit Zoo’s hours, exhibits and special events, visit detroitzoo.org. The zoo is located at 8450 West 10 Mile Road in Royal Oak. No additional fee to visit Arctic Ring of Life.
See wrong or incorrect information in a story. Tell us here
Location, ST | website.com
National Life Videos
- Fire destroys home, damages business in Waterford (1825)
- Long lines to see Stan Lee, Norman Reedus plague Motor City Comic Con on Saturday WITH VIDEO (1063)
- PAT CAPUTO: Detroit Red Wings show why they are Stanley Cup contenders (805)
- Nearby neighbors concerned after man convicted of murder paroled, moves to Pontiac group home (788)
- PAT CAPUTO: Detroit Red Wings show why Stanley Cup dream not far fetched (785)
- Pontiac council votes against Schimmel’s plan to eliminate health care for retirees (686)
- Fall Out Boy wants to "Save Rock and Roll" with new CD (4)
- New backcourt leads Lathrup over Dragons (4)
- Oakland County Sheriff’s Office veteran — Michigan's first black police captain — honored in retirement WITH VIDEO (3)
- Fire destroys home, damages business in Waterford (3)
- Despite Angelina Jolie, breast cancer treatment has a long way to go - COLUMN (2)
- PITTS: Woman ran to Key West, where else? (2)
- Bloomfield Hills mother graduates college with daughter, stepson (2)
Recent Activity on Facebook
Caren Gittleman likes talking cats. She'll discuss everything about them, from acquiring a cat, differences in breeds, behaviors, health concerns, inside versus outside lifestyles, toys, food, accessories, and sharing cat stories. Share your stories and ask her questions about your favorite feline.
Roger Beukema shares news from Lansing that impacts sportsmen (this means ladies as well) and talks about things he finds when he goes overseas to visit my children, and adding your comments into the mix.
Join Jonathan Schechter as he shares thoughts on our natural world in Oakland County and beyond.

The etymology of the term 'gurdwara' is from the words 'Gur (ਗੁਰ)' (a reference to the Sikh Gurus) and 'Dwara (ਦੁਆਰਾ)' (gateway in Gurmukhi), together meaning 'the gateway through which the Guru could be reached'. Thereafter, all Sikh places of worship came to be known as gurdwaras.
All About Sikhs
AllAboutSikhs.com is a comprehensive web site on sikhism, sikh history and philosophy, customs and rituals,sikh way of life, social and religious movements, art and architecture, sikh scriptures,sikh gurudwaras.
Based on the belief in One God, the Sikh religion recognizes the equality of all human beings, and is marked by rejection of idolatry, ritualism, caste and asceticism. This website serves to heighten the awareness of Sikhism and hopefully can be of some use to seekers of knowledge.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of diseases marked by abnormal production of blood cells by the bone marrow. Healthy bone marrow produces immature blood cells—called blasts—that then develop into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. MDS disrupts this normal process so that the bone marrow is overactive, producing many immature cells. These blasts, however, do not fully develop into mature blood cells. As a result, patients with MDS have fewer mature blood cells, and those they do have may be abnormal and not function properly.
Any or all blood cell types may be affected by MDS, which is different from leukemia in which only white blood cells are overproduced. The direct effects of MDS may include:
- Anemia and fatigue if red blood cells counts are low
- Increased risk of infection if white blood cell counts are low
- Compromised ability to control bleeding if platelets counts are low
Failure of the bone marrow to produce normal cells is a gradual process. As such, MDS is primarily a disease of the aging and most patients are over 65 years of age. Some patients may survive with MDS while approximately one-third will have their disease progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). AML that develops from MDS is a difficult disease to treat.
The possible treatments for MDS, which may be used alone or in combination, include the following:
- Supportive care through administration of growth factors to stimulate immature cells to development into mature blood cells
- Destruction of abnormal cells through administration of chemotherapy, at either low, conventional, or high doses, depending on the condition of the patient and the aggressiveness of their disease
- Replacement of damaged bone marrow with healthy cells that develop into blood cells, a procedure called stem cell transplantation
Targeted therapy that may include the new drug Revlimid® (lenalidomide), which is thought to work by regulating the immune system
About this MDS Treatment Information
The information contained on this site is a general overview of treatment for MDS. Treatment may consist of growth factors, chemotherapy with or without stem cell transplantation, targeted therapy, or a combination of these treatment techniques. Multi-modality treatment, which utilizes two or more treatment techniques, is increasingly recognized as an important approach for improving a patient’s chance of cure or prolonging survival.
In some cases, participation in a clinical trial utilizing new, innovative therapies may provide the most promising treatment. Information about treatments for MDS that are being evaluated in clinical trials is discussed under Strategies to Improve Treatment.
Circumstances unique to each patient’s situation may influence how these general treatment principles are applied. The potential benefits of multi-modality care, participation in a clinical trial, or standard treatment must be carefully balanced with the potential risks. The information on this website is intended to help educate patients about their treatment options and to facilitate a mutual or shared decision-making process with their treating cancer physician.
MDS Treatment Sections:
Background: Normal Blood Cell Production
In order to better understand MDS and its treatment, a basic understanding of normal blood cell production is useful. Normal blood is made up of fluid called plasma and three main types of blood cells–white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of blood cell has a specific function:
- White blood cells, also called leukocytes, help the body fight infections and other diseases.
- Red blood cells, also called erythrocytes, make up half of the blood’s total volume and are filled with hemoglobin, which picks up oxygen from the lungs and carries it to the body’s organs.
- Platelets, or thrombocytes, help form blood clots to control bleeding.
Blood cells are produced inside the bones in a spongy space called the bone marrow. The process of blood cell formation is called hematopoiesis. All blood cells develop from one common cell type, called a stem cell. Stem cells become mature blood cells by a process called differentiation. Immature blood cells are called blasts. Blasts grow or differentiate into mature red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Once they are fully developed, these cells are released into the blood where they circulate throughout the body and perform their respective functions. In healthy individuals, there are adequate stem cells to continuously produce new blood cells and mature blood cells are produced in a continuous and orderly fashion.
MDS disrupts this normal process resulting in many blasts and few mature, healthy blood cells.
In order to diagnose MDS and plan treatment, a physician must evaluate the patient’s bone marrow cells to determine the specific type of MDS. The cells are removed through a technique called a bone marrow biopsy, which uses a large needle to withdraw cells directly from the bone marrow.
A special laboratory test is conducted on the sample cells, called a cytogenetic analysis. The purpose of this test is to determine whether there are abnormalities in the DNA of the blood cells. DNA contains the genetic code for the cell, which can be thought of as the instructions for what the cell looks like, what it does, and how it grows. Most forms of MDS and leukemias are characterized by specific abnormalities. Identifying these provides useful information about the patient’s prognosis, or duration of survival.
Types of MDS
There are several different types of MDS, which are classified by how the abnormal cells that were removed from the bone marrow appear under the microscope and how many blasts can be identified. At the time of bone marrow evaluation, cells are also removed for cytogenetic analysis. MDS is classified into five different diseases characterized by ineffective blood cell production in the bone marrow and varying rates of progression to acute leukemia. Following is a description of the five classifications:
Refractory Anemia (RA): Patients have low blood counts, bone marrow blasts are less than 5%, and sideroblasts (iron containing cells) are less than 15%. The average survival is approximately 43 months, but can be influenced by specific chromosomal abnormalities.
Refractory Anemia with Ringed Sideroblasts (RARS): Patients have low blood counts, bone marrow blasts are less than 5%, and sideroblasts are greater than 15%. The average survival is 55 months, but can be influenced by specific chromosomal abnormalities.
Refractory Anemia with Excess Blasts (RAEB): Patients have low blood counts, 1-5% blasts in the blood, and bone marrow blasts between 5 and 20%. The average survival is 12 months, but can be influenced by specific chromosomal abnormalities.
Refractory Anemia with Excess Blasts in Transition (RAEBt): Patients have low blood counts, over 5% blasts in the blood or cells in the blood containing an abnormality referred to as Auer rods, and bone marrow blasts between 20 and 30%. The average survival is 5 months, but can be influenced by specific chromosomal abnormalities.
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML): Blood cells called monocytes make up more than 1,000 ml in the blood and patients have less than 5% blasts. Bone marrow blasts are less than 20% and the average survival is 30 months, but can be influenced by specific chromosomal abnormalities.
Planning Treatment for MDS
Since a stem cell transplant utilizing cells from a donor—called an allogeneic stem cell transplant—holds the most hope for cure, a major decision faced by patients with MDS is not whether to undergo transplantation, but when. Patients with MDS that is likely to progress to leukemia early—which results in shorter survival—may be willing to accept higher risks of treatment and proceed quickly to a stem cell transplant. Patients with MDS that progresses more slowly are likely to live longer and may wish to pursue a more conservative treatment approach, opting to use supportive care and wait a longer period before undergoing a stem cell transplant.
However, patients who choose conservative treatment approaches should always be prepared to receive more aggressive treatment in case their disease progresses more rapidly than anticipated. To prepare for a possible stem cell transplant, patients should consider arranging for a stem cell donor and/or having their own stem cells collected and stored shortly after diagnosis. This is important because as MDS progresses and treatment is initiated, it becomes increasingly difficult to collect stem cells.
In order to better plan treatment, doctors try to identify how quickly patients are likely to progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A score is assigned that reflects this tendency to progress, and is based on a system called the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS). A higher score is associated with a type of MDS that is likely to progress to leukemia more quickly. The IPSS score takes into account three important factors in MDS:
- The percent of bone marrow blasts—more blasts contributes to a higher score
- Genetic abnormalities—more abnormalities contribute to a higher score
- Severity of low white blood cell counts—lower counts of white blood cells, platelets, and red blood cells contribute to a higher score
Relationship between a patient’s risk of progressing to leukemia and timing of stem cell transplant: Research shows that knowing a patient’s risk of progressing to leukemia is important for determining optimal timing of stem cell transplantation. Based on information about 1,000 patients who had been diagnosed with MDS, researchers from several U.S. cancer centers have determined that patients with a low or low-intermediate risk of progression to leukemia have better outcomes if their transplant was not performed at the time of diagnosis, but was delayed. Patients with a high or high-intermediate risk experienced optimal survival if they underwent an allogeneic transplant at the time of diagnosis, without delay. Furthermore, the patients with lower risk achieved optimal outcomes if their transplant was administered prior to progression of their disease to acute myeloid leukemia compared to after progression. 
Overview of Treatment of MDS
The objective of treatment is to control the growth of the abnormal cells so that more normal cells can grow and improve blood cell production. Some treatments are designed to manage the complications associated with ineffective blood cell production, while others extend survival or even cure the disease.
Treatment of MDS is individualized and depends on two main factors:
- The severity of low blood counts
- The risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia
Other factors that influence treatment decisions include patient’s age, other medical conditions, and the severity of the myelodysplastic syndrome.
The potential treatment options for MDS include the following:
Currently, only stem cell transplant utilizing cells from a donor—called an allogeneic transplant—can consistently cure patients with MDS. Other therapies are directed at prolonging survival and decreasing the symptoms from these diseases.
 Cutler C, Lee S, Greenberg P, et al. A decision analysis of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for the myelodysplastic syndromes: delayed transplantation for low-risk myelodysplasia is associated with improved outcome. Blood. 2004;104:579-585.
Copyright © 2013 Omni Health Media Myelodysplastic Syndrome Information Center. All Rights Reserved.

Fundamentals of Business Finance
Durée de l'évènement:
Page d'accueil du programme:
Event focal point email:
Autres infos sur l'évènement:
This course is designed for both officials and businessmen who are interested in learning the basics of investments and finance as needed in a modern environment. It represents a departure from available academic courses as it is directly centred on the typical challenges that are faced every day by officials involved with trade promotion and business development as well as young entrepreneurs.
It covers, in intuitive plain language, basic concepts needed to understand modern finance for enterprises in a normal and efficient business environment. From modern and practical perspectives, it covers notions of finance and accounting sufficient to understand balance sheets, short and long-term credit, equity and investments, cash as well as sustainable profits, return to shareholders, areas of financial risks and available insurances. It also provides an idea where to look for sources of funds, what to ask and finally understand offers and contracts.
This practical course on the fundamentals of business finance will allow participants to face all those business situations in which finance plays a role, let it be for starting a business, acquiring a production tool or contributing to the promotion of a country business environment. It also helps participants to understand and act at present times when the global finance is going through critical times.
At the end of the course, the participants should be able to:
- Explain with accuracy the main issues relating to modern business finance such as but not limited to, starting a business, acquiring a production tool, or contributing to the promotion of a country business environment;
- Identify the essential accounting needs including the preparation of cash flow, profit and loss, balance sheets, and the basics of forecasting, target and ratios;
- Interpret financial, economic, and social results;
- Analyze existing financial needs - short vs. long-term credit, equity, investments, cash as well as sustainable profits, return to shareholders, areas of financial risks and available insurances, financing tools, and banking products; and
- Analyze a presentation and business plan with strategies on how to deal with banks, or develop a plan on how to renegotiate existing contracts.
Contenu et structure
The course consists of the following modules:
Module 1: Understanding and planning a business and its financial implications
Module 2: Examining financial options and identifying sources of finance
Module 3: Dealing with financial institutions
Module 4: Financial results, economic, social Results: protective measures to weather the crisis
In order to ensure the best possible outreach, the course will be delivered through e-learning. Through a multiple-instructional setting, the goal is to achieve the learning objectives by means of learning technologies that match personal learning styles and by the inclusion of non-linear learning that aims at the development of just-in-time skills of adult learners. At the same time, in order to allow participants maximum flexibility of scheduling , the learning will be conducted in an asynchronous manner. Using a state-of-the-art training architecture, UNITAR will combine self-learning with assessments and online discussions. The pedagogy - adapted specifically to professionals in full-time work - will help train participants through various experiences: absorb (read); do (activity); interact (socialize); reflect (relate to one’s own reality).
This course is designed for private sector managers and entrepreneurs in industrial as well developing countries, government officials, typically at ministry of trade, finance, economy and/or planning levels, diplomats and trade representatives, and national and international experts involved in trade and finance negotiations.
A certificate of completion will be issued by UNITAR to all participants who complete the course-related assignments and assessments successfully. Course schedule is subject to change. Course fee is non-refundable but transferrable to another course or participant and subject to change as per UNITAR's policy on pricing.
- Public - Sur Inscription
- Public - Candidature
- Privé - sur Invitation
- Open to register/apply
- Face à face

Antonio de Herrera y Tordesillas
A Spanish historian; born at Cuellar, in the province of Segovia, in 1559; died at Madrid, 27 March, 1625. He was a great-grandson of the Tordesillas who was put to death by the Comuneros at Seville. He studied in Spain and Italy, and became secretary to Vespasiano Gonzaga, a brother of the Duke of Mantua, who was afterwards Viceroy of Navarre and Valencia, and who recommended him to Philip II in the last year of that monarch's reign. Philip appointed him grand historiographer ( cronista mayor ) of America and Castile, and he filled that office during part of his royal patron's reign, the whole reign of Philip III, and the beginning of that of Philip IV. At his death his body was conveyed to Cuellar, and interred in the church of Santa Marina, where his tomb is still to be seen.
His most famous work is the "Historia General de los Hechos de los Castellanos en las Islas y Tierra Firme del Mar Océano" (General History of the deeds of the Castilians on the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean Sea), divided into eight periods of ten years each, and comprising all the years from 1472 to 1554. This work was printed at Madrid in 1601; reprinted by Juan de la Cuesta in 1615; revised and augmented by Andrés González and published at Madrid by Nicolas Rodríguez in 1726, and at Antwerp, by Juan Bautista Verdussen, in 1728. Worthy of note is the "Description of the West Indies", in the first volume of his work, which was translated into Latin and published at Amsterdam, by Gaspar Barleo, in 1622, a French version being published at Paris in the same year. In 1660 there appeared a French translation of the first three decades of his "Historia" by Nicolás de la Corte. In writing his great work Tordesillas made use of all the public archives, having access to documents of every kind. It is evident in his writings that he had to deal with a large number of historical manuscripts, and contented himself with relating events as he found them recorded. A great part of his work is more or less a transcript of the History of the Indies left by the famous Bishop Bartolomé de las Casas , though expurgated of wellnigh everything unfavourable to the settlers. A painstaking and conscientious investigator for the most part, his style does not correspond to his other admirable qualifications. He was a learned and judicious man, though, particularly in the later decades, somewhat prone to overpraise the conquerors and their exploits.
In addition to that already mentioned, his most important works are: "A General History of the World during the time of Philip II from the year 1559 to the King's death"; "Events in Scotland and England during the forty-four years of the lifetime of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland" (Historia de lo sucedido en Escocia é Inglaterra en los cuarenta y cuatro años que vivió Maria Estuardo Reina de Escocia); Five books of the history of Portugal and the conquests of the Azores in the years 1582, 1583; "History of events in France from 1585 to 1594" (a work published in Madrid in 1598, but suppressed by command of the king); "A Treatise, Relation, and Historical Discourse on the Disturbances in Aragon in the years 1591 and 1592" (Tratado, relación y discurso histórico de los movimientos en Aragon en los años de 1591 y 1592); "Commentary on the deeds of the Spaniards, French, and Venetians in Italy, and of other Republics, Potentates, famous Italian Princes and Captains, from 1281 to 1559"; "Chronicle of the Turks, following chiefly that written by Juan Maria Vicentino, chronicler to Mahomet, Bajazet, and Suleiman, their lords" (unpublished); various works translated from the French and Italian, preserved in the National Library at Madrid.
More Catholic Encyclopedia
Browse Encyclopedia by Alphabet
The Catholic Encyclopedia is the most comprehensive resource on Catholic teaching, history, and information ever gathered in all of human history. This easy-to-search online version was originally printed in fifteen hardcopy volumes.
Designed to present its readers with the full body of Catholic teaching, the Encyclopedia contains not only precise statements of what the Church has defined, but also an impartial record of different views of acknowledged authority on all disputed questions, national, political or factional. In the determination of the truth the most recent and acknowledged scientific methods are employed, and the results of the latest research in theology, philosophy, history, apologetics, archaeology, and other sciences are given careful consideration.
No one who is interested in human history, past and present, can ignore the Catholic Church, either as an institution which has been the central figure in the civilized world for nearly two thousand years, decisively affecting its destinies, religious, literary, scientific, social and political, or as an existing power whose influence and activity extend to every part of the globe. In the past century the Church has grown both extensively and intensively among English-speaking peoples. Their living interests demand that they should have the means of informing themselves about this vast institution, which, whether they are Catholics or not, affects their fortunes and their destiny.
Browse the Catholic Encyclopedia by Topic
Copyright © Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company New York, NY. Volume 1: 1907; Volume 2: 1907; Volume 3: 1908; Volume 4: 1908; Volume 5: 1909; Volume 6: 1909; Volume 7: 1910; Volume 8: 1910; Volume 9: 1910; Volume 10: 1911; Volume 11: - 1911; Volume 12: - 1911; Volume 13: - 1912; Volume 14: 1912; Volume 15: 1912
Catholic Online Catholic Encyclopedia Digital version Compiled and Copyright © Catholic Online

Are Black & White Colors?
Is Black a Color? Is White a Color?
The answer to the question - "Are black and white colors?" - is one of the most debated issues about color. Ask a scientist and you'll get a reply based on physics: “Black is not a color, white is a color.” Ask an artist or a child with crayons and you'll get another: “Black is a color, white is not a color.” (Maybe!)
There are four sections on this page that present the best answers.
# 1 - The First Answer: Color Theory #1 - Color as Light
Black is not a color. White is a color.
# 2 - The Second Answer: Color Theory #2 - Color as Pigment or Molecular Coloring Agents
Black is a color. White is not a color
Comments from color pros: More about black & white
How Colors Exist
A basic understanding of how colors are created is the first step in providing correct answers. Here are two examples:
The color of a tangible object is the result of pigments or molecular coloring agents. For example, the color of a red apple (in the illustration at the left) is the result of molecular coloring agents on the surface of the apple. Also, a painting of a red apple is the result of red pigments used to create the image.
The colors of objects viewed on a television set or on a computer monitor are the result of colored light (in the illustration at the right). If you're not familiar with how colors are created by light, look at your monitor or television screen close up. Put your eye right up against the screen. A small magnifying glass might help. This is what you will see:
A simplified way to explain it is that the color of a red apple on a computer or television is created by photons of red light that are transmitted within the electronic system.
It's also important to understand the concept of "primary" colors. The fundamental rule is that there are three colors that cannot be made by mixing other colors together. These three, red, blue, and yellow, are known as the primary colors.
Now that we've described two different categories of colors (pigment and light-generated) and have a definition of primary colors, the answer to whether black and white are colors can be answered.
(Additive Color Theory)
Red, Green, and Blue
(The primary colors of light)
Are black and white colors when generated as light?
Black and white cats generated on a television.
These colors are created by light.
1. Black is the absence of color (and is therefore not a color)
When there is no light, everything is black. Test this out by going into a photographic dark room. There are no photons of light. In other words, there are no photons of colors.
2. White is the blending of all colors and is a color.
Light appears colorless or white. Sunlight is white light that is composed of all the colors of the spectrum. A rainbow is proof. You can't see the colors of sunlight except when atmospheric conditions bend the light rays and create a rainbow. You can also use a prism to demonstrate this.
Fact: The sum of all the colors of light add up to white. This is additive color theory.
When you're finished with black & white, explore some real colors at Color Matters: The Meanings of Color
Color Theory 2 - Color as Pigment or Molecular Coloring Agents
(Subtractive Color Theory)
|Red, Yellow, and Blue|
(The primary colors of pigments in the art world)
|Cyan, Magenta, and Yellow|
(The primary colors of inks in the printing industry) *
Are black and white colors when they exist as pigments or as molecular coloring agents?
Black and white cats created by colored crayons.
This is color generated by pigments.
Black and white cats. The colors of the fur is the result of molecules.
1. Black is a color. (Chemists will confirm this!)
Here's a simple way to show how black is made: Combine all three primary colors (red yellow and blue) using a liquid paint or you even food coloring. You won't get a jet black, but the point will be clear. The history of black pigments includes charcoal, iron metals, and other chemicals as the source of black paints.
Resource: History of Pigments
Therefore, if someone argues that black is the absence of color, you can reply, “What is in a tube of black paint?” However, you must add the fact that black is a color when you are referring to the color of pigments and the coloring agents of tangible objects.
2. White is not a color.
... but .... in some cases you could say that white is a color.
The grey area:
However, when you examine the pigment chemistry of white, ground-up substances (such as chalk and bone) or chemicals (such as titanium and zinc) are used to create the many nuances of white in paint, chalk, crayons - and even products such as Noxema. It's worth noting that white paper is made by bleaching tree bark (paper pulp). Therefore, you could say that white is a color in the context of pigment chemistry.
More Information about CMYK primary colors:
In theory, mixing equal amounts of three primary colors should produce shades of grey or black when all three are fully saturated. In the print industry, cyan, magenta and yellow tend to produce muddy brown colors. For this reason, a fourth "primary" pigment, black, is often used in addition to the cyan, magenta, and yellow colors.
There's more to color than black and white! When you're finished with this article, discover the 3 most important things about color at Color Matters. See Basic Color Theory
Vision and Reflection
The final answer to whether black and white are colors takes other factors into consideration.
Colors exist in the larger context of human vision. Consider the fact that there are three parts to the process of the perception of color.
1. The medium - The color as it exists as a pigment/colorant (such as the color of a tangible object) or as light (such as the color of an image on a television screen).
2. The sender - How the color is transmitted.
3. The receiver - How humans see color. In other words, how we receive information about color.
(If a tree falls in the forest and there is nobody around does it make a sound? Does a color exist if there is no one to see it?)
Are black and white colors?
The best answer combines both of the theories described in Part 1 and Part 2. Pigments and coloring agents (as described in Part 1) are only half of the answer.
Here's how we see color:
The color of a tangible object originates as a molecular coloring agent on the surface of the apple. We see the color of an object because that object reflects “a color” to the eye. Every color is the effect of a specific wavelength. Link to ElecroMagnetic Color at Color Matters.
In the case of the apple, we see the color red because the red apple reflects the specific wavelength of red (640nm is red).
The same theory applies to black and white.
Are black and white colors?
1. Black is not a color; a black object absorbs all the colors of the visible spectrum and reflects none of them to the eyes.
The grey area about black:
- A black object may look black, but, technically, it may still be reflecting some light. For example, a black pigment results from a combination of several pigments that collectively absorb most colors. If appropriate proportions of three primary pigments are mixed, the result reflects so little light as to be called "black." In reality, what appears to be black may be reflecting some light.
- In physics, a black body is a perfect absorber of light.
2. White is a color. White reflects all the colors of the visible light spectrum to the eyes.
Explore some real colors at Color Matters: The Meanings of Color
The colors we see are simply a degree of how much of this color present in light is reflected. To be completely accurate, a color reflects the wavelengths in the NM range that our retinal cones respond to.
The medium is the process of reflection of the wavelength of the color.
The receiver is our eyes which receive the wavelength of the color.
Comments from colors pros: More about black & white
More about color vision: How the Eye Sees Color

FISHING FORECAST TAKES GUESS WORK OUT OF WHERE TO FISH
Feb. 14, 2013
Anglers use fishing forecast to find hidden opportunities
PRATT – The Kansas Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism (KDWPT) 2013 Fishing Forecast features the ins and outs of fish populations in public waters around the state, helping anglers to better decide where to cast their lines. Comprised of sampling efforts conducted during annual lake monitoring, the fishing forecast gives anglers detailed information on the best bodies of water to fish for their specific fishing needs.
The data collected is divided into three categories based on the size of the body of water sampled. Reservoirs are defined as bodies of water larger than 1,200 acres, lakes are defined as bodies of water from 10 to 1,200 acres, and bodies of water smaller than 10 acres are defined as ponds. Since not every lake is sampled each year, the forecast provides a three-year average of each location to provide anglers with the best available information.
In addition to what species of fish can be caught at any given body of water, the fishing forecast also includes tables with a Density Rating, Preferred Rating, Lunker Rating, Biggest Fish (the largest fish sampled), Biologist’s Rating and the previously-mentioned Three-Year Average of popular species.
The Density Rating is the number of fish that were high-quality size or larger sampled per unit of sampling effort. High-quality size, listed in parentheses at the top of the Density Rating column, is the length of fish considered acceptable to most anglers and is different for each species. The higher the Density Rating, the more high-quality-sized or larger fish per surface acre in the lake. Theoretically, a lake with a Density Rating of 30 has twice as many high-quality-sized fish per acre as a lake with a Density Rating of 15.
The Preferred Rating identifies how many above-average-sized fish a water contains. For example, a lake may have a good density of crappie, but few fish over 10 inches. The Preferred Rating tells an angler where to go to for a chance to catch bigger fish.
The Lunker Rating is similar to the Density Rating, but it tells you the relative density of lunker-sized fish in the lake. A lunker is a certain length of fish considered a trophy by most anglers. It also differs with each species and is listed in parentheses at the top of the Lunker Rating column. For example, most anglers consider a channel catfish longer than 28 inches a lunker. Many lakes may have a lunker rating of 0, but this does not mean there are no big fish in that lake. It just means that no lunker fish were caught during sampling, and they may be less abundant than in lakes with positive Lunker Ratings.
You can use the Density Rating and Lunker Rating together. If you want numbers, go with the highest Density Rating. If you want only big fish, go with the Lunker Rating. Somewhere in the middle might be a better choice. A lake with a respectable rating in all three categories will provide the best overall fishing opportunities.
The Biggest Fish column lists the weight of the largest fish caught during sampling. A heavy fish listed here can give the lunker fishermen confidence that truly big fish are present.
The Biologist’s Rating adds a human touch to the forecast. Each district fisheries biologist reviews the data from annual sampling of their assigned lakes. This review considers environmental conditions that may have affected the sampling. They also consider previous years’ data. A rating of P (poor), F (fair), G (good), or E (excellent) will be in the last column. Sometimes the Density Rating may not agree with the Biologist’s Rating. This will happen occasionally and means the Density Rating may not accurately reflect the biologist’s opinion of the fishery.
The Three-Year Average rating refers to the averaging of the Density Rating over the previous three years of sampling to help show a trend for a particular lake.
Whether anglers are simply looking for a new spot to cast, or are searching for that elusive trophy fish, the 2013 Fishing Forecast is an invaluable tool for any fisherman.
A copy of this year’s forecast can be found in the March/April issue of Kansas Wildlife and Parks magazine, any KDWPT office or license vendor.

Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Tips and Techniques (2013)
Duration of event:
Event focal point email:
Other events details:
Prior to the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, which were concluded in December 1993, multilateral trade negotiations were seen as a preserve of the developed countries and the developing countries have only a marginal role to play in the negotiation process; they were primarily the recipients of preferential market access and other special differential treatment. Since the Uruguay Round, although the developing countries have been actively involved in the negotiation process, they face serious challenges in keeping pace with the growing area of international trade law. Their role in the negotiation process is limited due to certain imbalances in their negotiation preparedness, structures and outcomes. Negotiators from developing countries face serious challenges to catch up and keep pace with, and even to influence the scope and outcome of negotiations that serve the best interests of their countries.
This course aims to assist the negotiators and government officials of developing and least-developed countries in their preparations for future multilateral trade negotiations. The course will enhance their knowledge and disseminate information about various trade negotiation skills and techniques, which will enable them to better prepare for future multilateral trade negotiations, become ‘well-informed’ and fully benefit from their participation by becoming equal partners in the negotiating process. The course will provide a comprehensive overview of the concept of negotiations, background and special characteristics of multilateral trade negotiations in the WTO and how to strategically prepare and plan in conducting successful negotiations. It will also help participants gain greater insight into various negotiation issues currently involved in different WTO Agreements.
At the end of the course, the participants should be able to:
• Differentiate between bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations;
• Illustrate how multilateral trade negotiations in the WTO are done;
• Examine the problems faced by both the developing and the least developed countries as regards multilateral negotiations;
• Formulate a sound negotiation strategy;
• Analyze the significance of data required for a multilateral trade negotiation; and
• Assess various issues that may arise during negotiation processes related to WTO Agreements such as agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS), technical barriers to trade (TBT), trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS), and trade in services.
Content and Structure
The course consists of the following modules:
• Module I – The Concept of Trade Negotiations: An Overview
• Module II – General Introduction to WTO Negotiations
• Module III – Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Strategic Planning and Preparation
• Module IV – Information Requirements in a Negotiation Process
• Module V – Negotiating Issues in Different WTO Agreements
In order to ensure the best possible outreach, the course will be delivered through e-learning. Through a multiple-instructional setting, the goal is to achieve the learning objectives by means of learning technologies that match personal learning styles and by the inclusion of non-linear learning that aims at the development of just-in-time skills of adult learners. At the same time, in order to allow participants maximum flexibility of scheduling , the learning will be conducted in an asynchronous manner. Using a state-of-the-art training architecture, UNITAR will combine self-learning with assessments and online discussions. The pedagogy - adapted specifically to professionals in full-time work - will help train participants through various experiences: absorb (read); do (activity); interact (socialize); reflect (relate to one’s own reality).
This foundation course is designed for government officials, trade experts, government lawyers and negotiators who serve their government in regional or international trade negotiations. The course is beneficial for all other participants including policy advocates, academics, researchers, and the members from the wider public, who are interested in learning about the structuring and negotiating of multilateral trade agreements.
A certificate of completion will be issued by UNITAR to all participants who complete the course-related assignments and assessments successfully. Course schedule is subject to change. Course fee is non-refundable but transferrable to another course or participant and subject to change as per UNITAR's policy on pricing.
- Public - by registration
- Public - by application
- Private - by invitation
- Open to register/apply
Mode of Delivery

Nicaraguan Pottery Designs by David Sequeira
- Dates: December 1, 1939 through February 4, 1940
- Collections: Arts of the Americas
December 1, 1939: Eighty large color drawings by David Sequeira from Chorotegan pottery excavated by him in Nicaragua will be shown at the Brooklyn Museum from December 1 through February 4 in an exhibition arranged by Fr. Herbert J. Spinden, Curator of American Indian Art and Primitive Cultures. Sequira is of Nicaraguan birth and primarily a musican whose interest in musical themes of the Indians induced him to study and reproduce the brilliant designs on the pre-Colombian pottery of Nicaragua identified by Dr. Spinden as superb examples of Chorotegan art.
The drawings are circular and rectangular and will be shown in panels. The designs are in strong, warm colors, brick red, reddish brown, black and white, The artist has, in effect, transferred the patterns from concave and convex pottery surfaces to flat surfaces The patterns incorporate motives of conventionalized jaguars, crab, serpents, crocodiles, monkeys and birds, the last including the famous Quetzal which Dr. Spinden states is unusual to find represented in a culture as far south as Nicaragua. Human figures and geometrical or abstract designs both showing a strong Maya influence are also used in the patterns.
The drawings are shown more for their interest as sound designs than for their scientific interest, which is nevertheless important, as part of the Museum’s policy of making available basic creative designs of old cultures that can he adapted to today’s needs or inspire new efforts.
The circumstances of the preparation of these drawings are important. In the first place, they were made only a short time after the pottery was excavated while the colors were still at their full strength. The tones tend to fade when they come in contact with the air after their long burial. Secondly, the artist, to carry out the preservation of the designs as faithfully as possible, mixed his own watercolors from the kinds of materials that were probably used in coloring the pottery, usually earth colors.
According to Dr. Spinden, in his paper presented at the 21st International Congress of Arnericanists in Goteborg in 1924, the Chorotegan Culture Area from which these designs come "is a strip of territory beginning on the humid north coast of Honduras near Ceiba, widening with the wet lands and extending southward across Nicaragua and Costa Rica to about the limits of Panama. The word Chorotegan…is of Mexican origin with some such meaning as the Driven-out People.
“The culture in this area was built historically on Mayan ideas of the First Empire ending A.D. 630, yet the Chorotegas reached the height of their productivity on the Toltec horizon (1150-1350) and were intermediaries in trade between Mexico and Colombia.” He further states that the present tribes in this area are not of the same stock as the Chorotegans who produced the high culture.
In the region of Northern Costa Rica and southern Nicaragua “……the culture was intensively developed, especially in pottery….. The designs are painted and modelled, with the crocodile, the monkey, the jaguar, the fish, etc. serving as motives. One peculiar type of pottery shows the use of a purplish black luster paint made from manganese ore.” It is probable that the pieces of pottery from which the exhibited designs were taken fall in this category.

A lumbar puncture is a procedure in which a needle is inserted into the spinal canal to measure the pressure and obtain a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), the colorless fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. The procedure may also be used to inject anesthetics, medicine, or a contrast dye (for spinal X-rays) into the spinal fluid or to drain fluids that accumulate as a result of certain medical conditions.
Fluid samples obtained from a lumbar puncture can be analyzed for signs of infection (such as meningitis), inflammation, cancer, or bleeding in the area around the brain or spinal cord.
A lumbar puncture is also sometimes called a spinal tap.
eMedicineHealth Medical Reference from Healthwise
To learn more visit Healthwise.org
© 1995-2012 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.
Find out what women really need.
Most Popular Topics
Pill Identifier on RxList
- quick, easy,
Find a Local Pharmacy
- including 24 hour, pharmacies

Carbon Monoxide Detector Placement - Carbon Monoxide - Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Proper placement of a carbon monoxide (CO) detector is important. If you are installing only one carbon monoxide detector, the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) recommends it be located near the sleeping area, where it can wake you if you are asleep. Additional detectors on every level and in every bedroom of a home provides extra protection against carbon monoxide poisoning.
Homeowners should remember not to install carbon monoxide detectors directly above or beside fuel-burning appliances, as appliances may emit a small amount of carbon monoxide upon start-up. A detector should not be placed within fifteen feet of heating or cooking appliances or in or near very humid areas such as bathrooms.
When considering where to place a carbon monoxide detector, keep in mind that although carbon monoxide is roughly the same weight as air (carbon monoxide's specific gravity is 0.9657, as stated by the EPA; the National Resource Council lists the specific gravity of air as one), it may be contained in warm air coming from combustion appliances such as home heating equipment. If this is the case, carbon monoxide will rise with the warmer air.
Installation locations vary by manufacturer. Manufacturers' recommendations differ to a certain degree based on research conducted with each one's specific detector. Therefore, make sure to read the provided installation manual for each detector before installing.
CO detectors do not serve as smoke detectors and vice versa. However, dual smoke/CO detectors are also sold. Smoke detectors detect the smoke generated by flaming or smoldering fires, whereas CO detectors can alarm people about faulty fuel burning devices to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. Carbon monoxide is produced from incomplete combustion of fossil fuels. In the home CO can be formed, for example, by open flames, space heaters, water heaters, blocked chimneys or running a car inside a garage.
Since CO is colorless, tasteless and odorless (unlike smoke from a fire), detection and prevention of carbon monoxide poisoning in a home environment is impossible without such a warning device. In North America, some state, provincial and municipal governments require installation of CO detectors in new units - among them, the U.S. states of Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, and Vermont, the Canadian province of Ontario, and New York City.
According to the 2005 edition of the carbon monoxide guidelines, NFPA 720, published by the National Fire Protection Association, sections 184.108.40.206 and 220.127.116.11, all CO detectors 'shall be centrally located outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms,' and each detector 'shall be located on the wall, ceiling or other location as specified in the installation instructions that accompany the unit.'
When carbon monoxide detectors were introduced into the market, they had a limited lifespan of 2 years. However technology developments have increased this and many now advertise 5 or even 6 years. Newer models are designed to signal a need to be replaced after that timespan although there are many instances of detectors operating far beyond this point.
Although all home detectors use an audible alarm signal as the primary indicator, some versions also offer a digital readout of the CO concentration [see side-bar], in parts per million. Typically, they can display both the current reading and a peak reading from memory of the highest level measured over a period of time.
The digital models offer the advantage of being able to observe levels that are below the alarm threshold, learn about levels that may have occurred during an absence, and assess the degree of hazard if the alarm sounds. They may also aid emergency responders in evaluating the level of past or ongoing exposure or danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Battery-only carbon monoxide detectors tend to go thru batteries more frequently than expected. Plug-in detectors with a battery backup (for use if the power is interrupted) provide less battery-changing maintenance.
Some CO detectors are available as system-connected, monitored devices. System-connected detectors, which can be wired to either a security or fire panel, are monitored by a central station. In case the residence is empty, the residents are sleeping or occupants are already suffering from the effects of CO, the central station can be alerted to the high concentrations of CO gas and can send the proper authorities to investigate possible carbon monoxide poisoning.
Page 1 of 3: Next Page »
Carbon Monoxide Detectors w/ PPM Displays and Battery Backup
Although all home carbon monoxide detectors use an audible alarm signal as the primary indicator, some versions also offer a digital readout of the CO concentration, in parts per million.
Typically, they can display both the current reading and a peak reading from memory of the highest level measured over a period of time.
The digital models offer the advantage of being able to observe levels that are below the alarm threshold, learn about levels that may have occurred during an absence, and assess the degree of hazard if the alarm sounds.
They may also aid emergency responders in evaluating the level of past or ongoing exposure or danger.

Swine flu, these days, may not be as rampant as last year when over 787 cases were detected in the State and nearly 55 persons died because of complications arising out of it. However, sporadic cases continue to get reported from districts and there is always a possibility of the virus making a comeback next winter, physicians maintain.
To be prepared for this eventuality, authorities on Thursday launched swine flu vaccination drive among healthcare workers, who are, when it comes to fighting H1N1 virus, the first line of defence.
All government hospitals including those in the districts have been given sufficient doses of the vaccine for inoculation of healthcare workers.
This is the first phase of swine flu vaccination drive and, according to authorities, the second phase covering high risk groups among general public will be taken up after an indigenous vaccine is developed.
The present vaccine being administered to health workers, has been imported by noted pharma giant Sanofi Pasteur.
Health care workers from private hospitals, who are willing to get inoculated, can also get themselves administered with the vaccine at any of the Government hospitals, authorities said.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has supplied close to 80,000 doses of swine flu vaccine for inoculation of health workers in the State. In all, the Centre has procured nearly 15 lakh doses of swine flu vaccine for distribution all over the country.
The swine flu vaccine will provide immunity for only one year because of the possibility of the virus changing its ‘nature' and turning into a more virulent form in the next few years. “In the second phase of vaccination, which could start in three to four months, pregnant women and children will be our prime targets.
Because of their compromised immunity, they are susceptible to this virus and hence they will be given the indigenous vaccine,” said state swine flu coordinator Dr. K. Subhakar.
Keywords: Medical facilities

THE NEW FOUNDE LAND
Volume 18 Number 1
Farley Mowat draws from his own authoritative works on Newfoundland to create a fascinating eulogy for traditional life on the Rock. He captures the character of the seafolk, whose chosen life-style remained the same from one generation to the next until they were pushed unwillingly into the twentieth century by the political machinations of Joey Smallwood. From the unification with Canada in 1949 to the present, the government has continued purposefully to dislodge the people from their outport homes and seagoing livelihoods into larger mining and industrial communities, systematically destroying both the natural and human environment in the name of progress.Mowat brings both Newfoundland's past and present to life, taking the reader through the Norse sagas, the first European visits, and the establishment of permanent settlements based on cod fishing and seal hunting. Interspersed with this historical account are Mowat's own experiences while living on the south coast of Newfoundland for several years. With seeming ease he distils the essence of these kind, hardworking, insular people and simultaneously arouses the reader's anger at the destructive excesses wrought by the present technological age.
Michael Freeman, Bathurst Heights Secondary School, North York, ON.
1971-1979 | 1980-1985 | 1986-1990 | 1991-1995
The materials in this archive are copyright © The Manitoba Library Association. Reproduction for personal use is permitted only if this copyright notice is maintained. Any other reproduction is prohibited without permission Copyright information for reviewers
Young Canada Works

Joined: 16 Mar 2004
|Posted: Mon Aug 31, 2009 12:50 pm Post subject: New Holographic Method for Lab-on-a-Chip Technologies
These images were taken from a video illustrating a new technique that uses a laser and holograms to precisely position clusters of numerous tiny particles within seconds, representing a potential new tool to analyze biological samples or create devices using "nanoassembly." The red dots are individual particles. (Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University)
Researchers at Purdue University have developed a technique that uses a laser and holograms to precisely position numerous tiny particles within seconds, representing a potential new tool to analyze biological samples or create devices using nanoassembly.
The technique, called rapid electrokinetic patterning, is a potential alternative to existing technologies because the patterns can be more quickly and easily changed, said mechanical engineering doctoral student Stuart J. Williams.
"It's potentially a very versatile tool," said Williams, who is working with doctoral student Aloke Kumar and Steven T. Wereley, an associate professor of mechanical engineering.
The research is based at the Birck Nanotechnology Center in Purdue's Discovery Park .
The students won a research award for their work in October during the 12th International Conference on Miniaturized Systems for Chemistry and Life Sciences in San Diego . Four young researcher poster awards were selected out of more than 220 posters judged in the contest. Findings also have been recently published in two peer-reviewed journals, Lab on a Chip and Microfluidics and Nanofluidics.
The experimental device consists of two parallel electrodes made of indium tin oxide, a transparent and electrically conductive material. The parallel plates were spaced 50 micrometers, or millionths of a meter, apart, equivalent to two-thousandths of an inch or about the diameter of a human hair. A liquid sample containing fluorescent beads was injected between the two electrodes, a laser in the near infrared range of the spectrum was shined through one of the transparent electrodes and a small electrical voltage was applied between the two electrodes.
"We send holograms of various patterns through this and, because they are holograms, we can create different shapes, such as straight lines or L patterns," Kumar said.
The particles in the liquid sample automatically move to the location of the light and assume the shape of the hologram, meaning the method could be used to not only move particles and molecules to specific locations but also to create tiny electronic or mechanical features.
"It's a very dynamic system, so we can change this pattern quickly," Kumar said.
The light heats up the liquid sample slightly, changing its density and electrical properties. The electric field applied to the plates acts on these altered properties, causing the heated sample to circulate, much like heated air causes convection currents in the atmosphere, producing a donut-shaped "microfluidic vortex" of circulating liquid between the two plates.
This vortex enables the researchers to position the particles in the circulating liquid by moving the laser light.
"You could take one particle, a hundred particles or a thousand particles and move them anywhere you want in any shape that you want," Williams said. "If you have particles of two different types, you can sort one group out and keep the other behind. It's a versatile tool."
Separating particles is important for analyzing medical and environmental samples. The system could allow researchers to design sensor technologies that move particles to specific regions on an electronic chip for detection or analysis.
The technique overcomes limitations inherent in two existing methods for manipulating particles measured on the scale of nanometers, or billionths of a meter. One of those techniques, called optical trapping, uses a highly focused beam of light to capture and precisely position particles. That technique, however, is able to move only a small number of particles at a time.
The other technique, known as dielectrophoresis, uses electric fields generated from metallic circuits to move many particles at a time. Those circuit patterns, however, cannot be changed once they are created.
The new method is able to simultaneously position numerous particles and be changed at a moment's notice simply by changing the shape of the hologram or the position of the light.
"If you want to pattern individual particles on a massive scale using electrokinetic methods as precisely as we are doing it, it could take hours to days, where we are doing it in seconds," Williams said.
The method offers promise for future "lab-on-a-chip" technology, or using electronic chips to analyze biological samples for medical and environmental applications. Researchers are trying to develop such chips that have a "high throughput," or the ability to quickly detect numerous particles or molecules, such as proteins, using the smallest sample possible.
"For example, a single drop of blood contains millions of red blood cells and countless molecules," Williams said. "You always want to have the smallest sample possible so you don't generate waste and you don't have to use as many chemicals for processing the sample. You want to have a very efficient high throughput type of device."
So-called "optical tweezers" use light to position objects such as cells or molecules.
"You can't use mechanical tweezers to move things like molecules because they are too delicate and will be damaged by conventional tweezers," Kumar said. "That is why techniques like optical tweezing and dielectrophoresis are very popular."
The students also have designed an experiment containing one indium tin oxide plate and one gold plate, an important development because gold is often used in biomedical applications.
"It's a technique that you would likely use in sensors, but we also see definite potential ways in which you could use it to manufacture devices with nanoassembly," Wereley said. "But it's really too soon to talk about scaling this up in a manufacturing setting. We're just beginning to develop this technique."
The researchers recorded videos of the circulating particles to document the effect. A video showing the effect was selected as an outstanding entry during a meeting of the American Physical Society in November. The video can be accessed at http://ecommons.cornell.edu/handle/1813/11399 .
"This technique has not been done before," Williams said. "We can pattern light, we can pattern particles, we can pattern the vortex. No other tool can do all of these."
The researchers demonstrated how the method could be used to cause particles to stick permanently to a surface in a single crystalline layer, a structure that could be used in manufacturing. They used their technique to move fluorescent-dyed beads of polystyrene, latex and glass in sizes ranging from 50 nanometers to 3 micrometers.
Future work may involve using a less expensive light source, such as a common laser pointer, which could not be used to create intricate patterns but might be practical for manufacturing.
Source: Emil Venere http://www.purdue.edu/dp/Nanotechnology/news.php

Student Health Checklist
Being a college student warrants a quick health check in order for you to remain healthy all school year. By following a few simple strategies, you can “rock on” in school, work and your social life.
Get involved in regular cardio exercise
for 30 minutes five times a week such as walking, swimming, running or any other activity that increases your heart rate.
De-stress by deep breathing and stretching exercises
two to three times a week. Spring for a DVD of yoga or get involved in a yoga class.
Get plenty of sleep!
This is very important in every aspect of your life!! As a college student, it is recommended that you log six to eight hours per night.
Take time out every half hour to stretch, walk around, or deep breathe if you are working at a computer.
Drink plenty of water.
Dehydration can make you more vulnerable to illness and infections, therefore, it is important that you down plenty of non-alcoholic fluids. And if water isn’t your thing, juice, tea, and other beverages will work as well.
Utilizing your BFFs.
Having the right friends and someone to talk to and count on is extremely important for your mental health. Seek out groups and activities that will attract new friends who will be supportive of you and vice versa
Eat your fruits and veggies.
A good rule of thumb is to make sure that half of your plate is filled with fruits and vegetables as these foods are bursting with nutrients that help keep infection and diseases at bay.
Fight the flu.
Get a flu shot to avoid being laid up this year for a week with fever and sickness. This vaccine is made available to each residential student and all Gallia County students in mid- October here at URG. Being a college student, you often are in close quarters with roomies and classmates, so make sure you get that flu shot!!
Back off the alcohol.
Alcohol has empty calories and is a risk factor for accidents, injuries and regrettable risky behaviors. Once you turn 21, try sticking to the recommended daily limit of no more than two beers or glasses of wine for men and one for women.
Kick the bad habits!
Rub snuff, smoke cigarettes or do other drugs? STOP!! All these can impose serious health threats so start kicking those bad habits today. Talk with your healthcare provider for assistance or check out your local health department

Molecular Imaging: Seeing Cancer in Action Inside the Body
Oct. 8, 2009 – Molecular imaging can reveal how cancer cells communicate, how they move, what they need to survive and where they are vulnerable to attack. In this edition of Breakthroughs in Cancer Research, David Piwnica-Worms, MD, PhD, professor of developmental biology and radiology at Washington University School of Medicine, explains how molecular imaging is different from more traditional radiology techniques and discusses new discoveries coming out of the medical school’s Molecular Imaging Center.
Other Siteman web resources.
TRANSCRIPT OF AUDIO FILE
On this edition of Breakthroughs in Cancer Research, we’ll talk about how scientists are making it possible to see cancer in action inside the body. That’s providing new information on how to destroy cancer cells.
Host: Thanks for downloading this podcast from the Siteman Cancer Center at Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis. I’m Gwen Ericson. With techniques collectively called molecular imaging, scientists are finding new ways to detect cancer early, monitor cancer treatment and develop better cancer drugs. Molecular imaging can reveal cancer’s secrets, showing how cancer cells communicate, how they move, what they need to survive and where they are vulnerable to attack. To tell us more is David Piwnica-Worms. He is director of the Molecular Imaging Center at the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology and the Siteman Cancer Center. Dr. Piwnica-Worms, thank you for joining us.
Piwnica-Worms: Well thank you, Gwen. I’m happy to talk with you today.
Host: Most of us have had experience with traditional kinds of medical imaging – things like X-rays, PET scans and ultrasound scans. But we’ve probably never encountered molecular imaging. Tell us about the distinction between traditional medical imaging and molecular imaging.
Piwnica-Worms: In most of the traditional medical imaging that we may have experienced as patients or with family members, the focus of the imaging is on the anatomy and, in the context of cancer, on the mass or the size of the mass. But in molecular imaging, we’re actually interested in the details of the molecules that are inside the cancer. That is the biology or the biochemistry or metabolism of the cancer. We’re actually trying to image changes in those molecules and biochemistry that may even precede changes in the anatomy.
Host: Give me an example of a molecular imaging technique.
Piwnica-Worms: One strategy is in the general area that we call genetically encoded reporters. And that means we may take some genetic material from one organism and transfer it into another that may have favorable imaging properties. One such example that we make common use of is firefly luciferase. That is the same firefly that we see flying around in our backyards on a July day in St Louis. And the gene that actually makes the fireflies glow is called luciferase. We can actually use standard molecular biology and cloning techniques to transfer that luciferase gene from fireflies into a cancer cell, and we can watch the cancer glow and move around the body. Or it may tell us how it glows in response to different genes being expressed, or maybe how a protein, one of the building blocks, is processed. And those signals can tell us something about the metabolism and the gene expression inside those cancer cells using noninvasive imaging cameras.
Host: Tell me more about what techniques like that reveal about cancer.
Piwnica-Worms: One way to think of this is that cancer is like a baseball game where we don’t understand the rules. And you can imagine if you were taking a snapshot of Pujols at bat in the first inning, and then sometime later in the third inning you had a snapshot of Holliday running around a base path. And then at some other time, you had a snapshot of Ankiel making a long throw to third base from the outfield. What are the underlying rules that allow that to happen? If you knew nothing about the game of baseball and you had to try to put these together, dynamic views, continuous videos and movie loops would allow you to begin understanding those rules of why sequential events occur in a more dynamic and easy way than a series of random snapshots. And we hope that analogy sort of lets you know how we can look dynamically, continuously, over time with these noninvasive molecular imaging strategies at the baseball game of cancer that’s going on inside the cells.
Host: In medical terms, what can molecular imaging do for us?
Piwnica-Worms: A lot of the activities do relate to preclinical and basic type of cancer biology work. These help us better understand the cancer pathways, the rules that guide the metabolism of the cancer cell. These represent the new targets of tomorrow, where new drugs and combinations of drugs can actually help patients. And in some special cases, maybe even in a human, we can tag the drug and understand, is it actually hitting the cancer? Is it binding to its molecular target? And we can image that noninvasively and repetitively over time. And in another area that relates more directly to patients, there are some techniques like fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET. And this is a special subset of molecular imaging that is available today that does look at sugar metabolism in cancer. It can help us detect cancer at early stages or help guide therapeutic choices. That’s one area of molecular imaging that’s actually in the clinics today.
Host: What are some of the latest discoveries to come out of the Molecular Imaging Center?
Piwnica-Worms: We have a lot of activities going on both within our core groups and collaborators. Two areas of interest that have recently been published and explored involve one of these special pathways. It’s known scientifically as the beta-catenin pathway. It’s very, very important in colon cancer, and it also affects how cells grow and metastasize. And by using one of these luciferase strategies, we can now follow the time course of the regulation of the beta-catenin protein inside colon cancer cells.
Another area that’s been very interesting for us is we developed a new optical technique to look directly at inflammation in living animals. In inflammation that occurs around cancer, there is an enzyme known as myeloperoxidase. And it ends up that a small molecule that many people are familiar with known as luminal – which is the same small molecule that you see on CSI Miami that’s sprayed on blood – has a very highly sensitive response to the enzyme myeloperoxidase, which is one of the key enzymes in inflammation. We’ve developed some techniques now using that luminal where we can now look at this myeloperoxidase-mediated inflammation in mouse models, and maybe someday we might be able to look at that in humans and help us follow inflammatory processes related to cancer.
Host: Tell me about what the Molecular Imaging Center itself is like.
Piwnica-Worms: Well, the Molecular Imaging Center itself is really two main components – a physical center, if you will, and a virtual center. The physical center is the founding faculty investigators who are physically in our laboratory space, all interacting on a daily basis with our laboratories, ourselves and the imaging cores that are in my lab and the investigators’ labs around. And then in addition, we’re tied together by a National Institutes of Health Molecular Imaging Center grant that helps support the cores and the broad array of investigators. We have projects that are ongoing with collaborators in cancer biology and immunology and pharmacology and biochemistry – all interested in studying biology noninvasively through these molecular imaging strategies so that we can try to pry basic biology done with traditional reductionist approaches together with these new dynamic strategies in living cells and live animals and ultimately patients.
Host: Dr. Piwnica-Worms, thank you for joining us.
Piwnica-Worms: You’re welcome.
Host: If you are interested in learning more about the Molecular Imaging Center, please visit its Web site at mic.wustl.edu.

BSA Supply No. 35940
If you have ever wanted to go back in time or wished you could visit the future, if you are curious about the world, or if you are interested in how things work or like to learn new things, these are all reasons why you should want to read. Reading is fascinating. It's full of surprises. And it will take you places you can't get to in any other way.
- Do EACH of the following:
- Learn how to search your library's card catalog or computerized catalog by author,
title, and subject.
- With the assistance of your merit badge counselor or a librarian, select six books
of four different types (such as poetry, drama/plays, fiction, nonfiction, biographies,
etc.). Ask your librarian or counselor about award-winning books that are recommended
for readers your age and include at least one of those titles.
- Find the books in the library catalog. With your counselor's or a librarian's assistance,
locate the books on the shelves.
- Read each book. Keep a log of your reading that includes the title of the book,
the pages or chapters read, the date you completed them, and your thoughts about
what you have read so far. Discuss your reading with your counselor. Using your
log as a reference, explain why you chose each book and tell whether you enjoyed
it and what it meant to you.
- Read about the world around you from any two sources--books, magazines, newspapers,
the Internet (with your parent's permission), field manuals, etc. Topics may include
sports, environmental problems, politics, social issues, current events, nature,
religion, etc. Discuss what you have learned with your counselor.
- Do ONE of the following:
- From a catalog of your choice, fill out an order form for merchandise as if you
intended to place an order. Share the completed form with your counselor and discuss
- With your parent's permission, locate at least five Web sites that are helpful for
your Scouting or other activities. Write the Internet addresses of these sites in
your log. Talk with your counselor or a librarian about safety rules for using the
- With your counselor's and your parent's permission, choose ONE of the following
activities and devote at least four hours of service to that activity. Discuss your
participation with your counselor.
- Read to a sick, blind, or homebound person in a hospital or in an extended-care
- Perform volunteer work at your school library or a public library.
- Read stories to younger children, in a group or individually.
- Best Books for Young Adults - http://www.ala.org/ yalsa/booklists/bbya
- BookSpot: Young Adult Books - http://www.bookspot.com/ youngadult.htm
- Choices Booklists - http://www.reading.org/ choices
- National Book Awards for Young People's Literature - http://www.literature-awards. com/national_book_awards.html
- Newbery Medal Winners and Honor Books - http://www.ala.org/alsc/ newbpast.html
- 100 Best Books for Children - http://www.teachersfirst.com/ 100books.htm
- Summer Reading Lists - http://www.educationworld. com/summer_reading
- Teenreads.com - http://www.teenreads.com
- U.S. Children's Book Awards - http://www.ucalgary.ca/~dkbrown/ usawards.html
- The Online Books Page - http://digital.library.upenn.edu/books
- Project Gutenberg - http://gutenberg.net
P.O. Box 152350
Irving, TX 75015-2350
Web site: http://www.boyslife.org
30 Grove St., Suite C
Peterborough, NH 03458
Toll-free telephone: 800-821-0115
Web site: http://www.cobblestonepub. com/pages/callmain.htm
Cicada and Cricket
P.O. Box 7434
Red Oak, IA 51591-0433
Toll-free telephone: 800-821-0115
Web site: http://www.cricketmag.com
149 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10010
Web site: http://www.kidsdiscover.com
SAS Campus Drive
Cary, NC 27513
Web site: http://www.ncsu.edu/midlink
National Geographic Kids
P.O. Box 63002
Tampa, FL 33663-3002
Toll-free telephone: 800-647-5463
Web site: http://www.nationalgeographic. com/ngkids
P.O. Box 3939
Eugene, OR 97403
Web site: http://www.skippingstones.org
Sports Illustrated for Kids
P.O. Box 60001
Tampa, FL 33660-0001
Toll-free telephone: 800-992-0196
Web site: http://www.sikids.com
P.O. Box 83
Santa Cruz, CA 95063
Toll-free telephone: 800-447-4569
Web site: http://www.stonesoup.com
- Internet Public Library - http://www.ipl.org/div/news
- Refdesk.com - http://www.refdesk.com/paper.html
- Barron's Profiles of American Colleges. Barron's Educational Series, annual.
- Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
- Contemporary Authors. Gale, annual.
- Current Biography. H. W. Wilson, annual.
- Guinness World Records. Bantam Books, annual.
- Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature. H. W. Wilson, annual.
- Subject Guide to Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
- Subject Guide to Children's Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
Web Directories, Search Engines, and Web Guides
- The Alphabet Superhighway - http://www.ash.udel.edu/ash
- Cool Sites for Kids - http://www.ala.org/alsc/children_links.html
- Internet Search Engines for Kids - http://www.ivyjoy.com/rayne/kidssearch.html
- Kids and Teens: Directories - http://dmoz.org/Kids_and_ Teens/Directories
- Kids Pick - http://www.ala.org/kidspick
- KidSpace - http://www.ipl.org/div/ kidspace
- Great Web Sites for Kids - http://www.ala.org/parentspage/greatsites/amazing.html
- Teen Hoopla- http://www.ala.org/ teenhoopla/sitemap.html
- TeenSpace - http://www.ipl.org/div/teen
America's Literacy Directory
Web site: http://www.literacydirectory.org
American Federation for the Blind
11 Penn Plaza, Suite 300
New York, NY 10001
Toll-free telephone: 800-232-5463
Web site: http://www.afb.org
The Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy
1201 15th St. NW, Suite 420
Washington, DC 20005
Web site: http://www.barbarabushfoundation.com
National Literacy Hotline
Toll-free telephone: 800-228-8813
Read Across America
National Education Association
1201 16th St., NW
Washington, DC 20036
Web site: http://www.nea.org/readacross
Reading Is Fundamental Inc.
1825 Connecticut Ave., NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20009
Toll-free telephone: 877-RIF-READ
Web site: http://www.rif.org

Green buildings are designed, constructed and operated for the purpose of providing the occupants with a space that is both healthy and productive, while also being energy efficient and sustainable. Unfortunately, current approaches to green building design and construction don’t always meet occupants’ indoor environmental quality (IEQ) needs for “acoustic comfort.”
Acoustic comfort refers to an indoor environment that is conducive to providing speech intelligibility, speech privacy, low distractions and annoyance, and sound quality.
And, according to ongoing research at the Center for the Built Environment (CBE), it is the lowest performing IEQ factor in green buildings. Moreover, in all buildings surveyed, the level of acoustic satisfaction was rated as the lowest performance IEQ factor, and the only negative (dissatisfaction) factor overall.
There is no need, however, to sacrifice good acoustics when selecting products for green buildings. Architects and interior designers do not have to choose between sustainability, design and acoustic needs—they can have all three.
Outlined below are a number of acoustic considerations for green buildings in three market segments: healthcare facilities, commercial offices and educational facilities.
Acoustics are a key element in the IEQ of healthcare facilities because they play an important role in supporting the safety, health and well-being of patients and staff alike.
In general, ambient noise levels in hospitals are high, and have been shown to be a source of annoyance and stress to both patients and staff. They can also interfere with the staff’s ability to work effectively. Because of this, both the FGI 2010 Guidelines and LEED for Healthcare address the issue.
One reason healthcare facilities are so noisy is the predominance of hard, sound-reflecting surfaces that cause speech and activity sounds to persist much too long. When acoustic conditions are characterized by long reverberation, spoken words are perceived to overlap, resulting in reduced speech intelligibility.
To reduce reverberation and noise levels, acoustical ceiling panels should have a noise reduction coefficient (NRC) of 0.70 or greater. (The NRC indicates the average percentage of sound a material absorbs; an NRC of 0.70 means the material absorbs about 70 percent of the sound that strikes it.) They should also meet healthcare standards for washability, mold and microbial resistance, and fire safety. Ceiling panels with these characteristics are ideal for patient rooms, treatment rooms and other spaces that require a balance of cleanliness and quiet.
Ceiling panels with a NRC of 0.95 are recommended for areas that require even higher levels of sound absorption to ensure patient privacy and meet HIPAA regulations. These include open plan spaces such as waiting areas, pharmacies, nurses’ stations and closed plan spaces where walls extend up to the deck above.
Whether for a space with cubicles and teaming areas or private offices and conference rooms, there are acoustic options that also address sustainable needs. For example, a wide range of continuous and wall-to-wall acoustical ceilings are available that not only enhance the acoustic environment, but also contain high recycled content and can be recycled at the end of their service life.
There are also a variety of “free-floating” ceiling treatments including acoustical clouds, canopies and baffles that are ideal for open plenum or exposed structure spaces—a design trend in green buildings that continues to grow.
Unfortunately, this “warehouse look” can often cause acoustical problems due to sound reflecting off the deck, resulting in excessive reverberation. Any large space of this type will usually need some sound-absorbing elements to help control noise and reverberation within it. In addition, if the exposed deck is less than 15 feet high, reflections between open plan cubicles can cause distractions for nearby occupants.
Designed for use in either new construction or retrofit applications, acoustical clouds, canopies and baffles can add sound absorption in open spaces, provide visual interest and make a design statement, all without sacrificing that exposed look.
Available in a myriad of shapes, acoustical ceiling clouds suspended above work areas provide a type of interrupted ceiling plane. As such, they help control both distant reverberations and reflections, reducing occupant annoyance and distractions. Acoustical clouds actually provide greater sound absorption than a continuous ceiling of the same surface area because they absorb sound on both their front and back surfaces. In fact, reverberation time can be reduced nearly 50 percent with only 20 percent coverage.
Acoustical canopies also help reduce reverberation in the space below them, but are much different in size and look compared to acoustical clouds. For example, cloud systems are available in standard sizes up to 14 by 14 feet, while canopies are usually 3 by 3 or 4 by 6 feet in size. Visually, acoustical clouds are flat, while canopies are curved and can be installed as hills or valleys.
Currently, there is no standard credit in the IEQ section of LEED for acoustic performance. However, an innovation credit can be applied for by demonstrating that the acoustics of a building are superior to what would normally be considered typical, thereby improving the quality of the indoor environment. The LEED v4 proposal (in a fifth public comment at the time of this writing) does, however, include a requirement for acoustic performance as part of the IEQ section.
Considering that the primary mode of teaching involves speech and listening, the quality of the acoustic environment in a classroom is crucial. LEED for Schools recognized the unique nature of the design and use of K-12 schools, and was the first of the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) rating systems to include acoustics as an integral and important element of IEQ.
To provide classrooms that enhance learning, LEED for Schools includes a minimum acoustical performance prerequisite. To meet it, two requirements must be achieved:
- Classrooms and other core learning spaces must include sufficient sound-absorptive finishes to comply with a maximum reverberation time of 0.60 seconds (classrooms less than 20,000 cubic feet).
- Classrooms and other core learning spaces must meet a maximum background noise level from HVAC systems of 45 decibels A-weighted (dBA).
Compliance with the first requirement is accomplished in one of two ways:
- By confirming that 100 percent of all ceiling areas (excluding lights, diffusers and grilles) are finished with a material that has a NRC of 0.70 or higher.
- By confirming that the total area of acoustical wall panels, ceiling finishes and other sound-absorbent finishes equals or exceeds the total ceiling area of the room (excluding lights, diffusers and grilles). All materials in the calculation must have an NRC of 0.70 or higher.
The proper use of sound-absorbing materials will significantly reduce reverberation, however, the location of acoustic treatments is a vital consideration. In classrooms where there is no fixed position for the teacher and ceiling heights are about 10 feet, the best and most cost-effective option is to place most, if not all, of the sound-absorbing material on the ceiling, in the form of a suspended acoustical ceiling.
If ceiling heights are greater than 12 feet, an increasing amount of sound-absorbing material should be placed on the walls. If there is no possibility for wall treatment, consider placing three-dimensional furnishings such as bookshelves along the walls to ensure sound waves are scattered, thereby reducing the possibility of distant echoes.
Kenneth P. Roy, Ph.D., FASA, is a senior principal research scientist for acoustic technologies for Armstrong Building Products in Lancaster, Pa. He can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org.

Young children have very short attention spans, which is not surprising given that the optimum study time for an adult is 40 to 45 minutes. So it's quite normal for your students' attention to stray. Also teaching young children is very different to working with adults, you just need to make a few adjustments to how you go about the classes.
You need to think about lots of short activities when you are planning your lessons. At the beginning, this will be very time-consuming as you will need to think through each activity when planning. As time goes by, you will build up a bank of short activities (eg a song, a chant, a nursery rhyme, games such as I spy) that the children are familiar with and that you can introduce when you feel a change is needed. As children get used to your style of teaching, the classroom rules and the types of activity, it will be easier to introduce these short activities into the lesson.
You should also think about pace and variety when you are planning. Some activities should involve whole class focus on the teacher, some should include individual work requiring reflection, some should involve group work and some should include physical movement. The changing focus will also stimulate children, re-focus their attention or calm them down.
You should also insist on having full attention when you are working with or addressing the whole class, for example when telling a story. Children need to understand that when you are talking they should stop what they are doing and listen to you. You could use a signal to indicate when this is necessay, for example clapping your hands.
I'm sure that with time you will get used to teaching children and it will seem less tiring the more you do it.

Behaviour-driven development is an “outside-in” methodology. It starts at the outside by identifying business outcomes, and then drills down into the feature set that will achieve those outcomes. Each feature is captured as a “story”, which defines the scope of the feature along with its acceptance criteria. This article introduces the BDD approach to defining and identifying stories and their acceptance criteria.
Software delivery is about writing software to achieve business outcomes. It sounds obvious, but often political or environmental factors distract us from remembering this. Sometimes software delivery can appear to be about producing optimistic reports to keep senior management happy, or just creating “busy work” to keep people in paid employment, but that’s a topic for another day.
Usually, the business outcomes are too coarse-grained to be used to directly write software (where do you start coding when the outcome is “save 5% of my operating costs”?) so we need to define requirements at some intermediate level in order to get work done.
Behaviour-driven development (BDD) takes the position that you can turn an idea for a requirement into implemented, tested, production-ready code simply and effectively, as long as the requirement is specific enough that everyone knows what’s going on. To do this, we need a way to describe the requirement such that everyone – the business folks, the analyst, the developer and the tester – have a common understanding of the scope of the work. From this they can agree a common definiton of “done”, and we escape the dual gumption traps of “that’s not what I asked for” or “I forgot to tell you about this other thing”.
This, then, is the role of a Story. It has to be a description of a requirement and its business benefit, and a set of criteria by which we all agree that it is “done”. This is a more rigorous definition than in other agile methodologies, where it is variously described as a “promise of a conversation” or a “description of a feature”. (A BDD story can just as easily describe a non-functional requirement, as long as the work can be scoped, estimated and agreed on.)
The structure of a story
BDD provides a structure for a story. This is not mandatory – you can use a different story format and still be doing BDD – but I am presenting it here because it has been proven to work on many projects of all shapes and sizes. At the very least, your story should contain all of the elements described in the template. The story template looks like this:
Title (one line describing the story) Narrative: As a [role] I want [feature] So that [benefit] Acceptance Criteria: (presented as Scenarios) Scenario 1: Title Given [context] And [some more context]... When [event] Then [outcome] And [another outcome]... Scenario 2: ...
Telling the story
A story should be the product of a conversation involving several people. A business analyst talks to a business stakeholder1 about the feature or requirement, and helps them to frame it as a story narrative. Then a tester helps define the scope of the story – in the form of acceptance criteria – by determining which scenarios matter and which are less useful. A technical representitive will provide a ballpark estimate of the amount of work involved in the story, and to propose alternative approaches. Many great ideas for systems come from the people developing them as well as the people who asked for them in the first place.
This will likely be an iterative process. The stakeholder will have an idea of what they want but will usually not know how much work will be involved, or how that work will be allocated. With the help of the technical and testing experts, they will understand the cost/benefit trade-off of each scenario and can make a judgement about whether they want it. Of course this is also balanced up against the other requirements: is it better to cover more edge cases in this story, or to move on to another story?
Sometimes the development team will simply not know enough to be able to make even a ballpark estimate. In this case they may choose to carry out some investigative work, known as a “spike”, in order to understand more about the requirement. (I will cover planning in more detail in a future article.)
The characteristics of a good story
Using the example from the article Introducing BDD, let’s look at the requirements for withdrawing cash from an ATM:
Story: Account Holder withdraws cash As an Account Holder I want to withdraw cash from an ATM So that I can get money when the bank is closed Scenario 1: Account has sufficient funds Given the account balance is \$100 And the card is valid And the machine contains enough money When the Account Holder requests \$20 Then the ATM should dispense \$20 And the account balance should be \$80 And the card should be returned Scenario 2: Account has insufficient funds Given the account balance is \$10 And the card is valid And the machine contains enough money When the Account Holder requests \$20 Then the ATM should not dispense any money And the ATM should say there are insufficient funds And the account balance should be \$20 And the card should be returned Scenario 3: Card has been disabled Given the card is disabled When the Account Holder requests \$20 Then the ATM should retain the card And the ATM should say the card has been retained Scenario 4: The ATM has insufficient funds ...
As you can see, there are a number of scenarios to consider, some related to the account balance, others about the card and yet others about the ATM itself. Let’s dissect the story to determine whether it is any good.
The title should describe an activity
The title of the story, “Account Holder withdraws cash”, describes an activity that the account holder wants to carry out. Until we implement this feature, the account holder won’t be able to withdraw money from the ATM. Once we have delivered it, they will. That gives us an obvious starting point for determining what “done” looks like.
If we had a title like “Account management” or “ATM behaviour”, we would have to look harder to understand when we were finished, and the edges would be a lot more fuzzy. For instance, “account management” might incorporate applying for a loan, and “ATM behaviour” might encompass changing the PIN number on my cash card. The story title should always describe actual behaviour by a user of the system.
The narrative should include a role, a feature and a benefit
The template “As a [role] I want [feature] so that [benefit]“ has a number of advantages. By specifying the role within the narrative, you know who to talk to about the feature. By specifying the benefit, you cause the story writer to consider why they want a feature.
It gets interesting if you find the feature won’t actually deliver the benefit attributed to it. This usually means you have a missing story. There is one story with the current feature, which delivers a different benefit (and is therefore still useful), and a hidden story whereby you will need a different feature to deliver the benefit described.
The example story tells us there is an Account Holder who cares about the feature being delivered, so we know where to start exploring what it should do.
The scenario title should say what’s different
You should be able to line up the scenarios side by side, and describe how they differ using only the title. In our example, we can see that the scenario descriptions say only what’s different between each scenario. You don’t need to say “an account holder withdraws money from an account with insufficient funds and is told they are unable to fulfull the transaction”. It’s obvious from the title whether this is the scenario you care about, compared to the others.
The scenario should be described in terms of Givens, Events and Outcomes
This is the single most powerful behavioural shift I have seen in teams adopting BDD. Simply by getting the business users, the analysts, the testers and the developers to adopt this vocabulary of “given/when/then”, they discover that a world of ambiguity falls away.
Not all scenarios are this simple. Some are best represented as a sequence of events, described as: given [some context] when [I do something] then [this happens] when [I do another thing] then [this new thing happens] and so on. An example is a wizard-style website, where you step through a sequence of screens to build up a complex data model. It is perfectly appropriate to intermingle sequences of events and outcomes, as long as you get into the habit of thinking in these terms.
One interesting emergent behaviour is that the quality of the conversation changes. You will quickly discover that you have missed out an assumed given (“well of course the account is overdrawn”), or forgotten to verify an outcome (“well naturally the account holder gets their card back”). I observed this on one particular project where the lead developer told me he could sense the analysts and developers were talking at cross purposes, but couldn’t see a way to demonstrate this to them. Within a few days of introducing the given/when/then vocabulary, he could see a dramatic improvement in the quality of their interactions.
The givens should define all of, and no more than, the required context
Any additional givens are distracting, which makes it hard for someone looking at the story for the first time – whether from the technical or business side – to understand what they need to know. Similarly any missing givens are really assumptions. If you can get a different outcome from the givens provided, then there must be something missing.
In the example, the first scenario says something about the account balance, the card and the ATM itself. All of these are required to fully define the scenario. In the third scenario, we don’t say anything about the account balance or whether the ATM has any money. This implies that the machine will retain the card whatever the account balance, and whatever the state of the ATM.
The event should describe the feature
The event itself should be very simple, typically only a single call into the production code. As discussed above, some scenarios are more complicated than this, but mostly the scenarios for a story will revolve around a single event. They will differ only in the context (the givens) and the corresponding expected outcomes.
The story should be small enough to fit in an iteration
There are no hard and fast rules about how you do this, as long as you break it down into demonstrable chunks. In general if there are more than about five or six scenarios, a story can probably be broken down by grouping similar scenarios together.
We can’t tell from the ATM example how many more scenarios there are for this story, but I am suspicious that there may be several more. Essentially we have three “moving parts” in this story, namely the account balance, the status of the cash card and the state of the ATM. We could get into more detail with the cash card: what if it is out of date, so I can’t use it to withdraw cash but the ATM still returns it to me? What if the ATM breaks partway through the transaction? What if my account has an overdraft facility?
It might be better to break the story out into several smaller stories:
- Account Holder withdraws cash (assumptions: ATM is working and card is valid)
- Account Holder withdraws cash with invalid card (assumptions: ATM is working)
- Account Holder withdraws cash from flaky ATM (assumptions: card is valid)
Although this may seem artificial, it allows you to demonstrate progress in business terms and gives you more data points to track with. The important thing is always to break the story out along business lines by scenarios (and making the assumptions explicit) rather than along technical lines (e.g. doing the database stuff in this iteration and the GUI stuff in the next iteration). This is so the business can see demonstrable progress on their own terms rather than just taking your word for it.
So how is this different from Use Cases?
There are use cases and there are use cases. I’m a huge fan of the way Alistair Cockburn describes use cases (as opposed to the over-engineered versions I have encountered on RUP-as-waterfall projects). Given that I don’t have much experience on use case-driven projects, I’ll leave it to others to draw the comparisons.
Certainly I agree with his process of starting at the lower precision (of an outcome, or goal) and working towards higher precisions, taking in more exception scenarios as you go. In BDD, this means starting with the business outcome, and working through high level functional areas to drill into specific stories with acceptance criteria.
In reality, it doesn’t matter what your process is to identify and elaborate requirements. It’s fine for you to write requirements documents if that helps you organise your thoughts. It’s not fine, however, to pass those documents along as if they actually encapsulated all your thoughts, because they don’t. Instead, you should put the requirements document, or stack of use cases, to one side and start over defining stories from business outcomes, safe in the knowledge that your hard work has meant that you have all the answers in your head – or at least a good enough understanding to outline the work as you currently see it.
Behaviour-driven development uses a story as the basic unit of functionality, and therefore of delivery. The acceptance criteria are an intrinsic part of the story – in effect they define the scope of its behaviour, and give us a shared definition of “done”. They are also used as the basis for estimation when we come to do our planning.
Most importantly, the stories are the result of conversations between the project stakeholders, business analysts, testers and developers. BDD is as much about the interactions between the various people in the project as it is about the outputs of the development process.
1. Actually it should be the person who actually cares about the feature, so it may equally be an operational, legal or security person depending on the story.

Battle of Caporetto
The Battle of Caporetto (also known as the Twelfth Battle of the Isonzo or the Battle of Karfreit as it was known by the Central Powers), took place from 24 October to 19 November 1917, near the town of Kobarid (now in Slovenia), on the Austro-Italian front of World War I. The battle was named after the Italian name of the town of Kobarid (known as Karfreit in German).
Austro-Hungarian forces, reinforced by German units, were able to break into the Italian front line and rout the Italian army, which had practically no mobile reserves. The battle was a demonstration of the effectiveness of the use of stormtroopers and the infiltration tactics developed in part by Oskar von Hutier. The use of poison gas by the Germans played a key role in the collapse of the Italian Second Army.
||This section needs additional citations for verification. (October 2012)|
The Austrian offensive began at approximately 02:00 on 24 October 1917. Due to the inclement weather that morning, particularly the mist, the Italians were caught by complete surprise. The battle opened with a German artillery barrage, poison gas, and smoke, and was followed by an all-out assault against the Italian lines. The Italians had outdated gas masks, gave no counter fire and had given the Germans all the weather information they needed over their radio. The defensive line of the Italian Second Army was breached between the IV and XXVII Corps almost immediately. The German forces made extensive use of flamethrowers and hand grenades as a part of their infiltration tactics, and were able to tear gaping holes in the Italian line, especially in the Italian strongholds on Mount Matajur and the Kolovrat Range. By the end of the first night, von Below's men had advanced a remarkable 25 km (16 mi). German and Austro-Hungarian attacks from either side of von Below's central column were less effective, however. The Italian Army had been able to repel the majority of these attacks, but the success of von Below's central thrust threw the entire Italian Army into disarray. Forces had to be moved along the Italian front in an attempt to stem von Below's breakout, but this only weakened other points along the line and invited further attacks. At this point, the entire Italian position on the Tagliamento River was under threat.
2nd army commander Luigi Capello was Italy's best general but was bedridden with fever while still retaining command. Realizing his forces were ill-prepared for this attack and were being routed, Capello requested permission to withdraw back to the Tagliamento. He was overruled by Cadorna, however, who believed that the Italian force could regroup and hold out against the attackers. Finally, on 30 October, Cadorna ordered the majority of the Italian force to retreat to the other side of the river. It took the Italians four full days to cross the river, and by this time the German and Austro-Hungarian armies were on their heels. By 2 November, a German division had established a bridgehead on the Tagliamento. About this time, however, the rapid success of the attack caught up with them. The German and Austro-Hungarian supply lines were stretched to breaking point, and as a result, they were not able to launch another concerted attack. Cadorna took advantage of this to retreat further, and by 10 November had established a position on the Piave River.
Failures of German Logistics 
Even before the battle, Germany was struggling to feed and supply its armies in the field. Erwin Rommel, who, as a junior officer, won the Pour le Mérite for his exploits in the battle, often bemoaned the demands placed upon his "poorly fed troops". The Allied blockade of the German Empire, which the Kaiserliche Marine had been unable to break, was responsible for food shortages and widespread malnutrition in Germany and the Central Powers in general. When inadequate provisioning was combined with the gruelling night marches preceding the battle of Caporetto (Kobarid), a heavy toll was extracted from the German and Austro-Hungarian forces. Despite these logistical problems, the initial assault was extremely successful. However, as the area controlled by the combined Central Powers forces expanded, an already limited logistical capacity was overstrained. By the time the attack reached the Piave, the soldiers of the Central Powers were running low on supplies and were feeling the physical effects of exhaustion. As the Italians began to counter the pressure put on them by the Central Powers, the German forces lost all momentum and were once again caught up in another round of attrition warfare.
Italian losses were enormous: 10,000 were killed, 30,000 wounded and 265,000 were taken prisoner – morale was so low among the Italian troops, mainly due to Cadorna's harsh disciplinary regime, that most of these surrendered willingly. Furthermore, roughly 3,000 guns, 3,000 machine guns and 2,000 mortars were captured, along with an untold amount of stores and equipment. Rommel, then an Oberleutnant, captured 1,500 men and 43 officers with just 3 riflemen and 2 officers to help. Austro-Hungarian and German forces advanced more than 100 km (62 mi) in the direction of Venice, but they were not able to cross the Piave River. Although to this point the Italians had been left to fight on their own, after Kobarid (Caporetto) they were reinforced by six French infantry divisions and five British infantry divisions as well as sizeable air contingents. However, these troops played no role in stemming the advancing Germans and Austro-Hungarians, because they were deployed on the Mincio River, some 60 miles behind the Piave, as the British and French strategists did not believe the Piave line could be held. The Piave served as a natural barrier where the Italians could establish a new defensive line, which was held during the subsequent Battle of the Piave River and later served as springboard for the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, where the Austro-Hungarian army was finally defeated after four days of stiff resistance.
Luigi Cadorna was forced to resign after the defeat. The defeat alone was not the sole cause, but rather the breaking point for an accumulation of failures, as perceived by the Italian Prime Minister, Vittorio Emanuele Orlando. Throughout much of his command, including at Kobarid (Caporetto), Cadorna was known to have maintained poor relations with the other generals on his staff. By the start of the battle he had sacked 217 generals, 255 colonels and 355 battalion commanders. In addition, he was detested by his troops as being too harsh. He was replaced by Armando Diaz and Pietro Badoglio. He had already been directing the battle 20 miles behind before fleeing another 100 miles to Padua.
This led governments to the realization that fear alone could not adequately motivate a modern army. After the defeat at Caporetto, Italian propaganda offices were established, promising land and social justice to soldiers. Italy also accepted a more cautious military strategy from this point on. General Diaz concentrated his efforts on rebuilding his shattered forces while taking advantage of the national rejuvenation that had been spurred by invasion and defeat.
After this battle, the term "Caporetto" gained a particular resonance in Italy. It is used to denote a terrible defeat – the failed General Strike of 1922 by the socialists was referred to by Mussolini as the "Caporetto of Italian Socialism". Many years after the war, Caporetto was still being used to destroy the credibility of the liberal state.
Popular culture 
The Battle of Caporetto has been the subject of a number of books. The Swedish author F.J. Nordstedt (i.e. Christian Braw) wrote about the battle in his novel Caporetto. The bloody aftermath of Caporetto was vividly described by Ernest Hemingway in his novel A Farewell to Arms. Curzio Malaparte wrote an excoriation of the battle in his first book, Viva Caporetto, published in 1921. It was censored by the state and suppressed; it was finally published in 1980.
- Tucker, Spencer C. (11 November 2010). Battles That Changed History: An Encyclopedia of World Conflict. United States: ABC-CLIO. p. 430. ISBN 978-1-59884-429-0. Retrieved 16 September 2012.
- Tucker, Spencer C.; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (25 October 2005). World War I: A Student Encyclopedia. United States: ABC-CLIO. p. 431. ISBN 1-85109-879-8. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "By 10 November Italian losses were 10,000 dead, 30,000 wounded, and 265,000 prisoners (about 350,000 stragglers from the Second Army did manage to reach the Piave line). The army had also lost 3,152 artillery pieces of a preoffensive total of 6,918. An additional 1,712 heavy trench mortars and 3,000 machine guns had been captured or abandoned in the retreat, along with vast amounts of other military equipment, especially as the rapid withdrawal had prevented the removal of heavy weapons and equipment across the Isonzo River. In contrast, the attackers had sustained about 70,000 casualties."
- Seth, Ronald (1965). Caporetto: The Scapegoat Battle. Macdonald. p. 147
- Stearns, Peter; Langer, William (2001). The Encyclopedia of World History (6th ed.). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 669. ISBN 0-395-65237-5.
- Dupuy & Dupuy (1970), p. 971
- Geoffrey Regan, More Military Blunders, page 161
- Macksey, Kenneth (1997). Rommel: Battles and Campaigns. Da Capo Press. p. 224. ISBN 0-306-80786-6.
- Simkins, Peter; Jukes, Geoffrey; Hickey, Michael (2003). The First World War. Osprey Publishing. p. 352. ISBN 1-84176-738-7.
- Townley, Edward (2002). Collier, Martin, ed. Mussolini and Italy. Heinemann. p. 16. ISBN 0-435-32725-9.
- Geoffrey Regan, More Military Blunders, page 160
- Morselli, Mario (2001). Caporetto, 1917: Victory Or Defeat?. Routledge. p. 133. ISBN 0-7146-5073-0.
Further reading 
- Connelly, O. On War and Leadership: The Words of Combat Commanders from Frederick the Great to Norman Schwarzkopf, 2002 ISBN 0-691-03186-X
- Dupuy R. E., &, Dupuy, T. N., The Encyclopedia of Military History, (revised edition), Jane's Publishing Company, 1970, SBN 356 02998 0
- Morselli, M. Caporetto 1917: Victory or Defeat?, 2001 ISBN 0-7146-5073-0
- Reuth, R. G. Rommel: The End of a Legend, 2005 ISBN 1-904950-20-5
- Seth, Ronald: Caporetto: The Scapegoat Battle. Macdonald, 1965
- Cavallaro, G. V. Futility Ending in Disaster. Xlibris, 2009
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Battle of Caporetto|
- Walks of Peace in the Soea Region Foundation: The Battles of the Isonzo, 1915–17
- Pro Hereditate: The Isonzo Front
- (Italian) La Grande Guerra: Novant'anni fa la Battaglia di Caporetto
- The Battle of Caporetto, 1917

The Racial Geography of the Federal Death Penalty
Scholars have devoted substantial attention to both the overrepresentation of black defendants on federal death row and the disproportionate number of federal defendants charged capitally for the murder of white victims. This attention has not explained (much less resolved) these disquieting racial disparities. Little research has addressed the unusual geography of the federal death penalty, in which a small number of jurisdictions are responsible for the vast majority of federal death sentences. By addressing the unique geography, we identify a possible explanation for the racial distortions in the federal death penalty: that federal death sentences are sought disproportionately where the expansion of the venire from the county to the district level has a dramatic demographic impact on the racial make-up of the jury. This inquiry demonstrates that the conversation concerning who should make up the jury of twelve neighbors and peers - a discussion begun well before the founding of our Constitution - continues to have relevance today. This Article documents the historical and racial relationships between place and the ability to seat an impartial jury. We then discuss the unique impact demographic shifts in the jury pool have on death penalty decision making. Finally, we propose three possible solutions: (1) a simple, democracyenhancing fix through a return to the historical conception of the county as the place of vicinage in federal capital trials; (2) a Batson-type three-step process for rooting out the influence of race on the decision to prosecute federally; and/or (3) voluntary measures by the Attorney General to mask demographic and location identifiers when deciding whether to provide federal death-authorization. We explain why a return to county-level jury pools in federal capital cases (whether through statutory construction, legislative change, or through the authority of a fair-minded Attorney General) prospectively limits the impact of race on the operation of the federal death penalty, without establishing the intractability of the federal death penalty as a whole. Finally, we observe that any effort to study the federal death penalty cannot merely address those federal cases in which the Attorney General has considered whether to approve an effort to seek the death penalty, but must also include an assessment of the cases prosecuted in state court that could be prosecuted federally and the prosecutorial decision concerning when and whether to prosecute in federal court.
Robert J. Smith and G. Ben Cohen. "The Racial Geography of the Federal Death Penalty" Washington Law Review (2010).

Two well-preserved sections of the Antonine Wall are located at Hillfoot Cemetery, about a mile from the Roman bath at Bearsden, located in in southwestern Scotland near Glasgow. The exposed sections, within easy walking distance of each other, are stone footings which lay at the base of the Wall. They provide vivid examples of the massive size and careful construction methods used in the Wall.
(Figs.1,2: Exposed footings of Antonine Wall in Hillfoot (Photos: Athena Review).]
These portions of the ancient wall were exposed in 1903 and 1922, during expansion of the cemetery. The Antonine Wall at this location was originally 4.3 meters wide, but portions found at Hillfoot were later widened to 5 meters. Each of the exposed basal sections has outside rows of large dressed curbstones and a drainage system.
This drainage culvert crosses a basal section of the Antonine Wall at Hillfoot Cemetery in Bearsden, near Glasgow, Scotland. The Wall was built and maintained between 142 and 165 AD.
[Fig.3: Drainage culvert in Antonine Wall at Hillfoot (Photo: Athena Review).]
[References: Keppie, Lawrence. Scotland's Roman Remains. Glasgow, 1986, 1990.]
return to index for Antonine Wall.
Review Image Archive |
and Publishing Index |
Main index of Athena Review | Subject Index | Travel Pages | Galleries and Museums | Free Issue
Copyright © 1996-9 Athena Publications, Inc. (All Rights Reserved).

Name ID 1199
The first professional hunters came in 1913. They found the wildlife plentiful, especially the lions, but saw no elephants. Seven years later, an American arrived in a strange new contraption known as a Ford motor-car and news of the wonders of the Serengeti had reached the outside world. Because the Hunting of lions made them so scarse (they were considered 'vermin'), it was decided to make a partial Game Reserve in the area in 1921 and a full one in 1929. With the growing awareness of the need for conservation, it was expanded and upgraded to a National Park in 1951. Eight years later the Ngorongoro Conservation Area was established in the south-east as a separate unit.
Arusha: A Brochure of the Northern Province and its Capital Town
Page Number: 13-15-17
Extract Date: 1929
It is safe to say that Tanganyika holds a front place among our East African Colonies for the number and variety of its game animals. The belt from Tanga through to Lake Victoria is where game is most numerous. There is an abundance of the commoner antelope, and in certain parts the rarer species such as the Greater and Lesser Kudu, Gerenuk, etc., are still fairly plentiful. Big game like the Elephant, Rhinocerous, Lion and Buffalo, all of which hold for the hunter a new thrill and experience, are to be found in this area in such a variety of country and cover that the Hunting of no two animals is ever alike.
Here the hunter passes through most interesting country; Kilimanjaro with its snow-capped dome, running streams and dense forests, across the plains to the Natron Lakes and the Great Rift Wall with its volcanic formation and on to the great Crater, Ngorongoro. In his travels he will come into contact with some of the most interesting and picturesque tribes that inhabit Africa such as the Masai, Wambulu, etc., each with their own quaint customs and histories.
The Ngorongoro Crater, the greatest crater in the world, measuring approximately 12 miles in diameter, seen from the Mbulu side, is a delight to the eye with its teeming herds of game ; Wildebeest alone running into tens of thousands. This scene conveys to one the idea of a great National Park. Nature has provided the crater with a precipitous rock fence for tns most part and with lakes and streams to slake the thirst of the great game herds which inhabit it. The unalienated part of the crater is now a complete game reserve in which a great variety of game is to be found such as Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, Lion, and all the smaller fry. The Elephant although not in the crater is to be found in the forests nearby.
The Serengetti Plains lying away to the northwest of the crater holds its full share of animal life and here the sportsman has the widest possible choice of trophies. The Lion in this area holds full sway and is still to be seen in troops of from ten to twenty. Recently, Serengetti and Lion pictures have become synonymous. The commoner species of game are here in abundance and the plains are second only to the crater for game concentration. The country lying between the Grumeti River - Orangi River and the Mbalangeti from Lake Victoria to the Mou-Kilimafetha Road has recently been declared a game reserve.
Game animals that inhabit the northern area are well protected an'd their existence is assured to posterity by the great game sanctuaries and regulations which govern the Hunting or photographing of game.
In the Northern area there are six complete reserves and two closed areas. These are as follows:
(2) Mount Meru.
(3) Lake Natron
(4) Northern Railway.
The closed areas are :
Pienaar's Heights, near Babati and Sangessa Steppe in the Kondoa district. The boundaries for these are laid down in the Game Preservation Ordinance No. 41 of 1921. There are, however, vast areas open to the hunter and the abovementioned sanctuaries do not in any way detract from the available sport which the Northern Tanganyika has to offer.
The following game licences are now in force (Shillings)
:Visitor's Full Licence - 1500
Visitor's Temporary Licence (14 days) - 200
Resident's Full Licence - 300
Resident's Temporary Licence (14 days) - 60
Resident's Minor Licence - 80
Giraffe Licence - 150
Elephant Licence 1st. - 400
2nd. - 600
To hunt the Black Rhinoceros in the Northern Province it is now necessary to hold a Governor's Licence, the fee for which is 150/-. This entitles the holder to hunt one male Rhinoceros. Elephant, Giraffe, and Rhinoceros Licences may only be issued to holders of full game licences.
Now that the Railway is through to Arusha it is not too much to hope that with the assistance of a healthy public opinion the Sanya Plains may become restocked with game which would be a great source of interest and an attraction to the traveller visiting these parts.
Extract Date: 1931
Herne, Brian White Hunters: The golden age of African Safaris
Page Number: 375
Extract Date: 1965
Safari Hunting in East Africa was forever changed by the masterly blueprint of Brian Nicholson, a former white hunter turned game warden. The disciple and successor of C.I. P. Ionides, the "Father of the Selous game reserve," Nicholson conceived a plan for administering Tanzania's expansive wildlife regions. In 1965 he changed most of the vast former controlled Hunting areas, or CHAs, into Hunting concessions that could be leased by outfitters from the government for two or more years at a time. Nicholson also demarcated the Selous game reserve's 20,000 square miles of uninhabited country into 47 separate concessions. Concessions were given a limited quota of each game species, and outfitters were expected to utilize quotas as fully as possible, but not exceed them.
Nicholson's plan gave outfitters exclusive rights over Hunting lands, providing powerful incentives for concession holders to police their areas, develop tracks, airfields, and camps, and, most importantly, preserve the wild game. When the system was put into effect, it was the larger outfitting organizations - safari outfitters who could muster the resources to bid and who had a clientele sufficient to fulfill the trophy quotas Nicholson had set (done in order to provide government revenue by way of fees for anti-poaching operations, development, and research) - that moved quickly to buy up the leases on the most desirable blocks of land. Smaller safari companies who could not compete on their own banded together and formed alliances so that they, too, could obtain Hunting territories.
Herne, Brian White Hunters: The golden age of African Safaris
Page Number: 389
Extract Date: 1973 Sep 7
By the end of 1973 Kenya was the sole remaining tourist destination in East Africa. While the neighboring country of Uganda was still in the throes of military anarchy, Tanzania surprised the world on September 7 by issuing an overnight ban on all Hunting and photographic safaris within its territory. Government authorities moved quickly to seize and impound foreign-registered Land Cruisers, supply trucks, minibuses, aircraft, and equipment.
The stunned collection of safari clients as well as sundry mountain climbers, bird-watchers, and beachcombers who had been visiting the country at the time of the inexplicable edict were summarily escorted to Kilimanjaro airport outside of Arusha to await deportation. The residue of tourists stranded without flights were trucked to the northern town of Namanga where they were left on the dusty roadside to cross into Kenya on foot. All tourist businesses, including the government-owned Tanzania Wildlife Safaris, were closed down. No government refunds were ever made to tourists or to foreign or local safari outfitters
Africa News Online
Extract Date: 2000 June 5
Panafrican News Agency
Frequent acrimony, currently depicting the relationship between game Hunting companies and rural communities in Tanzania, will be a thing of the past after the government adopts a new wildlife policy.
Designated as wildlife management areas, the communities will benefit from the spoils of game Hunting, presently paid to local authorities by companies operating in those areas.
The proposed policy seeks to amend Tanzania's obsolete Wildlife Act of 1975, and, according to the natural resources and tourism minister, Zakia Meghji, 'it is of utmost priority and should be tabled before parliament for debate soon'.
She said the government would repossess all Hunting blocks allocated to professional hunters and hand them over to respective local authorities.
In turn local governments, together with the communities, would be empowered to allocate the Hunting blocks to whichever company they prefer to do business with.
'Guidelines of the policy are ready and are just being fine-tuned,' she said.
Communities set to benefit from this policy are chiefly those bordering rich game controlled areas and parks. They include the Maasai, Ndorobo, Hadzabe, Bahi, Sianzu and Kimbu in northeastern Tanzania.
Members of these communities are often arrested by game wardens and fined for trespassing on game conservation areas. As a result, they have been extremely bitter about being denied access to wildlife resources, which they believe, naturally, belong to them.
Under the new policy, Meghji said, the government will ensure that people undertake increased wildlife management responsibilities and get benefits to motivate them in the conservation of wildlife resources.
The East African
Extract Author: John Mbaria
Extract Date: February 4, 2002
KENYA COULD end up losing 80 per cent of its wildlife species in protected areas bordering Tanzania to hunters licensed by the Tanzanian government.
The hunters have been operating for about a decade in a section of the migratory route south from Kenya to Tanzania's Serengeti National Park.
They shoot large numbers of animals as they move into the park during the big zebra and wildebeest migration between July and December.
There are fears that the Maasai Mara National Park and most of Kenya's wildlife areas bordering Tanzania could lose much of their wildlife population, threatening the country's Ksh20 billion ($256 million) a year tourism industry.
Kenya banned Hunting in 1977 but the sport is legal in Tanzania, where it is sold as "Safari Hunting."
"The product sold is really the experience of tracking and killing animals, the services that go with this and the prestige of taking home the trophies," says a policy document from the Tanzania Wildlife Corporation (Tawico).
Tanzania wildlife officials said wild animals that cross over from Kenya are hunted along their migratory routes in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area in Ngorongoro district of Arusha region, 400 km northwest of Arusha. The area was designated by the British colonial power as a sports Hunting region for European royalty.
The officials said the area is now utilised by a top defence official from the United Arab Emirates (UAE), trading as Ortelo Business Company (OBC), through a licence issued in 1992 by former Tanzania President Ali Hassan Mwinyi. The permit allows the company to hunt wild game and trap and take some live animals back to the UAE.
Safari Hunting earns big money for the Tanzanian government, which charges each hunter $1,600 a day to enter the controlled area.
A hunter is also required to pay fees for each kill, with an elephant costing $4,000, a lion and a leopard $2,000 each and a buffalo $600. The document has no quotation for rhinos.
The sport is organised in expeditions lasting between one and three weeks in the five Hunting blocks of Lake Natron Game Controlled Area, Rungwa Game Reserve, Selous Mai, Selous U3 and Selous LU4.
For the period the hunters stay in each of the Hunting blocks, they pay between $7,270 and $13,170 each. Part of this money is shared out among the many Ujamaa villages, the local district councils and the central government.
Although Tawico restricts the number of animals to be culled by species, poor monitoring of the activities has meant indiscriminate killing of game.
"Some of the animals are snared and either exported alive or as meat and skins to the United Arab Emirates and other destinations," local community members told The EastAfrican during a recent trip to the area.
They claimed the hunters were provided with "blank Hunting permits," giving them discretion over the number of animals to be hunted down. Kenya wildlife conservation bodies are concerned that big game Hunting in the Ngorongoro area is depleting the wildlife that crosses the border from Kenya.
"Kenya is losing much of its wildlife to hunters licensed by the Tanzanian government," the chairman of the Maasai Environmental and Resource Coalition (MERC), Mr Andrew ole Nainguran, said. MERC was set up in 1999 to sensitise members of the Maasai community in Kenya and Tanzania to the benefits of wildlife conservation.
Kenya and Tanzania wildlife authorities have regularly discussed the problem of security and poaching in Arusha. However, the KWS acting director, Mr Joe Kioko, said legalised Hunting has never been discussed in any of the meetings.
The hunters are said to fly directly from the UAE to the area using huge cargo and passenger planes which land on an all-weather airstrip inside the OBC camp. The planes are loaded with sophisticated Hunting equipment, including four-wheel drive vehicles, weapons and communication gadgets.
On their way back, the planes carry a variety of live animals, game trophies and meat. Employees at the camp said the hunters are sometimes accompanied by young Pakistani and Filipino women.
The International Fund for Animal Welfare regional director, Mr Michael Wamithi, said Kenya and Tanzania should discuss the negative impact of the sport Hunting on Kenya's conservation efforts.
"The two neighbours have a Cross-Border Law Enforcement Memorandum of Understanding where such issues could be dealt with."
Kenya seems to be alone in adhering to strict protection of wildlife, a policy famously demonstrated by President Daniel arap Moi's torching of ivory worth $760,000 in 1989.
Although the country has made significant progress in securing parks from poachers, it is yet to embrace a policy on "consumptive utilisation" of animals advocated by Kenyan game ranchers and Zimbabwe, which wants the international trade ban on ivory lifted.
The animals in the Hunting block have been reduced to such an extent that the OBC camp management has been spreading salt and pumping water at strategic places to attract animals from Serengeti and the outlying areas.
"We will not have any animals left in the vicinity unless the Hunting is checked," a local community leader, Mr Oloomo Samantai ole Nairoti, said, arguing that the area's tourism economy was being jeopardised.
Mysterious fires in the area to the south of Serengeti have also forced animals to seek refuge in the Hunting blocks.
Locals said the camp is exclusively patronised by Arab visitors. The camp is usually under tight security by Tanzanian police.
The permit granted by Mr Mwinyi has raised controversy in Tanzania and was at one stage the subject of a parliamentary probe committee because members of UAE's royal family were not entitled to the Hunting rights in the country.
"Only presidents or monarchs are entitled to hunt in the area," an official said, adding that the UAE royal family had abused their permit by killing animals outside their given quotas or specified species.
The government revoked the licence in 1999 after realising that OBC was airlifting many wild animals to the Middle East, only to renew the permit in 2000. The current permit runs until 2005.
The withdrawal of the permit followed the recommendations of a 1994 parliamentary probe commission set up to "investigate the Hunting behaviour" of the UAE company.
Sources said permanent Hunting is prohibited in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area for fear of depleting animals from the four parks, which host the bulk of the region's tourist resorts.
The area is in a natural corridor where wild animals cross while roaming between the Ngorongoro Conservation Area and Serengeti National Park in Tanzania and Maasai Mara Game Reserve and Amboseli National Park in Kenya.
The late founding president of Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, took to himself the powers to issue Hunting permits for Loliondo when Tanzania became independent in 1961, but he never granted any.
After obtaining the permit, the UAE hunters created Hunting blocks in the area covering over 4,000 sq km.
No other Hunting companies have been granted permits, the source said.
The UAE royal family has donated passenger aircraft to the Tanzania army and a number of vehicles to the Wildlife Division.
The 1974 Wildlife Act set up five categories of wildlife conservation areas.
These are national parks, game reserves, partial game reserve, open areas and Ngorongoro Conservation Area. Hunting is prohibited in the national parks and Ngorongoro Conservation Area, but allowed in other areas during the seasonal Hunting period from July to December.
Additional reporting by Apolinari Tairo in Dar es Salaam
Tomlinson, Chris Big game hunting threatening Africa
Extract Author: Chris Tomlinson
Extract Date: 2002 03 20
Loliondo GAME CONTROL AREA, Tanzania - At a dirt airstrip in rural Tanzania, a desert camouflaged cargo plane from the United Arab Emirates air force taxis up to pallets stacked with large coolers full of game meat, the harvest of a successful Hunting season.
As Tanzanian immigration and customs officials fill out documents under a thatched shelter, brand-new, four-wheel-drive trucks and dune buggies drive to and from a nearby luxury campsite, the base for one of Tanzania's most expensive - and secretive - game Hunting operations, Otterlo Business Corp.
Hundreds of members of Arab royalty and high-flying businessmen spend weeks in the Loliondo Game Control Area each year Hunting antelope, lion, leopard and other wild animals. The area is leased under the Otterlo name by a member of an emirate royal family who is a senior officer in the UAE defense ministry.
While neighboring Kenya outlawed big game Hunting in 1978, the Tanzanian government says Hunting is the best use of the land and wildlife. But villagers and herders say big money has led government officials to break all the Hunting rules, resulting in the destruction of most of the area's non-migratory animals and putting East Africa's most famous national parks under threat.
Loliondo is on the main migratory route for wildlife north of Ngorongoro Crater, east of Serengeti National Park and south of Kenya's Masai Mara National Reserve. The summer Hunting season coincides with the migration of wildebeest and zebra through the area, where they eventually cross into the Serengeti and the Masai Mara. Predatory animals follow the migration.
During the colonial era, Loliondo was set aside for European royalty as a Hunting area. Since independence, Loliondo has remained a Hunting reserve, but it is supposed to be managed by area residents for their benefit.
Local leaders, who refuse to speak publicly because they fear retribution, say they have not been consulted about the lease that was granted in 1995 by national officials in Tanzania's political capital, Dodoma. They say government officials have tried to silence criticism.
"The lease was given by the government and the Maasai landowners were not involved," said one Maasai leader. "All the resident animals have been killed ... (now) they carry out Hunting raids in the Serengeti National Park, but the government closes its eyes."
Maasai warriors told The Associated Press that hunters give cash to anyone who can lead them to big game, especially leopards. They also said that Otterlo officials have begun pumping water into some areas to attract more animals and that what the warriors call suspicious fires in the Serengeti have caused animals to move into Loliondo.
An Otterlo manager, who gave his name only as Khamis, initially agreed to an interview with AP but later did not return repeated phone calls.
In an interview with the newspaper, The East African, Otterlo managing director Juma Akida Zodikheri said his company adheres to Tanzanian law, and he denied hunters killed animals indiscriminately. He said the owner of the company is Maj. Gen. Mohammed Abdulrahim al Ali, deputy defense minister of the UAE.
While Tanzania has strict rules on game Hunting, Maasai who have worked at the lodge say guests are never told of the limits and hunt as much as they want. Tanzanian officials deny that.
Col. A.G.N. Msangi, district commissioner for Ngorongoro District, said all applicable rules are enforced. He accused the Maasai of rumor-mongering in an effort to discredit Otterlo.
The company "is following the system the government wants," Msangi said. "OBC has invested more money here than any other company in the district."
Msangi said Hunting companies request permission to kill a certain number of animals. Once the request is approved by wildlife experts at the Ministry of the Environment, the company pays a fee based on that number whether they actually kill the animals or not, he said.
"We have police and ministry people making sure they don't exceed what they have paid for," Msangi said. The tourists are also required to employ professional hunters to ensure no female or young animals are killed, he added.
Compared to the numbers in Serengeti National Park, very few large animals were seen during a three-hour drive through Loliondo. But without any independent survey of the animal population, it is impossible to know whether Msangi's conservation efforts are working.
Msangi described his main duty as balancing the needs of people, animals and conservation. He said not only does Hunting revenue finance wildlife conservation, but Otterlo, like most tourism companies, also makes charitable donations to help pay for schools and development projects and it provides badly need jobs.
Also appeared in http://www.washtimes.com/world/20020801-22110374.htm
1 Aug 2002
Internet Web Pages
Extract Author: Lifer
Extract Date: April 16 2002
Posted - April 16 2002 : 20:53:22
The East African Newspaper of 4-10 February 2002 carried an article titled "Game Carnage in Tanzania Alarms Kenya", written by John Mbaria with supplement information from Apolinari Tairo of Dar es Salaam. The article was on The Ortello Business Hunting Company, which started to hunt in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area in 1992.
The following are issues raised in the article:
a) Hunting activities carried out in Liliondo Game Controlled Area near the Tanzania / Kenyan border causes loses of 80% of the Kenyan wildlife.
b) Hunting is conducted in the migratory route in the south between Kenya and Serengeti National Park. The animals are hunted during the migratory period as they move to Kenya and on their way back to Tanzania in July to December.
c) Hunting is threatening the Kenyan tourism industry, which earns the country USD 256.0 annually.
d) The Hunting kills animals haphazardly, without proper guidance and monitoring of actual number of animals killed and exported outside the country.
e) Airplanes belonging to Ortello Business Corporation (OBC) carry unspecified type of live animals and birds from Loliondo on their way back to UAE. Further more, the air planes fly directly in and out of Loliondo without stopping at Kilimanjaro International Airport (KIA).
The following are responses to the issues raised:
2.0 Conservation of wildlife in Tanzania
Tanzania is among the top ten countries in the world rich in biodiversity. Tanzania is also leading in wildlife conservation in Africa. It has 12 National Parks, including the famous Serengeti National Park, 34 Game Reserves and 38 Game Controlled Areas. The wildlife –protected areas cover 28% of the land surface area of Tanzania. In recognition of the good conservation works, Tanzania was awarded a conservation medal in 1995 by the Safari Club International whose headquarters is in the United States of America.
Tanzania has a number of important endangered animal species in the world. Such animal species are: Black Rhino, Wild Dog, Chimpanzee, Elephant and Crocodile (Slender Snorted Crocodile).
In 1998, the Government of Tanzania adopted a Wildlife Policy, which gives direction on conservation and advocate sustainable use of wildlife resources for the benefit of the present and future generations.
3.0 Tourist Hunting
Regulated tourist Hunting or any other type of Hunting that observes conservation ethics does not negatively affect wild animal populations. This is because Hunting ethics is based on selective Hunting and not random shooting of animals. Hunting was banned in Tanzania from 1972 to 1978. The resultant effect was increased poaching and reduced government revenue from wildlife conservation. Low revenue caused low budgetary allocations to wildlife conservation activities and the lack of working gear and equipment. When the tourist Hunting resumed Elephant population increased from 44,000 (in 1989) to 45,000 (in 1994). Elephant is a keystone species in the Hunting industry and is a good indicator in showing population status of other animal species in their habitat.
In 1989 to 1993 the government revenue from the Hunting industry increased from USD 2,422,500.00 to USD 7,377,430.00. The government earned a total of USD 9.3 Million from tourist Hunting in the year 2002. Increased revenue and keystone species such as Elephant are the results of efficient implementation of good plans and policies in conservation and sustainable use of wildlife resources.
4.0 Response to the issues raised in the article
4.1 Hunting against the law by OBC
OBC is one of the 40 Hunting companies operating in Tanzania. The Company belongs to the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Different from other Hunting companies, OBC does not conduct tourist Hunting business. The Kingdom of UAE has been the client Hunting in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area since 1992.
In conducting Hunting in Loliondo Game Controlled Area, the Company adhere to the law and regulations governing the tourist Hunting industry, namely:
4.1.1 Payment of concession fee amounting to USD 7,500.00 per Hunting block per year.
4.1.2 Requesting for a Hunting quota from the Director of Wildlife, before issuance of Hunting permit.
4.1.3 Payment of game fees as stipulated by the Government.
4.1.4 Hunting only those animals shown in the Hunting permit.
4.1.5 Contributing to the development of the Hunting block, local communities’ development projects and anti-poaching activities.
The following is what OBC has done so far:
· Contribution towards the development of the Ngorongoro District of USD 46,000.00
· Construction of Waso Primary and Secondary Schools, six bore holes and cattle dips and has purchased two buses to enhance/local transportation. Furthermore, OBC contributed TSh. 30.0M to six villages in the Hunting area, for providing secondary school education to 21 children.
· Purchased a generator and water pump worth TSh. 11.0M for provision of water to six villages. It has also constructed all weather roads and an airstrip within Loliondo area.
4.1.6. Different from the rest of the Hunting companies OBC Hunting period is very short. Normally the Hunting season lasts for six months, but OBC hunts for a maximum of four months. Few animals are shot from the Hunting permit.
4.2 Animals hunted in migratory routes.
The Government of Tanzania has permitted Hunting in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area and not in the migratory route between Masai Mara and Serengeti National Park. The Loliondo Game Controlled Area is a plain bordering the Serengeti National Park to the east.
4.3 The right for Tanzania to use wildlife in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area
The wildlife found in Tanzania is the property of the Government of Tanzania. The notion that these animals belong to Kenya is not correct. The wild animals in Loliondo Game Controlled Area do not have dual citizenship . Since some animal species move back and forth between Tanzania and Kenya it is better understood that these animals would be recognised to belong to either party during the time they are in that particular country. Animals in Masai Mara, Serengeti, Loliondo and Ngorongoro belong to one ecosystem namely, Serengeti ecosystem. However, Tanzania being a sovereign State with her own policies has the right by law to implement them. The same applies to Kenya, which has the right to implement its no-Hunting policy basing on the administration of her laws. Tanzania has therefore, not done anything wrong to undertake Hunting on her territory.
4.4 Hunting is threatening Kenyan tourism
Migratory animals move into Kenya during the rainy season. After the rainy season they move back to Tanzania. Animals that are hunted in Liliondo Game Controlled Area during this time of the year are very few. In the year 2000, only 150 animals were hunted, and in the year 2001 only 139 animals were hunted. It is therefore, not true that 80% of the animals in the border area were hunted. Based on this argument, it is also not true that Hunting conducted by OBC is threatening the Kenyan tourism industry. Tanzania does not allow Hunting of elephants 10 kilometres from the Tanzania/Kenya international boundary. (CITES meeting held at the Secretariat Offices in Geneva in 1993). This is an example of the measures taken to control what was erroneously referred to by the East African Paper as “haphazard Hunting of animals of Kenya”.
Furthermore, it is not true that the Wildlife Division does not know the number of animals that are killed. Control of Hunting is done by the Wildlife Division, District Council and other Law Enforcement agencies. The OBC does not capture and export live animals since it does not possess valid licence to do so.
4.5 OBC airplances export assorted number of live animals from Loliondo to UAE
Capture and export of live animals and birds is conducted in accordance with the Wildlife Conservation Act No. 12 of 1974 and resolutions of the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). The live animal trade is also conducted in accordance with the International Air Transport Association (IATA) regulations, with regard to the size of the boxes/containers allowed to transport specific animal species in order to avoid injuries or death of the same. The principle behind the live animal trade is sustainability. CITES may prohibit exportation of animals whose trade is not sustainable. On these grounds it is obvious that CITES and therefore, its 150 members recognise that the Tanzanian live animal trade is sustainable.
Live animal traders who exports animals, birds and other live specimens are obliged to adhere to the following procedure:
i) Must hold valid licence to trade on live animals.
ii) Must hold a capture permit and thereafter an ownership permit./certificate. The number of animals possessed and the number of animals listed on the ownership permit must be consistent with the number of animals that were listed in the capture permit and actually captured and certified.
iii) Must obtain an export permit for animals listed on the ownership permit/certificate.
iv) The Officer at the point of exit must certify that the animals exported are those listed on the certificate of export. The number of animals to be exported must tally with the number listed on the certificate of export.
Verification of exported animals is conducted in collaboration with the police and customs officials.
v) The plane that will carry live animals is inspected by the Dar es Salaam and Kilimanjaro Handling Companies’ Officials.
vi) For animals listed under CITES, appropriate export and import certificates are used to export the said specimens. If there is any anomaly in exporting CITES species, the importing country notifies CITES Secretariat, which in turn notifies the exporting country, and the animals in question are immediately returned to the country of export.
4.6 Other specific isues
4.6.1 Hunters are given blank permits
Companies are issued Hunting quotas before they commence Hunting activities. Each hunter is given a permit, which shows the animals that he/she is allowed to hunt depending on the quota issued and the type of safari. There are four types of safari Hunting as follows: 7, 14, 16 and 21 days safari. Each Hunting safari indicates species and numbers of animals to be hunted. When an animal is killed or wounded the officer in-charge overseeing Hunting activities signs to certify that the respective animal has been killed. If the animal has been wounded, the animal is tracked down and killed to ensure that no other animal is killed to replace the wounded animal at large. This procedure is a measure of monitoring of animals killed by hunters.
4.6.2 Good Neighbourhood Meetings between Tanzania and Kenya
There are three platforms on which Tanzania and Kenya meet to discuss conservation issues as follows:
a) The Environment and Tourism Committee of the EAC.
b) The Lusaka Agreement. In the Lusaka Agreement Meeting conservation and anti-poaching matters amongst member countries are discussed. The HQ of the Lusaka Agreement is in Nairobi.
c) Neighbourhood meeting. Experts in the contiguous conservation areas meet to discuss areas of cooperation between them, for example, in joint anti-poaching operations. Based on the regulations that govern the Hunting industry animals are not threatened by extinction since the animals that are hunted are old males for the purpose of obtaining good trophies. Trophies are attractions in this Hunting business. It is on this basis that tourist Hunting is not discussed in the said meetings, because is not an issue for both countries.
4.6.3 OBC airplanes flies directly to and from Loliondo without passing through KIA
The Tanzania Air Traffic Law requires that all airplanes land at KIA before they depart to protected areas. When the airplanes are at KIA and DIA the respective authorities conduct their duties according. The same applies when airplanes fly to UAE. They are required to land at KIA in order to go through immigration and customs checks. The allegation that OBC airplane does not land in KIA is therefore false. Furthermore, Tanzania Air Traffic Control regulates all airplanes includingly, OBC airplane at entry points.
4.6.4 OBC sprays salt in some parts of the Loliondo Game Controlled Area in order to attract animals from Serengeti National Park.
These allegations are baseless since the Tourist Hunting Regulations (2000) prohibit distribution of water and salt at the Hunting site in order to attract animals for Hunting. Besides the Game Scouts who supervise Hunting had never reported this episode. Furthermore, there are no reports that OBC is responsible for wild fires that gutters the south of the Serengeti National Park.
4.6.5 Cancellation of OBC block permit in 1999 since it was involved in the exportation of live animals.
This allegation is not true. The truth is that Hunting blocks are allocated to Hunting companies after every five years. The allocation that was done in 1995 expired in 1999. The next allocation was done in year 2000 and the companies will use the allocated blocks until 2004.
4.6.6 The UAE Royal Family contributions to the Wildlife Division
This is true. The Wildlife Division had received support from the UAE including: vehicles, transceivers and field gear in 1996. This was part of the fulfilment of the obligation by all Hunting companies to contribute towards conservation and anti-poaching activities.
Records in the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism show that there is no other District in Tanzania with Hunting area, other than Ngorongoro District, that receives enormous funds from Hunting business for community development. OBC contributes up to TSh. 354,967,000.00 annually for community development in Loliondo.
The Government of Tanzania has no reasons to stop the Hunting activities in Loliondo Game Controlled Area. The government sees that local communities and the Ngorongoro District Council benefit from the Hunting industry.
Edited by - lifer on 04/16/2002 20:57:41
Extract Author: Yannick Ndoinyo
Extract Date: 17 august 2002
ISSN 0856-9135; No. 00233
A rejoinder to the Ministry’s press release on Loliondo and OBC
We are replying in a critical analysis to the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism Press Release in the East African paper of April 1-7 2002 regarding the "Game Carnage in Tanzania Alarms Kenya" in the same paper (East Africa February 4-10 2002). Special reference was given to Hunting activities by OBC and our analysis base to same Company.
As it appears in the Press Release, OBC is the property of the UAE, but in reality some top influential people in Tanzania have some shares in the company. The OBC has been in Loliondo since 1992, even though ever since the whole local community in Loliondo refused to accept its presence and goes to the present day. OBC, to us, is not a normal Hunting company. It seems as if the Company has the right of ownership over land and other natural resources like water and wildlife. OBC has constructed expensive and luxurious houses, airstrip and big godowns on water source without the local people’s authority while they depend on such water for dry season grazing. Our surprise is that the government has always denied this fact and defended the Company. Why? The Company may be adhering to regulations and laws governing the tourist Hunting business in the books only and not practically. There are no monitoring schemes to make sure that the Company adheres to the said regulations.
It is true that OBC contributes 30 million to six villages, which is 5 million per village, and it was initially 2.5 million per village. The amount was raised two years ago. The issue here is that the amount was determined by OBC alone and therefore paid when they feel like doing, no binding mechanisms to endure payment on regular basis. The former OBC director was once quoted as saying, "I am paying this money as this money as a goodwill only because the government does not wish me to do so". The amount however does not compensate or match the resources extracted from the land of six villages. The implication is that OBC has entered into agreement with the government only and not with the villages. The provision of education to 21 children as indicated the Press release, is basically not true or correct.
The 30 million is the annual goodwill contribution from OBC to the six villages and not purposely meant for education only. The plan to utilize this money is upon the villages themselves.
It is also true that OBC has constructed Wasso secondary school but not Wasso primary school. The secondary school, which was built for the six villages in which OBC operated and the whole of Ngorongoro district has been taken by the government thus limiting the number of children hailing from these villages and Ngorongoro district an opportunity to obtain education from the same school.
In regard to bore holes, there are only four known boreholes and all these are built in Wasso and Loliondo townships. There are no any boreholes existing in any of the six villages, except only that a water pump machine, which currently does not work, was purchased for Mondorosi hamlet (Kitongoji) of Soit-Sambu village. Again, there is no virtually any cattle dip that OBC did dig or rehabilitated in six villages as mentioned in the Press Release from the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism. The information that OBC purchased a generator and water pump worth 11million is to six villages for water provision is false and misleading. Most villages in Loliondo have water problems and it is impossible for a generator to sustain a single village leave alone six villages. No single village has received such service from OBC.
In regard to transport, the two buses were either bought or just brought as second hand vehicles. These buses are expensive to run and spares are not easily obtained. At present they are just grounded at Ngorongoro district workshop/garage. There was a time the councilors debated whether or not to sell because of difficult management. At present the people of Loliondo use an extremely old SM bus for transport.
Again in the aspect of transport, there are no all weather roads in Loliondo that OBC constructed as it was said the Press release. Roads in most parts of Loliondo are murramed roads and mostly were constructed by Ngongoro district council using money from TANROADS and not OBC.
It is indeed true that OBC Hunting period is very short. There is a lot that can happen in short period especially if the team of hunters is composed of professional hunters. Our concern here is the interference and interruptions that OBC causes to the life systems of the people in Loliondo. The Maasai cannot resume their grazing patterns and often are forced to move by OBC. Where should we graze our cattle while our grazing land is occupied and by the Hunting company and protected by the gun? In six villages of Loliondo, five operate non-consumptive tourism that gives them more earnings except one which is dominated by OBC. The villages can now send children to school, construct basic infrastructure like health centers, classrooms, teacher houses water supply and food security ultimately eradicating poverty. This is all done using the money from the non-consumptive tourism. The OBC constantly interrupts this system and agreement between in the villages saying that the villages have no right to operate such tourism on ‘his land’. Is it his or our land? The other major problem besides the Arabs is the constant reprimand from the government, as it discourages this kind of tourism business that benefits the local people in the villages more. We favour this kind of tourism because it does not disturb our normal pattern of life system. At the same time it does not kill wild animals, they just camp and go to the Serengeti Park. The allegations that OBC airplanes fly directly from Loliondo to UAE without passing KIA and whether it exports live animals have existed and many people have spoken and written about it. However, we cannot confirm anything about without much scrutiny. We do not know much now.
Also in the Press Release the spray of salt to attract animals was referred to. The distribution of water in a certain site to attract animals was applied sometime ago. We are sure of this as it happened some years ago. What we are not exact is whether the practice continues to the present day.
In the Press Release, the records in the Ministry show that OBC pays annually 354,967,000/= for community development in Loliondo? We have some reservations in regard to such records. First of all they are just records and anything can be written. Secondly, how is it that the Ministry has such records while we in Loliondo, the base of OBC operation, do not have?
Thirdly, where is the provision in the agreement that forces OBC to annually pay to the district such amount of money? It may be that the amount is used to be paid annually but to individuals only and not to the district as it said.
In its conclusion the Ministry sees no reason to stop Hunting activities in Loliondo simply because the local community and Ngorongoro district council benefit from the Hunting business. We strongly feel that there is every reason to stop the Hunting activities in Loliondo for several reasons. First, the local community did not consent to the granting of their land to the Hunting company to the present day.
Secondly, the local community and Ngorongoro district council do not benefit in a way it should be from this Hunting business in Loliondo.
Thirdly, the presence of OBC has interrupted and interfered with our life systems including grazing, culture and other alternative means of business to the local community.
In our conclusion we feel that even though the government operates under the law set in Dar es Salaam and Dodoma without the involvement of the local people, it is very important to respect the localpeople.
Someone in the ministry who has never been to Loliondo, we firmly conclude, either wrote the Press Release, or the story was made. We suggest that the villagers or OBC people be contacted for more definite facts. Please feel free to contact us for any queries you might have regarding this article.
Tel: 0744 390 626
Extract Author: Arusha times Reporters
Extract Date: Aug 17 2002
ISSN 0856-9135; No. 00233
The Hunting plot controversy reigning within the Longido Game Controlled Area in Monduli district two weeks ago threatened the life of the American ambassador to Tanzania, Robert Royall who was Hunting in the block .
Riding in a Toyota Land Cruiser Station Wagon with registration numbers TZP 9016, owned by Bush Buck Safaris Limited, Ambassador Royall found himself being confronted by 16 armed men.
The incident took place on Saturday the 27th of July this year, at about 13.00 hours, in the Hunting block which is under the authority of Northern Hunting Enterprises Limited.
It is reported that, while Royall and his family were driving in the area, another vehicle, Land Cruiser with registration numbers TZP 3867, drove toward them and blocked them off.
Sixteen men, armed with traditional weapons including spears, machetes, doubled edged swords (simis) and clubs jumped out, ready for an attack.
However, both the ambassador, his team and driver Carlous Chalamila happened to be fully equipped and likewise drew their weapons.
Seeing modern weapons, the mob got frightened and decided to flee. But the ambassador’s driver, Chalamila followed them to find out what they wanted. Contacts were subsequently made with the wildlife department of the Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources. Some wildlife officers were dispatched to the scene from Arusha and when they arrived, they found the attackers already gone.
Regional Police Commander for Arusha, James Kombe admitted that the incident did take place but declined comments on the issue. However, already five people have been arrested in connection with the incident, these are: Omar Mussa, David Bernard, Salimba Lekasaine, Kiruriti Ndaga and the only lady in the team, Nuria Panito Kennedy.
This week, Arusha Times learned that, the five suspects are out on bail.
Speaking by phone from Monduli, the Monduli District Commissioner (DC), Anthony Malle said there was indeed some controversy regarding the Hunting bloc of Longido Game Controlled Area (LGCA) in which two Hunting companies of Kibo Safaris and Northern Hunting Enterprises (T) Limited, were at logger heads.
Captain Malle added that, even the residents of the Singa village in the area, have been divided into two groups each supporting either companies.
The District Commissioner however, pointed out that only the Ministry will decide which of the two parties have the right to the 1,500 square kilometre Hunting bloc.
DC Malle also said that he and other district officials have already held various meetings to address the issue and together have signed an official letter which was sent to the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources in order for the office to settle the matter once and for all.
Efforts to contact both Kibo Safaris and Northern Hunting Enterprises ended in vain.
The East African
Extract Author: John Mbaria
Extract Date: December 2, 2002
The East African (Nairobi) Posted to the web December 4, 2002
.. .. ..
Unlike in Kenya, the law in Tanzania promotes commercial wildlife utilisation activities such as safari Hunting and actually prohibits photographic tourism in areas declared as Hunting zones.
Under the WCA of 1974, the wildlife division can only regulate the capture, Hunting and commercial photography of wildlife.
The report adds that the director of wildlife can issue Hunting licences on village land, but he "does not have the power to give a hunter or Hunting company authority to hunt on village land without the permission of the village government."
On their part, the licensed persons are expected to seek the permission of the village government before engaging in any Hunting. However, reports indicate that the practice of safari Hunting has so far ignored this law. The report says that most Hunting companies put up facilities on village lands without the permission of the village government and the respective village assemblies.
The report gives the example of the Loliondo GCA, in Loliondo division of Ngorongoro district, where a Hunting company associated with a United Arab Emirates minister, "has built an airstrip and several large houses without the permission of the relevant village governments."
"Such actions are contrary to the VLA which, under section 17, requires any non-village organisation that intends to use any portion of the village land to apply for that land to the village council, which will then forward that application and its recommendation for approval or rejection to the Commissioner for Land."
In January, The EastAfrican published an exclusive story on the manner with which the Hunting company conducts Hunting activities in Loliondo.
.. .. ..
Extract Author: Indigenous Rights for Survival International
Page Number: b
Extract Date: 2/1/03
[click on the link to see the original MS Word document]
Indigenous Rights for Survival International
P.O. Box 13357
Dar Es Salaam.
Alternative E-mail: email@example.com
The United Republic of Tanzania
P.O. Box 9120
Dar Es Salaam.
If it pleases the Honourable President Benjamin Mkapa
Re: Stop the killing fields of Loliondo
I am a Tanzanian citizen, a strong believer in social justice. Under the same spirit I am the Co-coordinator of an informal group called Indigenous Rights for Survival International (IRSI). IRSI is a loose network of young people with an interest in public policy issues in Africa. We mainly discuss policy issues through emails communications and ultimately write articles in the press. IRSI as an entity takes no position on any of the discussed issues instead it simply stimulates, steers, and co-ordinates discussions and debates on public policy issues of members’ interest.
Mr. President, I have all along believed that you can stop the crime against humanity being inflicted upon the people of Loliondo, Ngorongoro District of Arusha Region by a no less authority than the Government of Tanzania.
Mr. President, Loliondo Division is located in Maasai ancestral lands in the northern part of Tanzania along the common border with Kenya. It borders the Ngorongoro highlands to the south, Serengeti National Park to the west, and the Maasai Mara Game Reserve in Kenya to the north. The Loliondo Game Controlled Area (LCGA) encompasses an estimated 4,000 sq km. There is no physical barrier separating the LGCA from other protected areas. It is a continuous ecosystem. LGCA was initially established in 1959 as a Game Reserve by the British colonialists under the then Fauna Conservation Ordinance, Section 302, a legal instrument the colonial authorities used to set aside portions of land for wildlife conservation. The legal status of the reserve was later changed to that of a Game Controlled Area to allow for commercial Hunting, a status that defines LGCA today and haunts its wildlife.
Mr. President, Loliondo forms an important part of the semi-annual migratory route of millions of wildebeests and other ungulates northward into the Maasai Mara Game Reserve and Amboseli National Park in Kenya between April and June, and returning southward later in the year. The survival of the Ngorongoro-Serengeti-Maasai Mara ecosystem and the wildlife it supports is linked to the existence of Loliondo and other surrounding communal Maasai lands in Tanzania and Kenya. Similarly, the survival of the Maasai people is dependent entirely upon the protection of their ancestral land for economic viability and cultural reproduction. Land to the Maasai is the foundation for their spirituality and the base for identity.
Mr. President, the people of Ngorongoro District in general and Loliondo Division in particular have suffered for a long time various established pains such as irrational grabbing of their ancestral land for “development”, tourism (consumptive and non-consumptive) and cultivation. While the people of Loliondo have lost much of their ancestral land to cultivation, the Government is evidently supporting private investors to further put Maasai pastoralists of Loliondo at a very awkward corner.
In 1992, the administration of the former president Ali Hassan Mwinyi granted the entire Loliondo Game Controlled Area (LGCA) as a Hunting concession to the Otterlo Business Corporation Ltd (OBC), a game-Hunting firm based in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The Government issued a 10-year Hunting permit, under the controversial agreement, to the Brigadier Mohammed Abdulrahim Al-Ali, believed to be a member of the royal family of the UAE, of Abu Dhabi in the UAE who owns (OBC). The grabbed land is a birthright land of thousands of villagers of Arash, Soitsambu, Oloipiri, Ololosokwan, Loosoito and Oloirien villages of Loliondo.
Mr. President, a Parliamentary Committee was formed to probe the Loliondo Gate saga. It revoked the dirty agreement. Strangely, a similar agreement was established.
In January 2000, OBC was granted another 5-year Hunting permit in the said area. As usual, without the villagers’ consent. OBC constructed an airstrip. The villagers have been witnessing live animals being exported through the airstrip. OBC constructed structures near water sources. Hearing of the new permit, the Maasai sent a 13-men protest delegation to Dar Es Salaam in April 2000. The intention was to sort out the matter with you Mr. President. Unfortunately, they did not see you.
However, the delegation managed to hold a press conference at MAELEZO, National Information Corporation Centre. The Maasai contemplated a number of actions to be taken against both your Government and the Arab in connection with the plunder of the resources. The Maasai said that before a mass exodus of the Maasai to Kenya the first thing was to eliminate wild animals. Thereafter, the delegation retreated to Loliondo, as gravely frustrated as before.
The general election was scheduled for 2000, so the saga had to be explained away. The official statement was that power hungry opposition politicians were pushing the elders and that all the claims by the Maasai were “unfounded” and “baseless.” To its credit, The Guardian went to Loliondo. It reported the following:
Maasai elders in Loliondo, Arusha Region, who recently declared a land dispute against OBC Ltd, a foreign game-Hunting firm, have accused some top Government officials of corrupt practices, saying the conflict is not political. The Arusha Regional Commissioner, Daniel ole Njoolay, recently described the simmering land dispute between the Maasai pastoralists and OBC, as a political issue.
Francis Shomet [the former Chairman for Ngorongoro District Council] claimed that Njoolay had misled Tanzanians to believe that the allegations recently raised by Maasai elders were unfounded and baseless. Fidelis Kashe, Ngorongoro District Council Chairman maintained, “We cannot stand idle to see our land being taken away by Arabs. We will kill all the animals in the area as these are the ones attracting the Arabs into our land” (The Guardian May 30, 2000).
The next morning Government officials were reported to have said the following:
The Minister for Natural Resources and Tourism, Zakia Meghji, yesterday assured Ngorongoro residents that no land has been sold or grabbed by Arabs in Loliondo. Flanked by the Arusha Regional Commissioner, Daniel ole Njoolay and the Director of Wildlife, Emanuel Severre, Meghji commented, “There is no clause on the sale of land in the contract signed between OBC and the six villages of Ololosokwan, Arash, Maaloni, Oloirien, Oloipiri and Soitsambu.”
However an inquiry conducted by The Guardian in Loliondo last week established that the Maasai elders were not involved in the re-lease of the Hunting block to the company. According to Megji, her probe established that the building has been constructed about 400 metres from the water source, 200 metres more than the distance recommended by law. But The Guardian investigation shows that the structures are less than 50 metres from a spring. And another spring has dried up (The Guardian May 31, 2000).
Mr. President, underline two points. First, the Minister said the building has been constructed 400 metres from the water source. Second, “The Guardian investigation shows that the structures are less than 50 metres from a spring.” Now unless one’s mathematics teacher at school was daft, there is a huge different between 50 and 400! When did 50 metric metres turn to mean 400 metric metres? Can it be claimed that the Maasai were party to this so-called agreement? I am at a loss why this-well known-Minister has not been made to face the full force of the law.
In the proposal, Brigadier Al Ali outlined the benefits of his operations in Loliondo to the Government, local communities, and wildlife conservation in the Serengeti-Maasai Mara-Ngorongoro ecosystem. Among its important objectives were:
• To conserve an area contiguous to the Serengeti National Park, which is essential to the long-term survival of the ecosystem and its migration.
• To develop a new role and image for the Arab world as regards wildlife conservation, management, and human development.
• To improve locals’ revenue, development facilities, and create employment.
• To generate revenues for the Central and District Governments.
The OBC now stands accused of self-contradiction and violation of legal and moral obligations in virtually all the above areas, resulting instead in environmental destruction; unfulfilled promises and exploitation of the local communities; and direct undermining of the stability of the region’s wildlife and natural habitats.
It has become evident that OBC had a long-term agenda for exploiting the high concentration of wildlife in Loliondo. Its Hunting operations are guaranteed by the continuous flow of wildlife from the Serengeti, Ngorongoro, Maasai Mara, and other areas. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature, OBC "was taking advantage of migratory patterns of wildlife coming out of Serengeti."
Mr. President, be informed that the villages in and adjacent to protected areas in Tanzania have no Government-supported infrastructures. Take Ngorongoro District for instance. There is no Government hospital in Ngorongoro. It may take a week to travel from Arusha to Loliondo, just less than 400 km, depending on weather, for there is no road. There is no even a single Government advanced level secondary education school in six (repeat six) Districts in the Greater Serengeti Region. This situation brings to question the legitimacy of wildlife conservation vis-à-vis the right of rural people to lead a decent life given nature endowment in their localities.
Mr. President, the Maasai of Loliondo have for a long time accused OBC of grave human rights abuses. They have described acts of intimidation, harassment, arbitrary arrest and detention, and even torture by OBC staff, Tanzanian police and military in the name of OBC; brazen violations of grazing and land rights; and wanton environmental destruction and imminent extermination of wildlife. They have seen leaders who once opposed OBC’s practices corrupted and bought-off.
The OBC operates like a separate arm of the Government. Many people in Loliondo believe that OBC is even more powerful than the Government. The Maa word for "the Arab", Olarrabui, is often used to refer Brigadier Al Ali, and by extension OBC. The word Olarrabui has become synonymous with power, authority, brutality, fear, and entities larger than life.
Mr. President, you do not need to be a rocket scientist to comprehend that this is the clearest case of abuse of office. It is suggested, for those willing to avert disaster, the Tanzania Government included, that immediate steps be taken to put to an end the violation of fundamental human rights in Ngorongoro. As to lands lost in Loliondo, the Government is advised to return this to its owners. Land should not be grabbed senselessly. The Government, should at once, re-look into the whole matter.
Navaya ole Ndaskoi.
- The International Court of Justice
- The United Nations High Commission for Human Rights
- The United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations
- Human Rights Groups around the World
- Faculty of Law of the University of Dar Es Salaam
- Local and International Conservation Agencies
- Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources
- The Attorney General
- The Chief Justice
- The Speaker of the United Republic of Tanzania Parliament
- The Press, print and electronic
- Political parties in Tanzania
- Tanganyika Law Society
- Other interested parties.
Navaya ole Ndaskoi
see also Extract 3734
The Maasai protest delegation holding a press conference in Dar Es Salaam in 2000

Journal Issue: Juvenile Justice Volume 18 Number 2 Fall 2008
The Prevalence of Mental Disorders among Adolescent Offenders
Two kinds of studies address questions about the social consequences of the links between mental disorders and delinquency. One type examines the degree of "overlap" between a community's population of youth with mental disorders and its population of youthful offenders. Knowing this overlap gives some notion of the risk of official delinquency for youth with mental disorders and the degree to which mental disorders of youth contribute to a community's overall delinquency. The second type of study examines the proportion of youth with mental disorders within juvenile justice facilities or programs. These studies provide information with which to formulate policy about treating and managing youth with mental disorders in juvenile justice custody.
It is important to recognize that these two types of research begin with very different populations, even though they both address the relation between mental disorder and delinquency. The first typically focuses on all delinquent youth in the community, while the second examines only delinquent youth placed in juvenile pretrial detention centers when they are arrested or in juvenile correctional facilities when they are adjudicated. This distinction is further complicated, as discussed later, by the fact that not all youth in juvenile justice facilities are necessarily delinquent.
Epidemiologic Studies of Mental Disorder and Delinquency
Some studies have identified a significant overlap between the populations of youth served by community mental health agencies and youth in contact with the community's juvenile court.23 These studies are few in number, but they have found that the risk of juvenile court involvement among a community's young mental health clients is substantial. For example, a study in one city found that adolescents in contact with the community's mental health system during a nine-month period were two to three times more likely to have a referral to the juvenile justice system during that period than were youth in the city's general population.24 Youth in contact with a mental health system's services, however, are not the sum of a community's youth with mental health needs because many receive no services. The results of the study above probably represent the proportion of more seriously disturbed youth who have juvenile justice contact. Even so, merely knowing that youth "have contact" with the juvenile justice system tells us little about their offenses or even whether they offended at all.
Very few studies have used samples that make it possible to identify both the proportion of delinquent youth in a community who have mental disorders and the proportion of youth with mental disorders who have been delinquent. The few that have, however, are large studies with careful designs.
One examined a community population (drawn from several cities) that identified youth with persistent serious delinquency (repeat offending) and youth with persistent mental health problems (manifested multiple times).25 About 30 percent of youth with persistent mental health problems were persistently delinquent. But among all persistently delinquent youth, only about 15 percent had persistent mental health problems.
Another recent study examined the relation between mental disorders during adolescence and criminal behavior when those youth became adults.26 Delinquencies and adult criminal arrests were recorded for a sample of youth in a large geographic region aged nine through twenty-one. The youth were also assessed for mental disorders three times between the ages of nine and sixteen. A diagnosis at any one of these three points identified the youth as having a mental disorder "sometime during childhood or adolescence."
In this study, youth who were arrested between the ages of sixteen and twenty-one included a considerably greater share of youth who had had mental disorders in adolescence than those who were not arrested—for males, 51 percent as against 33 percent. This finding does not mean that 51 percent of the arrested group had mental disorders at the time of their arrest, but that they had had a mental disorder sometime in adolescence. It also does not mean that the majority of youth who had mental disorders in adolescence were arrested in adulthood. A different statistical procedure in this study, called "population attributable risk," addressed that question. It showed that the risk of adult arrest among individuals who had mental disorders at some time during adolescence was about 21 percent for women and 15 percent for men.
These few studies suggest the following conclusions, all of which need further confirmation. First, consistent with the clinical research reviewed earlier, youth who have mental disorders are at greater risk of engaging in offenses than youth without mental disorders. It is possible that treating their disorders would reduce that risk. But most youth with mental disorders do not engage in offenses that involve them in juvenile or criminal justice systems. Second, youth with mental disorders represent only a minority of all youth who engage in delinquent behavior, although the share is somewhat disproportionately greater than their prevalence in the general community. If those youth received treatment that reduced their delinquency, it is possible that overall rates of delinquency in the community would fall somewhat, but the majority of delinquencies are not related to mental disorders.
Third, rates of delinquency are higher among youth with certain types of emotional disorders— for example, depression or anxiety co-morbid with substance use disorders— and among youth with chronic and multiple disorders (seriously emotionally disturbed youth). Finally, a few studies have suggested that youth with mental disorders make up a somewhat greater proportion (although still a minority) of youth who were arrested for more serious and violent delinquencies or crimes.27
Mental Disorder in Juvenile Justice Settings
Research on the subset of delinquent youth who enter juvenile pretrial detention centers and correctional programs cannot tell us the relation between mental disorder and delinquency, because most youth who engage in delinquencies are not placed in secure juvenile justice programs. Such studies, however, are extremely important for public policy, because they identify the scope and nature of mental disorder among youth for whom the juvenile justice system has custodial responsibility.
Until recently the precise prevalence of mental disorders among youth in juvenile justice custody was unknown. Estimates varied widely from study to study, largely because of inadequate research methods or differences from one study site to another.28 In the past decade, however, well-designed studies executed in a variety of sites have provided a reliable and consistent picture. Those studies have found that among youth in various types of juvenile justice settings—for example, pretrial detention centers where youth are taken soon after arrest—about one-half to two-thirds meet criteria for one or more mental disorders.29 The prevalence of mental disorders is much higher in juvenile justice settings than it is among youth in the U.S. general population, which is about 15 to 25 percent.30
Across these studies, the rate is higher for girls than for boys.31 The overall prevalence rate does not vary greatly between younger and older adolescents or for youth with various ethnic and racial characteristics, although age and race differences are sometimes found for specific types of disorders and symptoms.32 As described in the earlier clinical review, about two-thirds of youth in juvenile justice custody who meet criteria for a mental disorder (that is, about one-third to one-half of youth in custody) meet criteria for more than one disorder.33
I will focus later on the implications of these statistics for the juvenile justice system's best response to mental disorders among youth in its custody. The high prevalence of mental disorder in juvenile justice facilities does not necessarily define the need for treatment. Some youth who meet criteria for mental disorders are experiencing their disorders temporarily and need only emergency services, while a smaller share—about one in ten—represents a core group of youth with chronic mental illness who can be expected to continue to need clinical services into adulthood.34 Some are functioning fairly well despite their symptoms, while others are barely able to function at all. And some have mental health needs, such as learning disabilities, that were not even included in the recent studies of prevalence among youth in juvenile justice settings.
Reasons for the High Prevalence of Mental Disorders in Juvenile Justice Programs
Why are mental disorders so prevalent among adolescent offenders in juvenile justice settings? Three perspectives—clinical, socio-legal, and inter-systemic—help to explain. They are not competing explanations. All probably play a role, and no evidence suggests that one is more important than the others.
From a clinical perspective, it is likely that the same symptoms of mental disorder that increase the risk of aggression also increase the likelihood that youth will be placed in secure juvenile justice facilities for any significant period of time. When police officers arrest youth, usually those youth are not placed in pretrial detention. Nor is detention reserved for the most serious offenders—in fact, youth arrested for very violent offenses typically do not make up the majority of youth in detention. Those youth who are detained more than a few hours are those who have been more unruly or unmanageable at the time of their arrest, which satisfies detention criteria regarding a risk that they will be endangered, or might endanger others, if not detained.
Youth with mental disorders frequently have symptoms involving impulsiveness, anger, and cognitive confusion that can make them less manageable and a greater risk to themselves or others, especially under the stress associated with their offense and arrest. Thus, among youth who are detained, a significant share is likely to have mental disorders that create unmanageable behavior—more so than for youth without mental disorders and more so than their peers with less severe mental disorders. This likelihood makes it no surprise that youth with mental disorders contribute disproportionately to detention populations.
From a socio-legal perspective, recent changes in laws applied to youths' delinquencies may have increased the likelihood that youth with mental disorders will enter the juvenile justice system. Before the 1990s, law enforcement officers, juvenile probation departments, prosecutors, and judges typically had some discretion regarding whether they would arrest or prosecute youth with mental disorders when they engaged in illegal behaviors, especially if those behaviors involved minor offenses committed by younger adolescents without offense histories. But a wave of serious juvenile violence during the late 1980s caused virtually all states to revise their juvenile justice statutes during the 1990s to rein in this discretion.35 Under the new laws, certain charges or offenses required legal responses based on the nature of the offense alone, not the characteristics or needs of the individual youth. Penalties more often involved custody in secure juvenile facilities, thus reducing the likelihood that youth could receive mental health services in the community after their adjudication. An unintended consequence of these changes in law, therefore, was an increase in the share of youth with mental disorders coming into the system rather than being diverted on the basis of the juvenile court's discretion.
A final, inter-systemic, explanation involves the dynamic relation between systems that serve youth. During the 1990s, most states saw a reduction in the availability of public mental health services for children, especially inpatient services.36 It is possible that less adequate treatment contributed to increased delinquencies among youth with mental disorders. But it is certain that many communities began using the juvenile justice system to try to fill the gap caused by decreased availability of mental health services.
This phenomenon was documented in media articles, the observations of juvenile justice personnel, and government reports beginning in the mid-1990s and continuing into the early 2000s.37 Some parents of children with serious mental disorders began urging police to arrest their children, knowing that courts could "order" mental health services that were becoming nearly impossible for parents to get on their own. Soon the local juvenile pretrial detention center was becoming the community's de facto mental health center that provided emergency mental health services or simply acted as a holding place for seriously disturbed youth who had nowhere to go.
In summary, these three factors—clinical, socio-legal, and inter-systemic—may together produce a prevalence of mental disorder in juvenile justice settings that does not represent the actual relation between adolescent mental disorder and delinquency. That high prevalence does, however, represent a demand on the juvenile justice system to respond to youth in custody who have mental disorders, and the demand is almost overwhelming. Some of those youth are in secure custody because they have committed serious crimes, others because the legal system has widened the door to juvenile justice processing, and many because their symptoms make them difficult to handle and they have no place else to go.
The problem requires a solution, and the multiple causes of the problem as well as the various types of youth involved suggest that the solution will be complex. What have clinicians and researchers learned that can help us determine the appropriate response?38

Note: This lesson was originally published on an older version of The Learning Network; the link to the related Times article will take you to a page on the old site.
Teaching ideas based on New York Times content.
Overview of Lesson Plan: In this lesson, students evaluate current search procedures implemented to fight terrorism and examine constitutional rights to privacy. They then share and defend their opinions about domestic security and civil liberties in an age of terrorism.
Kristen Tepfenhardt, The New York Times Learning Network
Yasmin Chin Eisenhauer, The Bank Street College of Education in New York City
Suggested Time Allowance: 1 hour
1. Participate in a “random search” simulation; evaluate current search procedures implemented to fight terrorism.
2. Consider the New York area mass transit’s response to the terror attacks in London by reading and discussing the article “In New York, It’s Open Bag or Find Exits.”
3. Discuss constitutional amendments that relate to rights to privacy.
4. Share individual opinions on domestic security and civil liberties in an age of terrorism.
5. Justify their stances on this topic in letters to state legislators.
Resources / Materials:
-five index cards with instructions, as described in Warm-Up activity
-copies of the article “In New York, It’s Open Bag or Find Exits,” found online at http://www.nytimes.com/learning/teachers/featured_articles/20050725monday.html (one per student)
-four large pieces of paper or poster board, each with one of the following statements written in large letters: “Strongly Agree,” “Agree Somewhat,” “Disagree Somewhat,” “Strongly Disagree”
Activities / Procedures:
1. WARM-UP/DO-NOW: Prior to class, write the words Security Check on the classroom board, place a desk underneath it, and write the following five instructions each on its own index card:
-Please proceed to the Security Check area and list all of the items in your possession on the back of this card.
-Please proceed to the Security Check area, list all of the items in your possession on the back of this card, and take out proper photo identification.
-Please proceed to the Security Check area, remove your shoes and empty all of your pockets on the desk.
-Please proceed to the Security Check area and write your social security number, full name, home address and phone number on the back of this card, and await a search of your personal belongings.
-Please proceed to the Security Check area and await the K-9 Dog Unit, which will search your belongings.
As students enter the classroom, randomly hand an index card to students until all five index cards are distributed. (Based on your class size, you might want to give a card to every fourth or fifth student.) Each student who receives a card reports to the front of the room to the Safety Check area and follows the instructions as indicated on his or her index card.
After a few minutes, ask each student to read his or her card aloud, and have each student share his or her thoughts about being selected for this process. Did all students fully comply with the security check? Why or why not? Did they feel that their privacy was being invaded in any way? Now, facilitate a class discussion: How do other students in the class feel about these types of security checks? Would they feel comfortable with this search procedure if it were applied to them in school? On public transportation? In an airport? While entering a mall? Do students think this type of search procedure is effective in stopping potential terrorists? Do students feel that these types of procedures are a violation of their privacy?
2. As a class, read and discuss “In New York, It’s Open Bag or Find Exits” (found online at http://www.nytimes.com/learning/teachers/featured_articles/20050725monday.html), focusing on the following questions:
a. What “new era” has entered New York City’s subways?
b. What new element was added to subway riders’ commuting routines, and why?
c. Where did the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey state it would conduct its searches?
d. Where did the Metropolitan Transportation state its searches were conducted?
e. Who is Michael Chertoff, and according to him, how long will the nation’s mass transit agencies remain on high alert?
f. What did the New York Police Department refuse to disclose after its first day of searches?
g. According to officials, how will the searches be conducted on the weekends?
h. How many subway stations were involved in the initial searches?
i. What was the consequence for commuters who did not agree to inspection?
j. During what hours are the searches focused, and why?
k. How were officers ordered by commanders to stop riders for searches?
l. What did Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg acknowledge on the morning that the searches were announced?
m. What does Mayor Bloomberg hope he has established, as he indicated on his weekly program on WABC-AM?
n. What did Mayor Bloomberg pledge?
o. What has Mayor Bloomberg learned?
p. What has the New York Civil Liberties Union called the searches?
q. What did Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly indicate for officers in the guideline issued on July 21, 2005, to top police commanders?
r. What different types of packages were searched?
s. According to Shauna Murray, how long did the search process take at Woodlawn-Jerome Avenue in the Bronx?
t. When did the “every fifth person” search break down?
u. In addition to searching bags, what steps were taken at Sutphin Boulevard-Archer Avenue by officers?
v. What was the search procedure at 42nd Street and Eighth Avenue in Manhattan?
w. By what were selected riders met at Lafayette Avenue in Fort Greene, Brooklyn?
x. What was Amy Lisogorsky’s reaction the second time she was searched?
y. How did the search situation in the suburbs compare to that in the city?
z. What is James Murphy’s view regarding the searches’ ability to prevent a bombing?
aa. According to the Port Authority’s chairman, Anthony R. Coscia, what did the announcement of these searches prompt him to do?
3. Refer back to the statement in the article made by Acting New Jersey Gov. Richard J. Codey: “The two bomb attacks this month on subways and buses in London made it ‘necessary to bring a new level of vigilance to our mass transit system.’” Then, explain to students that privacy is not mentioned specifically in the Constitution, but the Supreme Court has ruled that several amendments do establish our constitutional right to privacy. Review and discuss the following amendments, focusing on how they relate to privacy:
-First Amendment: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.”
-Fourth Amendment: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”
-Fourteenth Amendment, Section 1: “All persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
4. Explain to students that they will be expressing their views on different statements that you will be reading to them regarding domestic security and civil liberties in an age of terrorism. Hang the four “statement” posters in different corners of the room. Because students will be moving around to stand beneath the statements with which they most agree for different questions related to democracy, be sure that students have clear paths in the room to reach the four corners. For each of the statements below, read the statement aloud and allow students to move to the corners of the room that best express their views on the statement. As students take their places, write the statement on the board. Then, ask at least one student in each group to share his or her choice. Encourage students to support their opinions with reasons, facts, and examples, and allow students to challenge one another’s ideas.
-Sometimes personal rights must be given up in order to protect people from those who could be a danger to all of us.
-Searches should be conducted at the discretion of police officers based only if they have probable cause to suspect someone of a crime.
-The phrase “it is better to be safe than sorry” applies when it comes to fighting terrorism.
-The American government should have the right to investigate to the fullest extent of the law any suspicious person and his or her activities.
-Civil liberties have been granted in the United States Constitution and should be preserved at all costs.
5. WRAP-UP/HOMEWORK: Students respond to the following prompt, written on the board for students to copy prior to leaving the classroom: “As quoted in the article read in class, Port Authority’s chairman Anthony R. Coscia stated that ‘people are willing to endure some level of inconvenience to have a higher level of safety.’ Considering the content of the article and today’s class discussions, write a letter to a senator or representative from our state. What balance can be struck between providing domestic security against terrorism and preserving the civil liberties guaranteed by the Constitution? What potential terror targets exist in your state, how are they protected in this age of terrorism, and how successful do you think those measures are?” Students can peer-edit their letters and send them to your state legislators. (You can find the addresses of your legislators at http://www.congress.org/congressorg/home/.)
Further Questions for Discussion:
-Public mass transit systems are currently using a random search method. What other systems might also be subject to searches?
-If current search methods begin to produce fear in the American people and deter them from using mass transit, how can the government restore faith in this system?
-Is it fair to compare mass transit search procedures to those used in airports if these modes of transportation do not follow the same protocol? Is one method more effective than the other?
Evaluation / Assessment:
Students will be evaluated based on participation in class discussions and clear presentation and defense of opinions, in both spoken and written forms.
widespread, yielding, random, conduct, endure, networks, vigilance, alertness, disclose, intrusive, violating, turnstile, profiling, unconstitutional, precedents, checkpoints, intoxication, guideline, retained, probable cause, diverse, notation, detained, emigrated, overzealous, substantial, submitted, optimistic
1. Examine other times in history when the United States government has implemented policies that some would consider to be invasions of privacy or threats to individuals’ civil liberties. Create a political cartoon for your school newspaper comparing that historic situation to the current situation discussed in the article read in class.
2. Research the United States Homeland Security Advisory System. Why was it developed? When and how was it developed? How does it work? What do different people think of this system’s effectiveness? Write a newspaper article sharing your findings, or an editorial piece offering your views.
3. What is the American Civil Liberties Union? What is their mission? What are their goals? What have they done to attain these goals? In what recent situations were they involved, and to what extent did their involvement impact the outcome? Create an informational poster or illustrated timeline with your findings.
Economics/Mathematics- How much has the United States spent on homeland security since September 11, 2001? Create a series of graphs illustrating various angles of answers to this question (e.g., one graph focusing only on New York, another focusing on airline security, another on costs incurred in the creation of the Department of Homeland Security, etc.) Then, write an evaluative piece reflecting on your findings.
Media Studies- Identify an issue of privacy related to the news media. Prepare a chart that lists the consequences of maintaining privacy in the situation, and identify these consequences as benefits or costs. Be prepared to explain the issue to your class. Is there a need for legislation related to this issue? What laws currently exist?
Teaching with The Times- Search for headlines in The New York Times that discuss to the London bombings and terrorism in general. What anti-terrorism methods are other countries taking in response to the London attacks? Then, create a chart to compare and contrast methods being used abroad with those being implemented in the United States. To order The New York Times for your classroom, click here.
Other Information on the Web:
The American Civil Liberties Union, or A.C.L.U. (http://www.aclu.org), is an advocate of individual rights.
Center for Civic Education (http://www.civiced.org) is a nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation which provides K-12 programs and curriculum which foster the development of informed, responsible participation in civic life.
Justice Learning: Civic Education in the Real World (http://www.justicelearning.org) is a collaboration between NPR’s Justice Talking and The New York Times Learning Network, with features on various constitutional issues affecting the world today.
Academic Content Standards:
Civics Standard 18- Understands the role and importance of law in the American constitutional system and issues regarding the judicial protection of individual rights. Benchmarks: Understands the importance of the rule of law in establishing limits on both those who govern and the governed, protecting individual rights, and promoting the common good; Knows historical and contemporary examples of the rule of law; Understands criteria for evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of a rule or law by determining if it is understandable, possible to follow, fair, well designed to achieve its purposes, and designed to protect individual rights and to promote the common good; Understands the basic concept of due process of law; Understands the importance to individuals and to society of major due process protections; Understands why due process rights in administrative and legislative procedures are essential for the protection of individual rights and the maintenance of limited government; Understands current issues regarding judicial protection of the rights of individuals
Civics Standard 26- Understands issues regarding the proper scope and limits of rights and the relationships among personal, political, and economic rights. Benchmarks: Understands what is meant by the “scope and limits” of a right; Understands different positions on a contemporary conflict between rights; Understands different positions on a contemporary conflict between rights and other social values and interests
Civics Standard 29- Understands the importance of political leadership, public service, and a knowledgeable citizenry in American constitutional democracy. Benchmarks: Understands why becoming knowledgeable about public affairs and the values and principles of American constitutional democracy and communicating that knowledge to others is an important form of participation, and understands the argument that constitutional democracy requires the participation of an attentive, knowledgeable, and competent citizenry; Understands how awareness of the nature of American constitutional change gives citizens the ability to reaffirm or change fundamental constitutional values
Language Arts Standard 7- Demonstrates competence in the general skills and strategies for reading a variety of informational texts. Benchmarks: Applies reading skills and strategies to a variety of informational texts; Knows the defining characteristics of a variety of informational texts; Uses new information to adjust and extend personal knowledge base; Identifies techniques used to convey viewpoint; Draws conclusions and makes inferences based on explicit and implicit information in texts; Differentiates between fact and opinion in informational texts
Language Arts Standard 8- Demonstrates competence in speaking and listening as tools for learning. Benchmarks: Plays a variety of roles in group discussions; conveys a clear main point when speaking to others and stays on the topic being discussed
Civics Standard 18- Understands the role and importance of law in the American constitutional system and issues regarding the judicial protection of individual rights. Benchmarks: Understands how the rule of law makes possible a system of ordered liberty that protects the basic rights of citizens; Knows historical and contemporary practices that illustrate the central place of the rule of law; Knows historical and contemporary instances in which judicial protections have not been extended to all persons and instances in which judicial protections have been extended to those deprived of them in the past; Understands why due process rights in administrative and legislative procedures are essential for protecting individual rights and maintaining limited government
Civics Standard 26- Understands issues regarding the proper scope and limits of rights and the relationships among personal, political, and economic rights. Benchmarks: Knows how to distinguish among personal, political, and economic rights; Understands different positions on a contemporary conflict between rights such as one person’s right to free speech versus another person’s right to be heard
Civics Standard 29- Understands the importance of political leadership, public service, and a knowledgeable citizenry in American constitutional democracy. Benchmarks: Understands why becoming knowledgeable about public affairs and the values and principles of American constitutional democracy, and communicating that knowledge to others are important forms of participation, and understands the argument that constitutional democracy requires the participation of an attentive, knowledgeable, and competent citizenry; Understands how awareness of the nature of American constitutional change gives citizens the ability to reaffirm or change fundamental constitutional values
Language Arts Standard 7- Demonstrates competence in the general skills and strategies for reading a variety of informational texts. Benchmarks: Applies reading skills and strategies to a variety of informational texts; Knows the defining characteristics of a variety of informational texts; Determines the effectiveness of techniques used to convey viewpoint
Language Arts Standard 8- Demonstrates competence in speaking and listening as tools for learning. Benchmarks: Asks questions as a way to broaden and enrich classroom discussions

INTEGRATED THEME UNIT: CRUISING THE CARIBBEAN - PART 4 - HONDURAS (ELEM/MIDDLE)
This fun unit features the adventures of Melvin and Morris as they visit Honduras while cruising the Caribbean includes a realistic fiction reading selection, comprehension questions and map reading skills. 6 pages including answer key
Already an abcteach Member?
LOG IN TO ACCESS THIS DOCUMENT...

Deep in a desiccated, Utah desert, surrounded by mountains and fringed with scorched sage and saltbush, stand the surreal remains of German Village. Out of bounds, out of place, out of time and 90 miles from Salt Lake City, it is surely the most bizarre feature of Dugway Proving Ground, a test site created by the Allied military during the second world war to develop weapons of mass destruction for use against civilian targets in Germany and Japan.
All that survives of German Village is a single block of high-gabled, prewar Berlin working-class housing. It is accurate in every respect. And it should be: commissioned by the chemical warfare corps of the US army, it was designed by Erich Mendelsohn (1887-1953), the German architect who settled in the US in 1941 after a spell in England.
I was alerted to the story of German Village by Mike Davis, who features it in his provocative book Dead Cities: A Natural History, a study of the vulnerability of modern cities from New York to Tokyo to destruction by man and nature. Mendelsohn's involvement in this deathly project, seemed, at first, bizarre. A Jew from Allenstein in East Prussia (today, Olsztyn in Poland), Mendelsohn settled in Berlin, where he trained as an architect after studying economics in Munich. From the trenches of the great war he sent home visionary sketches of extraordinary streamlined, or expressionist, buildings. In 1919, during the great flu epidemic, he began work on the Einstein Tower, an astrophysics laboratory for the German mathematician and scientist, at Potsdam on the edge of Berlin.
Over the next 10 or 12 years, Mendelsohn developed beautiful, sweeping, clean-lined, light-filled architecture - much of it in Berlin - that appeared to catch the spirit of the old German Enlightenment and represent it afresh in the uncertain days of the Weimar Republic. These included the Metal Workers Union building, the Universum Cinema on Kurfürstendamm, the Columbushaus (Galeries Lafayette) and several villas, including his own. Outside Berlin, the streamlined department stores he built for Schocken at Nuremberg, Stuttgart and Chemnitz were hugely influential worldwide.
Mendelsohn left for England when Hitler was voted into power in 1933. Here, with the Russian-born dandy Serge Chermayeff, he built, among a number of fine houses, the De la Warr Pavilion at Bexhill-on-Sea.
How can this Erich Mendelsohn be the architect of the dark and deathly German Village in the Utah desert? Mendelsohn left no correspondence or notebooks relating to the Dugway Proving Ground project, where napalm and poison gases were developed and tested. He had been under gas attack in the trenches, yet it is hard not to think that his primary motivation in the desert of Utah was revenge on the Nazis. If this seems fair enough, what remains disturbing is the fact that this work was expressly designed to destroy working-class districts of Berlin, including Wedding and Pankow. These had been communist strongholds, virulently anti-Hitler, before the Gestapo and SS all but destroyed opposition to the Nazi regime.
A concerted Allied attack, by the British and US air force on working-class districts of German and Japanese cities had, however, become more or less official policy by 1943. Churchill wanted to gas them. Killed and mutilated in sufficient numbers, the German working class would, he argued, rise up against Hitler and bring a quick end to the war. "It is absurd to consider morality on this topic," he told RAF planners when the first German V1 rockets fell on London. "I want the matter studied in cold blood by sensible people, and not by psalm-singing uniformed defeatists."
Sensible people included the prime minister's favourite scientific adviser, Professor Frederick Lindemann (Lord Cherwell), who insisted that "the bombing must be directed essentially against working-class houses. Middle-class houses have too much space around them, and so are bound to waste bombs." Psalm-singing uniformed defeatists included the US's air force's celebrated commander Jimmy Doolittle, who took against Churchill's proposed Operation Thunderclap that aimed to kill 275,000 Berliners in a single 2,000-plane raid scheduled for August 1944. It did not take place.
Washington's war secretary Henry Stimson said he did not want "the United States to get the reputation of outdoing Hitler in atrocities". His less diplomatic deputy, Robert Lovett, pleading the case for adopting anti-personnel bombs loaded with napalm and white phosphorous, said: "If we are going to have a total war, we might as well make it as horrible as possible." Churchill trumped Lovett by calling on US president Franklin D Roosevelt to speed up production of a promised 500,000 top-secret "N-bombs" - filled with anthrax, developed at Dugway - to be dropped on Berlin and five other German cities.
As the debate raged in political and military circles, Mendelsohn, with scientists from Standard Oil and German-emigre set designers from Hollywood's RKO studio, set to work on German Village. RKO expertise contributed the design of proletarian Berlin interiors down to the last detail. Using forced labour (inmates from Utah state prison), German Village and its six "mietskasernen" (rent barracks) apartment blocks were completed in 44 days, in time for experiments scheduled from May 1943.
Mendelsohn and his team had done a good job. Their designs were far superior to the German housing built in England for test destruction by the RAF at Harmondsworth, near Heathrow airport. Assaulted by napalm, gas, anthrax and incendiary bombs, German Village was rebuilt several times during 1943. Nearby, the Japanese Village (long since vanished), designed by the Czech-educated architect Antonin Raymond (1888-1976), paved the way for incendiary attacks on working-class districts of Tokyo. On March 9 1945, 334 US air force B-29 superfortress bombers dropped 2,000 tons of napalm and magnesium incendiaries on the timber and paper houses of Asakusa. Officially, 83,793 Japanese were killed, 40,918 injured and 265,171 buildings destroyed. The same month, German Village aided the fire raids on Dresden. By the time Germany surrendered in May 1945, US and British raids had destroyed 45% of German housing. And, as Davis wryly observes: "Allied bombers pounded into rubble more 1920s socialist and modernist utopias than Nazi villas."Mendelsohn was the architect of some of the very best of these white, concrete dreams. Dugway, Davis argues, "led the way to the deaths of, say, two million Axis civilians", and German Village remains "a monument to the self-righteousness of punishing 'bad places' by bombing them".
There is no doubt that Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan had to be defeated; but did the Allies really need German Village, Japanese Village and the refined architectural efforts of Mendelsohn and Raymond? At the fiery dawn of the 20th century, beneath the civilised, enlightened facades of Britain and the US, as well as Germany and Japan, was a desire for expansion, destruction and terrible revenge. Sitting on the sun-deck of Mendelsohn's pavilion at Bexhill-on-Sea, this axis of modern evil seems so very far removed, as far away, in fact, as the sole surviving "rent barrack" of German Village, Utah.
· Dead Cities: A Natural History by Mike Davis, The New Press, £16.95.

Internet shopping cart is a software program that acts as an online shopping store. It is when integrated on company website enables the customers to choose items from the web store and then help in purchasing those items particularly with the help of few steps.
In real world shopping cart is a metal basket where items are physically held together by the walls of the basket. Whereas, online shopping cart is an interface between company website and its infrastructure, allowing consumers to review what all they have selected and make necessary modifications, if required. It works as a web store on a website presenting its own set of unique changes and challenges. Further, the product offering needs to be kept current with statistics, pricing, information on availability and order needs to be fulfilled.
Why Is A Shopping Cart Required?
Online shopping is a fast means and growing consumer trends. Today most of the consumer’s assume that company offers Internet purchasing. In order to meet the demands of the customer company needs to have a secure, reliable and fast shopping cart system in place.
Uses of a Shopping Cart
Shopping cart software allows online shopping customers to "place" items in the cart. Upon "checkout" the software typically calculates a total for the order including shipping and handling (i.e. postage and packing) and taxes. It typically provides a means of capturing a client's payment information, but in the case of a credit card payment there is a payment gateway, a secure payment gateway is conducted in order to prefer for a secure transaction.
Benefits of a Shopping Cart
- Easily Accept Online Payments: Shopping Cart accepts credit card payments by simple payment gateway.
- Transactions Are Very Secure: Financial information is securely stored on their servers. There is always a 100% protection against unauthorized payments.
- Easy set up: There is no complex computer programming it’s simply a product display and sells by payment gateway.
- Product Details: Product details are mentioned for each item like the shipping charges, price, handling fees, item number which helps in customizing the product for the buyer.
- Multiple Options: There are multiple options for the customers to make changes or select the product as required by them before making purchases.
How Do Shopping Carts Work?
There are different types of shopping carts in the market along with its different ways of working. But normally a shopping cart includes a basic structure:
- A database to store information such as product detail, customer data, order information etc.
- A storefront that displays this information to store visitors (e.g. product detail pages, checkout pages, etc.)
- An administration area that allows the store administrator to manage the store. (Like where you add products, set up shipping & payment options, process order etc.)
Storing the database allows the web owners to see the existing shopping carts at any time, with their amount of purchases. This information is valuable allowing the web owners to get through the basic needs and belongings of a customer who did not proceed to check out process on last visit and who have processed the shopping from the site. Using cookies a virtual shopping cart can be stored in the customer web browser.
How Do Shopping Carts Work?
Web shopping requires a lot of security for online customers. Customer information should be kept confidential and secure in an online transaction. Working should be done more than the customer’s expectations, without any service disruptions.
The most important aspect is to secure the website from any fraud and mismanagement by the user.

|Home :: Building Database :: Extras :: Search :: Map||You are here Architecture Edinburgh Queensferry KY11|
Scroll down for more pictures
Firth of Forth Bridge
|Also known as:||Forth Rail Bridge|
This structure is a great undulating steel monster rising out of the estuary that is formed by the Forth river as it slowly spreads out toward the North Sea. "Monster" is an appropriate word, because this bridge has the looks of a beast, and the strength to back it up. It is considered one of the strongest, most stable, and most expensive bridges in history. That came out of necessity. The bridge was built after the span across the Firth of Tay collapsed, killing 75 people on a train in the middle of the night. Engineers and planners needed to cross the Forth, but had to do it in a way that would be acceptable to a public still shocked by what was then the worst bridge disaster in history. What they came up with wasn't merely another cantilever-truss bridge. What they put together was a marvel of Victorian engineering, and a span so overbuilt that it barely moves in even the heaviest wind, even though a certain amount of sway is expected in most large structures. This is achieved by using steel plate tubes with internal braces. The most stout of these building members are 12-feet in diameter. Its nearly exclusive use of steel, combined with its latticework appearance have made some people refer to it as the "Eiffel Tower of Scotland."
>1890 - The then-Prince of Wales drives the last rivet into place. It was gold plated and is inscribed. He would later go on to become King Edward VII.
>57 people lost their lives building the Forth of Firth bridge.
>The bridge is held together by nearly 7,000,000 rivets.
>The bridge is made from 54,000 tons of steel.
>The bridge is made from 194,000 cubic yards of granite.
>The bridge is made from 21,000 tons of cement.
>The bridge rests on three piers, 70-feet in diameter.
>Each of these piers descends up to 90 feet into the earth before resting on bedrock.
>The bridge is designed to stand up to wind forces as high as 56 pounds per square foot.
Rate This Bridge
method='post' action='/Building.php?ID=307#Rate'>Current rating: 70% name='Rating' id='Rating' value='Praise' class='Plain'> name='Rating' id='Rating' value='Raze' class='Plain'>
There are eight comments.
I am from the County of Fifeand have gone over the bridge many times on the steam trains.On the middle span we through a penny into the water or good luck.I have been in Australia for 37 years but stll consider the Forth Railway Bridge the milestone in engineering and the best in the world.
James A Taylor - Saturday, October 10th, 2009 @ 2:28am
I have riden across the bridge 5 times. If I am lucky enough to get to my favorite overseas city, Edinburgh. I would love to visit it from the shore in North Queensferry and visit Inchgarvie if possible. In my opinion the two most impressive bridges in the world are the Great Forth Bridge and the Brooklyn Bridge.
James Anderson - Saturday, February 21st, 2009 @ 7:38am
I visited the bridge in 1970 and i'm still fascinated by the vast of it....excellent achievement
robert ledger - Thursday, April 3rd, 2008 @ 10:20am
My brothers and I were born in a little cottage underneath the Forth Bridge on the North side. We think of this Bridge as the Best in the World. It is magic!!
Avril Hylton - Sunday, January 1st, 2006 @ 12:57pm
india - Thursday, July 7th, 2005 @ 5:24am
To view this bridge in the mist with just the tops rising above in the sunshine is a dream.
Mal Walker - Sunday, March 13th, 2005 @ 1:51am
|LACU Community||LACU Extras||LACU Tools||LACU Sister Sites|

SAVINGS ACTION 59: Lower the temperature on your water heater
In a typical household, the water heater thermostat is set to around 140 degrees Fahrenheit. But did you know that setting it to 120 is usually fine? Each 10-degree reduction saves 3 to 5 percent on your energy costs and 600 pounds of CO2 per year for an electric water heater, or 440 pounds for a gas heater. Reducing your water temperature to 120 also slows mineral buildup and corrosion in your water heater and pipes. This helps your water heater last longer and operate at its maximum efficiency. Here's another interesting tidbit from the folks at Power ScoreCard: "If every household turned its water heater thermostat down 20 degrees, we could prevent more than 45 million tons of annual CO2 emissions — the same amount emitted by the entire nations of Kuwait or Libya."
Savings: 3-5 percent on your monthly energy costs
Environmental Impact: 440-600 pounds of CO2 emissions reduced annually
TAKE THE CHALLENGE and LEARN MORE about SAVING ENERGY! Visit: www.SouthCoastEnergyChallenge.org

(CNN) — For parents in Somalia, giving their children immunizations is not a choice.
In a country enduring more than 20 years of conflict, Somalia is home to one of the highest child mortality rates in the world, with one in five Somali children dying before their 5th birthday, aid agencies say — in many instances, from diseases that could be prevented by vaccines.
Yet for some equally loving parents in the developed world, the messages surrounding childhood vaccination have become muddied. Some communities in areas previously considered disease-free are now falling below the levels of “herd immunity” required to protect against diseases such as measles, whooping cough and mumps.
This week, in Swansea, Wales, the local public health agency announced that 886 people have been diagnosed with measles in an epidemic that started in November. The outbreak has been attributed to low measles, mumps and rubella immunization rates. One man’s death has been linked to the measles virus, while 80 people have been hospitalized.
In 2011, six people in France died as a result of a measles epidemic that neared 15,000 confirmed cases, according to the World Health Organization.
Teens not getting vaccinated
PFCs’ impact on vaccine effectiveness
Study: 10% of kids improperly vaccinated
Vaccine schedules for children
In 2010, a whooping cough outbreak, resulting from pockets of under-vaccinated people in California, resulted in 10 deaths, according to the California Department of Public Health. Nine of these were infants were too young to be vaccinated.
“We are extremely concerned about what’s happening in some parts of the developed world,” said Jos Vandelaer, chief of immunization at UNICEF, one of the groups helping vaccination efforts in Somalia. “In the developing world, many people don’t even get the chance to be immunized. Health systems are not strong enough to take the vaccine to every child despite the fact that their parents want it.”
Parents with real fears
Measles, whooping cough and Hib (haemophilus influenzae type B), along with many other childhood diseases, can be deadly, but they are vaccine-preventable. Measles alone killed more than 150,000 people globally in 2011, according to WHO.
Measles is also highly infectious, with one carrier likely to pass on the virus to between 14 and 18 other susceptible people, said Dr. Matthew Snape of the Oxford Vaccine Group in the pediatrics department at the University of Oxford, England.
Despite the severity of these diseases, some parents in the developed world choose not to immunize their children and accept the risks.
“Studies show that it is the upper middle class, well-educated Caucasian parents who are shunning vaccines,” said Dr. Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. “They have generally gone to graduate school, are in positions of management and are used to being in control.”
A study released this month by the National Health Performance Authority in Australia reflected this trend. A number of affluent Sydney suburbs were identified as regions where low levels of immunity have put entire communities at risk from these diseases.
The reasons behind parents’ decisions are complex. Part of the problem is lingering doubts around vaccine safety that were compounded by a retracted 1998 study linking the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine with autism.
Although declared an “elaborate fraud” by the British Medical Journal, it raised questions about the safety of immunization in the minds of many parents. These doubts then were spread worldwide on the Internet and in the media by anti-vaccination groups and some celebrities.
“If you want to scare yourself about vaccines, it’s not that hard,” Offit said. “Just turn on your computer.”
For such parents, the perceived risks of vaccination outweigh the risks they associate with disease.
In Australia, where vaccination is not mandatory, the anti-vaccination Australian Vaccination Network website says parents need to make an informed choice. The site offers links to articles and parental accounts of the potential side effects of many vaccines.
A UNICEF working paper released this week to coincide with World Vaccination Week has tracked the rise of anti-vaccination sentiment in Eastern and Central Europe and concludes that poorly managed immunization campaigns in some countries have also contributed to the problem.
Concerned parents in the affected countries are taking to blogs and Facebook, discussing their mistrust of vaccines and government programs, questioning the involvement of pharmaceutical companies and often recommending alternative medicine.
A March survey conducted by the U.S. organization Public Policy Polling showed that 20% of Americans believe there is a link between childhood vaccines and autism, and a further 34% were not sure.
Diseases long forgotten in the developed world
While there are some risks associated with vaccines, they are mostly minor, such as pain at the vaccine site or low-grade fever, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A serious allergic reaction is rare and usually reported in less than one out of 1 million doses, the agency reported.
“Hundreds of millions of children every year are vaccinated, and the number of side effects we see is minimal,” UNICEF’s Vandelaer said. “The anti-vaccine groups focus on the potential side effects, not on the real side effects.”
On the question of autism, numerous studies conducted over the past decade have all demonstrated there is no scientific link between vaccines and autism.
With so much conflicting information readily available to parents, Dr. Dina Pfeifer, program manager for vaccine-preventable diseases and immunization for WHO’s Europe office, said she believes the decision of whether to immunize children has become so fraught that many parents choose to do nothing at all.
“They have a difficulty dealing with the amount of information for and against (vaccination) on the Internet, and out of this confusion they are failing to recognize the risks of the disease,” she said.
Another factor driving parents’ decision not to vaccinate is the security that comes with herd vaccination, as rates of immunization for many diseases remain above 92% for the population.
But Europe’s recent battle with measles demonstrates the problems under-vaccinated populations can pose, especially with older children.
“Europe had 100,000 cases of measles from 2009 to 2012, and that shows how prevalent the pockets of un-immunized populations are in that area,” Pfeifer said. “Almost 50% of those cases were older than 10 years of age, and the older you are when you contract measles, the more severe the course of the disease.”
Another factor of these pockets is their affluence; these parents tend to be the ones able to afford overseas travel.
In 2008, a 7-year-old U.S. boy whose parents chose not to immunize him against measles traveled with his family to Switzerland. He caught the virus and returned to San Diego, unknowingly exposing 839 people to the disease and infecting 11 unvaccinated children, according to the journal Pediatrics.
In Europe and the United States, parents and most people under 45 have never seen the effects of diseases such as measles, diphtheria or polio.
“The fear factor (among parents in the developed world) is missing now — the knowledge of what’s on the other side if you don’t have vaccinations,” said Dr. Seth Berkley, CEO of the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, known as GAVI Alliance.
The lack of knowledge of these diseases is also a problem among younger doctors and pediatricians, who may not be able to identify the signs, resulting in misdiagnoses.
“There is a lot of value in case-based learning, but it is difficult to learn how to recognize these diseases if you haven’t seen them before,” said WHO’s Pfeifer.
In contrast, most parents in the developing world, in places such as Somalia, have seen family members suffer, be maimed or die from such diseases, health advocates said.
Education and motivation
To address the problem, Berkley prescribes localized programs in countries to supplement the already high overall levels of immunization. Other physicians are supporters of parental education and want to ensure parents feel free to ask as many questions of their doctors and health care workers.
Dr. Steve Hambleton of the Australian Medical Association said further motivation may be necessary. “When you incentivize the parents in a meaningful way, whether it be financial or with other incentives, you can make an enormous difference in vaccination uptake,” he said.
Berkley, a doctor who specializes in epidemiology and global health, said he has seen the devastating effects of vaccine-preventable diseases in war-torn countries and refugee camps.
Berkley said he wished he could take some parents in the developed world “on a tour, show them how horrible it is. Show them the illness that occurs out of these viruses.”
“We’ve brought down child mortality dramatically with these vaccination campaigns and we are making dramatic progress, but the challenge is getting people to understand what the world was like before this.”

Some numbers mean things, and some numbers do things. Making--and breaking--that distinction was central to renowned mathematician John von Neumannâs implementation of Alan Turingâs Universal Machine in 1945-56. In this lecture, you will learn about the unlikeliest place on earth to build such a device and how this vital 5-kilobyte step in the digital revolution was sparked by a collision of ideas between mathematicians and engineers. Combining soldering guns with science, Von Neumann and his Electronic Computing Instrument tackled previously intractable problems ranging from thermonuclear explosions, stellar evolution, and long-range weather forecasting to cellular automata, network optimization, and the origins of life. In this highly visual and informative presentation, George Dyson will impart the full story - from the people to their processors - and where our digital directions through history may lead us next.

Food Safety: Serving
You can help prevent food poisoning by taking precautions when serving food.
When you eat out, be sure that meat is cooked thoroughly and that foods that should be refrigerated, such as puddings and cold cuts, are served cold. Also pay attention to the restaurant environment. If the tables, dinnerware, and restrooms look dirty, the kitchen may be too.
eMedicineHealth Medical Reference from Healthwise
To learn more visit Healthwise.org
© 1995-2012 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.
Find out what women really need.
Most Popular Topics
Pill Identifier on RxList
- quick, easy,
Find a Local Pharmacy
- including 24 hour, pharmacies

Look up in the sky - It's a bird! It's a plane! It's a ... hummingbird!
Those fragile-looking little flecks of light and noise that flit to and fro are not nearly as delicate as they might seem. Looking like dainty little fairies in their plumage of sparkly feathers, hummingbirds are really tough old birds that will fight fiercely to defend a territory or fly thousands of miles solo on their annual migration. Don't let their small size mislead you, for these miniature flyers are really little super heroes in disguise.
Just imagine all you could accomplish if you could move your arms as fast as the wings of the hummingbird. Actual wing speed varies with species, but the hummingbirds that frequent our valley move their wings at an average speed of 40 to 50 beats per second. This incredible speed is achieved from a combination of features.
The hummingbird's average weight is only about 0.13 ounces, 25 percent to 30 percent of which is pure muscle. Additionally, its shoulder joints have a unique design, allowing them to rotate nearly 180 degrees. This permits the hummingbird to move its wings in a figure-eight pattern, generating power on the upstroke as well as the downstroke. This is what enables the hummingbird to hover and fly in all directions - straight up or down, sideways and even backwards.
Hummingbird migration is legendary, and the eastern ruby-throated hummingbird is famous for its solo flights as far south as Panama. For years, researchers have sought to understand how such a small creature could make such a long journey, particularly because it entails crossing the Gulf of Mexico without stopping.
Stories told by generations past rationalized this feat by explaining that the tiny birds must hitch rides on the backs of more legendary migrators, such as the Canada goose. This story, while still told in some places, is completely untrue for so many reasons, starting with the fact that the geese don't go anywhere close to the Gulf of Mexico in their migrations.
Since our valley is home to lots of visitors and transplants from the East Coast, it's common to hear the local hummingbirds called ruby-throats, since the males share the same red gorget as their East Coast cousins. The predominant species of hummingbirds in our valley, though, is the broad-tail. These birds look similar to the ruby-throats but are slightly larger and hardier and are differentiated primarily by their range. The broad-tailed hummingbirds are primarily a Western species, with occasional sightings as far north as British Columbia. These hardy birds typically migrate down to Mexico, or sometimes as far south as Guatemala, where some populations remain all year long. The larger, rusty-colored Rufous hummingbird usually arrives later in summer, stopping in Colorado on its way from the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico to breeding grounds as far north as Alaska.
Very tiny animals don't typically fare well in really cold places. These hardy avian champions, though, have developed the ability to enter torpor, or a period of slowed metabolic rate similar to hibernation, during cold spells. During this time, they can lower their heart rate from a typical speed of 500 beats per minute to approximately 50. Body temperatures also decrease dramatically, from a daytime norm of 105 degrees to a nightly average of 50 degrees or so. Additionally, the male broad-tailed hummingbird, free from the obligations of caring for young, typically travels upslope at night, avoiding the cold air trapped in the valleys by thermal inversions. This reduces its overall energy costs by close to 15 percent, which can sometimes mean the difference between life and death. Despite these adaptations, really cold frosts can and do sometimes kill these hardy marvels of nature.
The mighty little hummingbird, smallest of all the vertebrate species, continues to amaze and astound. Recent high-tech, super-slow-motion video of these miniature flyers shows that they fight savagely to defend their territories, even body-slamming one another in order to make their point clear. These miniature birds are also champion migrators, with some species traveling more than 12,000 miles round trip each year. The hummingbird, while small in stature, stands as a testament to the tenacity and brilliance of nature's work, reminding us that there is beauty, strength and resilience in a world where appearances don't always tell the whole story.
Jaymee Squires is the director of graduate programs at Walking Mountains Science Center. She enjoys watching the hummingbirds buzz to and fro, but she has given up trying to feed them for this summer.

VLADNIC, Romania (AP) -- Their origins are a mystery. The most widely accepted theory is that the Csango people of Romania's remote eastern Carpathian mountains began settling around the 13th Century, dispatched by Hungarian rulers to defend the kingdom's easternmost frontier.
Of Roman Catholic faith and speaking a medieval Hungarian dialect, they still live in relative isolation, harvesting vegetables and nuts, some of which they exchange for oil, rice and other necessities brought in by village-to-village Romanian salesmen.
The Csangos fear that their culture and language are eroding. Since Romania joined the European Union in 2007, an entire generation of adults has been lured away by the prospect of jobs in countries like Italy and Spain.
In some homes, grandparents are looking after as many as 14 grandchildren.
A group of doctors from a Hungarian Catholic charity recently visited Vladnic and the nearby Csango villages of Ciucan and Tuta to give eye and dental tests.
For 14-year-old Tuta resident Annamaria Laura Lupo, the eye exam was long overdue. She said she's been having headaches and it was affecting her studies at school. Now, she and her mother are awaiting glasses that will be sent from Budapest.
Dentist Renata Jaky said there was a near total lack of oral hygiene. "When I ask the kids how many times they brush their teeth, the most usual answer is 'never,'" she said.
Children are key to the villages' survival and many start work before sunrise.
"I get up at five in the morning and start the day by milking the goat and taking the animals out to pasture. Only after that do I go to school," said Gyorgy Radavoi, a 14-year-old boy. "My mother died and my father works abroad all year. I'm happy when my granddad isn't drunk, we have food to eat and it's warm at home."

Moderating your food consumption is the most important component of a healthy, balanced diet. Incorporating concepts such as food combining and food rotation can also be beneficial when addressing poor digestion or food allergies. Following these simple guidelines below will help support your digestion and a strong immune system.
Eat Whole Natural Foods:
Whole natural foods that come direct from gardens, farms and orchards are the best choices for optimal nutrients, energy and vitality. Fresh fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, whole grains and legumes should ideally constitute 60-70% of your diet. Although processed food has an undeniable convenience factor and longer shelf life, they typically contain unnecessary additives and chemicals that can be detrimental to your health in the long run.
While not always the budget-friendly option, there are many benefits to eating organic whenever possible. Many believe that organically grown foods have a higher nutrient value than commercially grown produce, while others disagree. There are many studies to prove either side. What cannot be disputed is the undeniable benefit associated with the minimization of chemicals sprayed on organically grown produce, and therefore the reduced toxic load our bodies have to deal with.
Eat Naturally-Raised Meats (Fish, Seafood, Poultry, Beef, Lamb and Eggs):
Protein is an important component in diets, as it is the building block of all of our cells – and therefore our muscles, tissues and organs. And it is a tremendous source of vitamin B12 and iron. Due to its high fat content, it is important to consider only lean sources of protein. And to minimize our chemical and hormone exposure, look for naturally raised sources of protein.
Eat Raw or Lightly Steamed Vegetables:
Fruits and vegetables are best eaten as fresh as possible, though many can be stored well for several weeks. To maximize the nutrient value of fruits and vegetables, it’s best to eat them raw or lightly steamed. When cooked, many of the vitamins, some minerals and certainly the enzymes in fruits and vegetables are lost, thereby reducing their nutrient value.
Eat in Moderation:
As a general guideline, every meal and snack should have 40% lean protein, 20% fat and 40% complex carbohydrates for optimum nutrition and satisfaction. One of the best things you can do is to always eat a healthy balanced breakfast, setting up your metabolism properly for the day. If you have time constraints, consider options such as protein smoothies, healthy muffins, hardboiled eggs or granola with fruit, nuts and seeds.
Eliminate or Minimize Caffeine:
Caffeine is a stimulant that helps us feel temporarily energized, but it has many negative effects to the body. It has a laxative effect that may cover up sluggish bowels; it’s also a diuretic that causes frequent urination and dehydration, which can lead to many physical symptoms if taken in excess, including insomnia, high blood pressure and headaches.
Use Natural Sweeteners in Moderation:
Generally, it’s best to minimize sugar due to its well-documented impact on health, including hypoglycemia, weight gain, cravings, high cholesterol and dental cavities to name a few. When a sweetener is required, consider natural sources such as raw honey and maple syrup instead.
Eliminate or Limit Alcohol:
The negative effects of excessive alcohol use are well documented. Even in moderate amounts, alcohol is a diuretic and also uses up B vitamins as it is processed from the body, so it’s best to eliminate or strictly limit consumption.
Get Plenty of Sleep:
The importance of sleep is often overlooked. During sleep, our muscles and tissues are repaired and revitalized, and our minds process experiences and things we have learned during the day. Although we all have different sleep patterns and needs, the average person requires a minimum of seven to eight hours of uninterrupted sleep per night.
To achieve optimal sleep, avoid consumption of caffeine, heavy meals, exercise or alcohol within a few hours before bed. Before bed, consider reading, journaling or meditation to relax, as the day’s anxieties and an overactive mind can also impact your ability to sleep. And finally, ensure that your sleeping environment is set up for the best quality of sleep – minimize noise and keep the bedroom as dark as possible.
Exercise – Move your Body!:
Many feel that exercise only includes weekly classes, trips to the gym or running. The reality is that any form of exercise is beneficial, including morning or evening walks, or even taking the stairs whenever possible. Ideally, find an activity you enjoy doing and do it as frequently as possible. If finding the time becomes a challenge, use simple methods such as parking your car farther away from your destination and even taking business meetings outdoors and making them “walking meetings”. The key is to find every opportunity in a day to get your body moving.

Project management typically has five stages. Some project managers make mistakes during one or more of those stages, which can sabotage the chance of a successful outcome and have disastrous results for everyone involved. Here are two of the most common mistakes — and ways to avoid them — during each of the five stages. Which ones have you made?
Stage #1: Initiating:
1. Mistake: The project manager “assumes” he knows what the project sponsor (the high-level person who wants the project done and will support the project) considers to be an acceptable project outcome.
How to Avoid the Mistake: You must have a detailed conversation with the project sponsor that establishes specific and realistic measurable objectives for the project. This includes the outcome (expected objectives), a defined timeline (when does it start and when is it supposed to end?) and the cost of the project (how much money, labor, and stuff is required and where the resources will come from?)
2. Mistake: The project manager fails to identify all the stakeholders (those people who will benefit from or be affected by the project and those people who need to be involved in the project at some time during the project).
How to Avoid the Mistake: Ask the project sponsor to identify the primary and secondary stakeholders. Who will be directly and indirectly affected by the project’s outcome? Which stakeholders’ support will be needed to provide the required resources for the project? Include additional stakeholders as the progression of the project reveals them.
Stage #2- Planning:
1. Mistake: The project manager fails to include the team when planning how the outcome is going to be achieved.
How to Avoid the Mistake: It is essential to get the team’s ownership of the project and their commitment to produce agreed-upon results on time and within budget. Let the team help create a written project action plan by involving them in:
- Deciding roles and responsibilities of team members
- Creating a project schedule
- Determining the resources needed (personnel, time, material, other resources, etc.)
- Creating a communication plan for the project (see Planning - Mistake #2)
- Identifying the risks to the completion of the project, and creating a risk response plan if necessary
2. Mistake: The project manager fails to keep everyone informed.
How to Avoid the Mistake: You and the team should create a communication plan that addresses how and when the team will communicate with each other, with the sponsor, with each stakeholder, and with each team member who is not actively involved in the project. This is often done with status reports (where the project is now), progress reports (how it got there) and change reports (major changes and how they affect the project).
Stage #3- Executing:
1. Mistake: The project manager does not hold enough team meetings.
How to Avoid the Mistake: Start every large project with a kickoff meeting to review the project action plan with the team and generate excitement, and then hold weekly team meetings to discuss progress. Were all activities completed on time and within budget? Did the team exceed, miss or meet targets for the week? Use this time to discuss and reconcile problems, conflicts, disputes and potential issues.
2. Mistake: The project manager does not celebrate success with the team.
How to Avoid the Mistake: Celebration provides momentum for the team, so don’t wait until you achieve the “overall” success identified in the project action plan. Celebrate small milestones, perhaps on a weekly basis, by recognizing team and individual achievements.
Stage #4- Monitoring:
1. Mistake: The project manager is not constantly looking for trouble.
How to Avoid the Mistake: This fix is easy: constantly look for trouble! This means being aware of and managing any issue that might affect the outcome, time frame, or cost of the project. Examples include time slippage (keeping the project on schedule by tracking project activities), scope creep (prohibiting others from enlarging the project by saying “no”) and project changes (knowing how every change may impact — or jeopardize — the project’s success).
2. Mistake: The project manager loses track of the project’s outcome, time frame and cost by not using an appropriate tracking system.
How to Avoid the Mistake: Use tracking systems (i.e.,Microsoft Project, QuickBooks, Excel) that will reveal any issues or problems so timely corrective action can be taken.
Stage #5- Completing:
1. Mistake: The project manager attempts to complete or “hand off” the project without tying up all the loose ends.
How to Avoid the Mistake: When 90 percent of the project has been completed, meet with the sponsor and primary stakeholders and develop a closing checklist and punch list to identify any remaining uncompleted tasks. Those items must be done before handing the project off or declaring the project completed.
2. Mistake: The project manager fails to debrief and, if warranted, celebrate with the team.
How to Avoid the Mistake: Upon completion, a critical step is to hold a debriefing session about the project with the team using an after action review to share lessons learned, mistakes made and overcome, and successes achieved. You and the team can discuss what went right and what went wrong, and evaluate individual and team performance. If the project’s objectives were met, celebrate and recognize the individual and team efforts and accomplishments.
While project management is replete with the opportunity to make mistakes, avoid the common ones during each phase, and virtually all of your projects will end in success.

web page http://www.amperefitz.com
Ampere's 1824 Laws
Theserelative motion laws greatly simply all of science:
These laws are essentially Ampere's simple 1824 long wire laws with a frequency modification. .These are universal laws that unify all the forces by seeing all forces as space-time creations similar to the way it's done in general relativity. . These laws, though, visualize different space-time intervals (different gauges) being created at various different spin/orbit frequencies.
Despite the fact that quantum theory does not see our type of spin causing angular momentum in the microcosm, these laws show it is there nevertheless but at a different space-time interval (different gauge - - different spin/orbit frequency level).
The "A" Laws
[The reason these "A" Laws work relates to the superposition principle that there is no repulsive force with in phase waves but a repulsive force (space) is always generated by out of phase waves].
You must also understand Dr. Milo Wolff's concept that particles (andtime) are manufactured by Spinning, Scalar, Standing Wave, Resonances with an immense, finite number of similar surrounding SSSWRs (Mach's principle).
Force (space) exists not DIRECTLY via scalar resonances but because of individual vector spin and orbital resonances between two similar Spinning, Scalar Standing Wave Resonances.
Remember, these"A" Laws (Ampere or Aufbau) have unified ALL the forces so these are now the NEW laws for everything, from the smallest spinning particle to the largest spinning super cluster of galaxies even where high relativistic speeds and mass are encountered. For simplicity, we must return to the Bohr concept of the electron. I have shown why in numerous other papers.
*The 1st. "A" Law shows us where all SSSWRs in relative motion produce the least space-time between themselves:
The space time interval is created theleast between any two SSSWRs, the closest sides of which "see" themselves spinning or moving on parallel paths in the same direction at the same frequency (like gears meshing) or a close harmonic thereof. You can also say these two objects will attract each other.
*The 2nd. "A" Law shows us where all SSSWRs in relative motion produce the most space-time between themselves:
Both space and time are created themost between any two SSSWRs, the closest sides of which "see" themselves spinning or moving on parallel paths in opposite directions at the same frequency (like gears clashing) or a close harmonic thereof. You can also say these two objects will repel each other.
I use the quoted word "see" to emphasize the particular spacetime realm in which these entities actually find themselves although this will NOT be the way it is seen from our particular spacetime reference frame realm.
Of great importance, in the two preceding laws, is that these laws arefrequency laws and they work separately for each separate spin/orbit frequency level which means these individual wave-particles must "see" themselves doing these things from their viewpoint in their local gauge environment. It does not matter how some other spin/orbit frequency level views these things because space and time and indeed the average space time interval is entirely different for each different spin/orbit frequency level (gauge).
These two laws look equal and opposite but they are not: The 1st"A" law "locks on" while its opposite 2nd sister law never does. This is because the total force is generally centralized and you can feel this 1st "A" law "lock on" when two magnets come together. These two laws result in limits of aggregation being established all throughout this universe: This is why there are limits to the size of atoms and limits to the size of stars as well.
*The Aufbau or Ampere Corollary
The aforementioned forces, or space-time intervals, between two SSSWRs will vary proportionally with the cosine of the angle of their paths. And they will have a torque that will tend to make the paths parallel and to become oriented so that SSSWRs on both paths will be traveling in the same direction.
All SSSWRs that "see" themselves traveling in the same direction on parallel paths at the same frequency will attract and/or space and time, at that frequency, between them is created the least.
All SSSWRs that "see" themselves traveling in opposite directions on parallel paths at the same frequency will repel and/or space and time between them, at that frequency, increases or is created the most.
And please don't forget this:
Why electrons, stars & galaxies repel each other
Remember, we have completely chucked out all those invisible forces you are familiar with and all we have now are these two"A" Laws.
Please remember, in thisnew "big picture" of everything, ALL FORCES ARE NOW UNIFIED so there are no such things as gravity, magnetic lines of force or plus and minus charges or for that matter even the strong force.
Pleasepay particular attention to the following.
Electrons can exhibit either an attraction or repulsion when they are "locked" spin up or spin down on orbitals such as like or unlike charges; like or unlike poles OR they may even display a gyroscopic type repulsive behavior when they are "free". Our"A" Laws show us why this is so and in the next 6 paragraphs you have the best explanation of why electrons and even stars & galaxies repel each other.
Lets look at these free electrons first: They spin and hence they have inertial qualities and this includes gyroscopic inertia which always provides this force 90 degrees to any external force acting on such a spinning item.
Completely forget about charge now and only look at our new"A" Laws and what they say.
The 1st "A" Law tells us that there is a possibility that two free electrons can attract each other providing that any portion of their closest sides are spinning in the same direction at the same frequency. This means either their sides can be spinning in the same directions or they can be lined up so that both of their poles can be spinning in the same directions: Any such two electrons will attract each other (magnetism also sigma and pi bonding).
Then we see that there is something else: This torque twisting force - on BOTH free items - depends on the cosine of the angle of their respective spin planes.
As this force begins to act, it in turn causes this 90-degree gyroscopic torque to twist both of those totally free electrons away from this initial attracting position, doesn't it?
So because of this gyro torque, two free electrons can never remain in a full attracting position and they will therefore be forced to stay more in arepelling position. Therefore free electrons will always end up repelling each other and this repelling is not explained by using this thing called charge: it is explained only by simply using global inertial qualities and our new global "A" Laws.
The above6 paragraphs explain not only why electrons repel each other but they also explain why any two perfectly free similar spinning SSSWRs of the same size must repel each other. So now you know why both electrons and galaxies stay well away from each other.
Thisis Einstein's cosmological constant.
Something somewhere has to be"locked" in place and synchronized in frequency (such as the electron's spin with another electron's spin) or a close subharmonic to get any kind of attracting force:
Yes, the proton attracts an electron but instead of charge please see it this way:
When two up quarks combine with one down quark to form a proton then the two up quarks are able to synchronize in with the electron's spin frequency and
This is why aggregations come together(gravity) and larger aggregations come together and accumulate because as these things grow in size there are more things "locked" in place strengthening the attractive force of the 1st "A" Law.
Once we knew about quarks then we should have realized how those two 'up quarks' in the proton are set up spin up-spin down (The 'up quark' does not signify orientation). Those two spin up--spin down 'up quarks' are spinning - in the same equatorial plane - at a higher frequency but all 'up quarks' spin at a harmonic of the electron's spin frequency allowing a spin up and spin down electron to be attracted to them in the same equatorial plane. We will soon know even more about theattractive quark strong force binding functions. Attraction is always a synchronized frequency attraction and it is not simply the old idea of plus and minus charges.
Allattractions in this theory must be synchronized frequency attractions.
Both light and inertial mass are caused by these synchronized frequency attractions.
As quantum theory shows us, the orbital of an electron on a distant star goes down a certain amount while the orbital of the electron receiving this quantum of energy---in your eye---goes up the exact same amount. But what quantum mechanics does not tell you is that these two energy-exchanging orbitals must be in the same exact plane. Not only that but each orbital must be a mirror image of the other with the electrons in each rotating and revolving in the exact opposite directions so that at the time the energy exchange takes place the closest sides of both electrons are going in the same direction. You can see from this that this energy change is merely a MOMENTARY DIRECT PULL from the electron, on the star, to the electron in your eye. These electrons will make many revolutions, rotations and wobbling oscillations during each change of those orbitals giving you the light that you see.
If two distant quarks are lined up so that their closest sides are in the same directions as the two aforementioned electrons then they too will momentarily bind with each other---even from a vast distance---and cause what we see as inertial mass. But since the quarks in the proton and neutron tri-quark entities do not oscillate and wobble quite like the electron then this pull of the two quarks is a steady momentary binding pull where BOTH quarks are pulled away from the other two quarks but NO PERMANENTEnergy CHANGE is made in either tri-quark entity (neutron or proton).
When you spin a flywheel and notice the gyroscopic inertia, you should also notice that the gyroscopic torque that is always 90 degrees to the axis of rotationcan also be seen as a linkage with the rim of the rapidly spinning flywheel to a path projected in the sky (macrocosm surroundings). The rim tries to stay in this path. This is showing you that you do have an absolute reference frame, which is Mach's principle. Billions of quarks in BOTH the flywheel and in the macrocosm are both being momentarily extended more than normal thus giving you this added gyroscopic inertia.
You might have to read the long TOE athttp://www.rbduncan.com/TOEbyFitzpatrick.htm to get the full picture of what happens when you crank up a gyroscope or a flywheel or ride a bicycle and produce gyroscopic inertia. It's similar to the reason you need cyclic pitch on a helicopter. When a helicopter moves forward then the blades on one side travel through the air faster than the blades on the other side and this tries to tip the helicopter over. (Igor Sikorsky had to invent cyclic pitch to prevent this).
The same thing happens to certain quarks whose rims line up with the rim of the gyroscope, flywheel or bicycle wheels. The speed that these items are turning---in respect to the macrocosm---now adds to portions of the quark rim speed which before was close to the speed of light and now gets even closer to the speed of light (becoming more massive hence at a higher frequency). So you are moving up an asymptotic curve close to that unsurpassable speed of c. And this---even with a miniscule number of quarks involved---gives us this gyroscopic inertia. It does this because the mass of these few quarks increase tremendously as portions of their rim speed approach the speed of light. As Einstein has shown us, mass increases with speed and especially increases when on that asymptotic portion of the curve.
Of available electrons, only the smallest fraction link with others a distance away to transfer light and heat. The same with the spinning quark that causes gyroscopic inertia. All spinning quarks link to cause inertial mass. All these binding linkages are momentary with the electron's oscillations causing a permanent transfer of energy and the various momentary quark bindings causing inertial mass. This could be seen---in gyroscopic inertia---as only a temporary transfer of inertial mass. But if you could increase our surroundings---as will be the case when our Milky Way galaxy finally collides with the Andromeda galaxy---then anyone here on earth will find both inertial mass, gyroscopic inertia and centrifugal force have all become stronger with the more crowded surroundings.
Now let's go to the stars and you will see the same"A" Laws apply there as well and, as you can see, these too will always have to remain in a repelling position with each other.
Recently Perlmutter discovered this acceleration and showed we must have Einstein'scosmological constant---a repulsive force---between all the stars and galaxies.
Scientists have been recently wracking their brains to figure out why we have Perlmutter's acceleration because nothing in our present science has even predicted such a thing.
But read those preceding blue sentences again! Now I hope you can finally see that our "A" Laws tell you exactly why we have Einstein's "cosmological constant" not only in the sky but in the microcosm as well. And they tell you why we have gravity too. Your present science doesn't even do this.
The reason these "A" Laws work is that this universe is built on an extraordinarily simple principle via an endless supply of vector wave resonances producing lower frequency spherical standing wave, scalar wave resonances that, in turn, produce space-time by spinning, orbiting and precessing.
Aminimum of space (at that particular frequency) is produced between the closest sides of spinning entities that are in the same scalar phase.
Scalar phaseis more like a movie frame than voltage phase, which pertains to a waveform.
These "A" Laws show us the production of the most important vector forces between the closest sides of such spinning spherical resonances and in the direction of the axis of each spin. There are also vector forces via orbits and spin and orbital and spin precessions.
This universe equalizes the energy vector force input to vector force output of these scalar wave resonances by balancing them on specific spin and orbital geodesics.
These vector forces, in turn, combine to produce lower frequency, hence lower energy, scalar resonances, which in turn, spin, precess and orbit producing still lower frequency space-time and its related vector forces and this goes on and on: Thus is our universe built from the microcosm to the macrocosm and may continue indefinitely because higher frequency waves would always be producing lower frequency, lower energy scalar wave resonances and they, in turn, would be producing even lower energy, lower frequency resonances.
This seems to be an infinite frequency universe with each spin/orbit frequency having inertial and gyroscopic qualities but yet with each spin/orbit frequency having its own distinct symmetry laws.
Daniel P. Fitzpatrick Jr.
Over 4 Decades of Fitzpatrick's Books, Papers & Thoughts:
And here's this page duplicated in Adobe.pdf:
Over 4 Decades of Fitzpatrick's Books, Papers & Thoughts:http://www.amperefitz.com/4.decades.htm
Fitzpatrick's website is athttp://www.amperefitz.com
Another older website carrying Fitzpatrick's works FREE is:http://www.rbduncan.com
Thank you, World Scientist Database - - Daniel P. Fitzpatrick Jr.
Have a good day & visit my site at goodreads:
Click ANY of these links to get what you want
Read my latest book FREE:(these two links below)
http://www.amperefitz.com/ua_20071020_ck_ds_jm_ds.pdf (This is the book in Adobe)
http://www.amperefitz.com/unvasleep.htm (This book link opens faster if you have dial up.)
While all the links on this page are OK and presently working, unfortunately only about two thirds(2/3) of the links I gave, years ago, as proof (click & see: http://www.amperefitz.com/presskit.html) for statements in this latest book, published in the year MMVl, are now still working BUT your search engine will probably take you to a similar area where you should be able to read similar proof material.

The specter of chemical weapons has been hanging over war-torn Syria for months.
Although viewed with skepticism by U.S. officials, the latest claims and counterclaims by the Syrian government and opposition forces over their alleged use in Aleppo province and a Damascus suburb have intensified concerns and prompted the United Nations to promise an investigation.
Syria's government insists it doesn't have chemical weapons, and wouldn't use them against its own people if it did, while the Syrian opposition says it neither has such munitions nor the means to make them.
Whatever the truth of the latest allegations, military analysts say they believe Syria may have one of the largest stockpiles of chemical weapons in the world. Specifically, the supply could include sarin and VX gases -- both nerve agents -- and mustard gas, which are banned under international law.
The prospect that these could potentially be deployed by an increasingly beleaguered regime has made many observers anxious -- and has been cited as a "red line" for robust action by the United States.
So why would Syria have such armaments?
Few munitions evoke as much fear as chemical weapons. And unlike nuclear weapons, they are relatively inexpensive to develop and stockpile.
This lends them a disproportionate importance for Syria and the region, analysts say.
"In the Middle East, chemical weapons have been seen as a possible counter to Israel's nuclear weapons," said Dr. Susan B. Martin, of the Department of War Studies at King's College London.
"They are seen as a possible strategic deterrent," she said, "and they are cheaper and easier to have than nuclear weapons."

American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. A soft, silvery, easily oxidized metallic element that ignites spontaneously in air when finely divided. Strontium is used in pyrotechnic compounds and various alloys. Atomic number 38; atomic weight 87.62; melting point 769°C; boiling point 1,384°C; specific gravity 2.54; valence 2. See Table at element.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. Chemical symbol, Sr; atomic weight, 87.37; specific gravity, 2.54. A dark-yellow metal, less lustrous than barium, malleable, and fusible at a red heat. When heated in air, it burns with a bright flame to the oxid. It decomposes water at ordinary temperatures, evolving hydrogen, and uniting with the oxygen of the water to form the oxid strontia. It does not occur native. The chief strontium minerals are the carbonate (strontianite) and the sulphate (celestine). Strontium also occurs as a silicate in the mineral brewsterite. It has been detected in the waters of various mineral springs, as well as in sea-water, and in the ashes of some marine plants. Salts of strontium are chiefly used in pyrotechny, imparting an intense red color to flames.
- n. A metallic chemical element (symbol Sr) with an atomic number of 38.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Chem.) A metallic element of the calcium group, always naturally occurring combined, as in the minerals strontianite, celestite, etc. It is isolated as a yellowish metal, somewhat malleable but harder than calcium. It is chiefly employed (as in the nitrate) to color pyrotechnic flames red. Symbol Sr. Atomic weight 87.3.
- n. a soft silver-white or yellowish metallic element of the alkali metal group; turns yellow in air; occurs in celestite and strontianite
- Named in a pseudo-Latin manner for the name of the Scottish town Strontian. (Wiktionary)
- From New Latin strontia, strontium oxide, from English strontian; see strontianite. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“But the water may contain other harmful substances, such as beta-ray emitting strontium, which is known for causing bone cancers.”
“The strontium is the secret," said Li - although exactly what it is doing is unclear.”
“One of the procedures is called strontium isotope analysis, a technique that measures the ratio of strontium isotopes in a person's tooth enamel to determine where they grew up.”
“Answer: A drug called strontium ranelate is commonly prescribed in several European countries.”
“Recent health department tests on National Gypsum board found it lacked a compound called strontium sulfide - something found in all of the Chinese drywall samples.”
“When a POS is attacked, when it hits the end of its shields, it goes into 'reinforced mode', and becomes invunerable for a period of time depending on how much 'strontium' it is fueled up with.”
“Other hazards such as strontium are insignificant.”
“A: The non-patentable forms of strontium supplements, such as strontium citrate, should dissolve and deliver strontium to the bones just as efficiently as strontium ranelate.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘strontium’.
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
includes words of the "Prodcom list"
A list of chemical elements
I'm wading through Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey/Maturin novels one by one, and someday, I'll wade through them again and list all the words I learned while reading them.
Edit: I started ma...
Looking for tweets for strontium.

Establishing awareness of intellectual property amongst staff of your company is essential for early maximizing the value of your intellectual property and the wealth of your business and reducing the possibilities of accidental non-confidential disclosures, that could prejudice successful patent applications and negatively affect the value of your intellectual property and ultimately the wealth of your business.
Regular training sessions of staff on intellectual property are key and should include the following:
how to identify and protect intellectual property;
how to use patents to improvements of technology;
understanding Patent Process;
how to deal with confidential information (see some examples in the scenarios below);
record keeping of intellectual property, including laboratory notebooks and policy on intellectual property; and
who to contact in case of need.
The record keeping procedures and manuals will address the following questions:
has the inventor kept the idea confidential?
is there a written description of the idea and has been kept safe and confidential?
how the idea has been generated? If during a collaborative programme, then was it agreed beforehand who owns what?
is the idea a new product, a new material, a new process for making something? If so, is it patentable or protectable in any other way?
is the idea a variation in a product or material or process? If so, it is still likely to be patentable or protectable in any other way?
who generated the idea? The answer to this question is very important in the event self-employed or other third party consultants are involved in any research and development or collaborative project.
The main object of this record keeping is to track, protect and maintain all relevant intellectual property rights of the business so that intellectual property can be licensed, assigned or exploited to the fullest extent and benefit of the company.
The record keeping procedures should also include a form upon which, potential inventions should be recorded identifying the following:
Who: department and research area;
Named individuals: inventors and authors;
What: technical description;
Why: perceived novelty;
How to use the information: potential applications/markets;
What else is needed: background or third party intellectual property and information.
The correct use of laboratory notebooks by staff is also essential. In the event of a dispute laboratory notebooks may be required to be presented as legal evidence.
It is therefore recommended that:
permanent bindings are used on notebooks (loose leaf books should be avoided to prevent possible removal or substitution of pages);
pages should be numbered and any additional drawings cards or computer printouts should be permanently attached to the notebook clearly identified and have reference made to them in the notebook;
all projects related and other activities, such as breaks in research due to secondment or holiday should be recorded factually; and
the notebook should be reviewed regularly by someone who understands the technology involved, each page should ideally be signed by a witness and again the choice of the witness is important and should not be someone who may be nominated as core inventor. The witness should also sign and date and graphs, chart, printouts, which are inserted into the laboratory notebook.
In addition, to the use of appropriate record keeping procedures and notebooks, an evaluation of IPR policy should be adopted. Such an evaluation should include factors, such as potential market, market, impact, competitive products, timing, intellectual property protection available and experience in the field concerned.
Finally, once relevant intellectual property rights have been identified, protected, exploited and enforced, it is advisable that, regular audit of such rights is undertaken to ensure that, the intellectual property rights reflect the current needs of the business and that expenditure is limited accordingly.
How to take care of confidential information:
Scenario 1 –
Have you been asked to sign a confidentiality undertaking? If so, please check that it is only confidentiality restriction and not a transfer of intellectual rights.
Obtain express confirmation from the discloser, that the information is not confidential, where possible, before disclosure.
Make a written record of what was disclosed, by whom and when.
Please remember that, an obligation, to keep information confidential, includes the obligation of not disclosure or not use of the information, without the permission of the person to whom the obligation is owned.
Scenario 2 –
Put in writing or some other permanent form.
Mark any documents with appropriate confidentiality and IPR disclaimers.
Keep a copy of what is disclosed and a record of when and to whom.
If an oral disclosure is made in confidence, confirm in writing what was disclosed and what was given in confidence.
Have the recipient sign a confidentiality undertaking of the disclosure.
Scenario 3 –
Consider whether anything in the paper describes a new device, chemical compound or manufacturing process or a significant improvement or modification to any such matters.
Do not disclose anything, without first considering the possibility of the content of the papers being patentable in whole or in part.
Consider whether there are any restrains, under any relevant agreements (including research and development or collaboration agreements).
Keep an eye on any relevant timetable for confirming publication.
Request that, the publisher confirms confidentiality on receipt of paper pending decision on publication.
Please, always remember that, any document exchanged, should be clearly marked as being confidential.
Scenario 4 –
Consider what background IPR, if any, are free from obligations of confidentiality and may be introduced to the project.
Prior to disclosing any information to third parties, have a confidentiality agreement signed. Such agreements, may take many forms and the terms should be adjusted in accordance with the particular circumstances.
You should always include the following:
- identification of parties;
- what information is to be kept secret; and
- for how long.
If in any doubt, consult your legal adviser.
The World Intellectual Property Rights Organization, WIPO has organized a three day workshop to educate the public on intellectual property rights. The initiative started today at the Coco palm hotel. The drive which is aimed at sensitizing St. Lucians to intellectual property rights issues will also include a public forum for persons interested in learning more about the issue.
Video Rating: 0 / 5
The expression, ‘intellectual property’ has come to be internationally recognized as covering mainly two branches, namely; ‘industrial property’ and ‘copyright’. Patents, industrial designs and trade marks used to be considered as different kinds of industrial property. In Bangladesh (during the time of the then British regime), the first legislation of its kind, on copyright was introduced in 1914, which was mainly based on the British Copyright law of 1911. After the independence from Britain new law on copyright was promulgated in 1962. The Copyright Ordinance 1962 has been replaced by the new copyright act of 2000. Now in our country, Copyright law is regulated by the Copyright Act 2000. This is done because of the prevailing situation in Bangladesh and around the world.
In case of patent and designs we have law which we inherited from our Colonial ruler. Patent rights are created by statute and governed by the Patent and Designs Act 1911. We have also law related to trademarks and it is regulated by the Trademarks Act 1940.
Intellectual property has acquired an internationally recognized character. Now it is regarded as “one of the most important sectors” of international law, having its source in various international conventions. At present, each and every country is trying to shape or reshape their legislature, relating to intellectual property; in the light of those international conventions.
The convention establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), concluded in Stockholm on July 14th, 1967, provides that, ‘intellectual property’ shall include rights relating to:
1. literary, artistic and scientific works,
2. performances of performing artists, phonograms and broadcasts,
3. inventions in all fields of human endeavor,
4. scientific discoveries,
5. industrial designs,
6. trade marks, service marks and commercial names and designations,
7. protection against unfair competition,
And all other rights resulting from intellectual activity in the industrial, scientific, literary or artistic fields. (Article 2/VIII) 1
Intellectual property protects application of ideas and information that are of commercial value.2
By virtue of a number of international conventions such as the, Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention, copyright acquired in one country extends to other countries which are member of these conventions. Other intellectual properties are beginning to acquire the same nature as well.
The principles of intellectual property law are substantially the same in all countries with little variation to meet the national requirements of each of the countries.
Bangladesh, as a least developed country, has also enacted intellectual property law in its national legislature.
The Trade Related aspects of Intellectual Property rights (TRIPs) were included as integral part of World Trade Organization (WTO) due to pressure and interest of basically transnational companies and developed countries to ensure maximum profit or interest out of intellectual property in international trade.3 The TRIPs Agreement has been called the most ambitious international intellectual property convention ever attempted. TRIPs agreement has established the protection of intellectual property as a major part of the multinational trading system embodied in the WTO. As one commentator observer, intellectual property is now a key component of this trading system, “the protection of intellectual property is one of the three pillars of the WTO”.4
Bangladesh is now enjoying the transitional period that has been fixed by WTO under the light of TRIPs. So, we do not have a clear idea about the relation between intellectual property rights and economical development. But, it is certain that after the expiration of transitional period, Bangladesh will have to face a serious and severe situation because of the weak legal framework relating to intellectual property.
Now, in brief, the main features of intellectual property laws are given below:
1. The Patents and Designs Acts, 1911:-
(Act no. 11 of 1911)
The salient features of our existing Act are as follows;
Part-1; of the Patents and Designs Act, 1911; is about of patent. This part starts from section-1 and extends to section-42.
Section 2(8) contains the definition of invention; it proceeds as – invention means any manner of new manufacture and includes an improvement and all alleged invention. In sub-section (10) of the same section, provides the explanation of manufacture, “manufacture includes any art, process or manner or producing, preparing or making any article and also any article prepared or produced by manufacturer.”
Section-3 of the Act provides about the manner and mode of an application for patent. According to section-3(1); a patent application can be made by any person, whether he is a citizen of Bangladesh or not. An application can be made, alone or jointly with any other person.
According to section-4 of the Act; there are some provisions about specification. Wection-4(2) states that, a complete specification must particularly describe and ascertain the nature of the invention and the manner in which the invention is to be performed.
Section-10 of the Act, discusses about the topic, “grant and sealing of patent”. According to section-10(1); if there is no opposition of the patent application or, in case of opposition, if the determination is in favor of the grant of a patent, a patent shall, on payment of the prescribed fee, be granted, subject to such conditions if any as the Government thinks expedient, to the applicant, or in the case of a joint application to the applicants jointly, and the Controller shall cause the patent to be sealed with the seal of the Patent Office.
Term of patent, is laid down in section-14(1) of the Act. The duration of patent is sixteen years from its date. Section 15 of the Act; also provides rules regarding extension of the term of patent.
If any patent has been ceased, owing to the failure of patentee to pay any prescribed fee within the prescribed time, the patentee may apply to the controller in the prescribed manner for an order for the restoration of the patent. Section-16 of the Act deals with the matter, restoration of lapsed patent.
Section-22 of the Act contains provisions of “Compulsory Licenses and Revocation”. Both the Govt. and High Court Division are empowered to grant compulsory license or revocation of patent. Any person interested may present a petition to the Govt., alleging that the demand for a patented article in Bangladesh is not being met to an adequate extent and on reasonable terms and praying for the grant of a compulsory license, or in the alternative, for the revocation of the patent.
According to section-25 of the Act, if any patented invention or the mode which it is exercised; is mischievous to the state or prejudicial to the public; Govt. can declare the patent, revoked, by notification in the official Gazette.
Section-26 of the Act; provides the grounds, on which; a patent can be revoked by the High Court Division. Section-26(2) also provides, who can present a petition for revocation of a patent.
Section-30 of the Act; declares that; an innocent infringer of a patent; is exempted from liability or damages for infringement.
Part-II of the Act; describes all about ‘Designs’ or industrial designs. According to section-43(1); any person claiming to be the proprietor of any new or original design not previously published in Bangladesh, can apply to the Controller for the registration of that particular design.
According to section-47(1); the proprietor of a registered design, shall subject to the provisions of this Act, have copyright in the design during five years from the date of registration.
Section-51(A) of the Act; narrates that, any person interested may present a petition for the cancellation of the registration of a design. Such petition should be presented to the High Court Division.
Part-III of the Act; is about, Patent Office and proceedings there at.
According to section-59 of the Act; every register kept under this Act shall at any convenient times be open to the inspection of the public, subject to provisions of this Act.
Section-65 of the Act; states that, in any proceeding under this Act, the Controller shall have the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of receiving evidence, administrating oaths, enforcing the attendance of witness compelling the discovery and production of documents, issuing commissions, for the examining of witnesses and awarding costs and such award shall be executable in any Court having jurisdiction as if it were a decree of that Court.5
2. The Trade Marks Act; 1940:
(Act No. V of 1940)
The basic principles of the Trade marks Act are described below:
Section-2 of the Trade marks Act contains definitions that are related to this Act. As to, section-2(k); trade mark means a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the goods and some person having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, to use the mark whether with or without any indication of that identity of that person.
The establishment of Trade marks Registry at Dhaka, appointment of the Registrar and Deputy Registrar are laid down in section-4 of the Act.
According to section-5 of the Act; the registration of a trade mark, requires distinctiveness. Purpose of such distinctiveness is to distinguish those particular goods from the others, which have similarity in nature.
Any mark, containing scandalous design; or be likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class of the citizens, or to be contrary to any law for the time being in force or morality is prohibited for registration of that mark. Section-8 of the Act, say so.
Section-16 of the Act; provides that; when an application for registration of a trade mark has been accepted and either has not been opposed or having been opposed, has been decided in favor of the applicant, the Registrar shall, registers the said trade mark.
Section-18 of the Act, says that; the registration of a trade mark shall be a period of seven years, and may be renewed from time to time in accordance with the provisions of this section.
According to section-20 of the Act; no person shall be entitled to institute any proceedings to prevent, or recover damages for the infringement of an unregistered trade mark.
According to section-46 of the Act; any person aggrieved can apply to the High Court Division or the Registrar, for the cancellation or verification of the registration of a trade mark on the ground of any contravention of, or failure to observe a condition entered on the register in relation there to.
Chapter-IX of the Act; is specially written down for textile goods.
Chapter-X of the Act, states the provisions regarding offences and restriction of use of Royal Arms and state emblems.
According to section-73 of the Act, any suit for the infringement of a trade mark or otherwise relating to any right in the trade mark; shall be instituted to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.6
3. THE COPYRIGHT ACT; 2000:
(Act No. 28 of 2000)
A short overview:-
Section-2 of the Copyright Act; provides all the definitions related to copyright and so on.
According to Chapter II; section -9, 10 and 11; Copyright Board will consist and the post of Register has made. The board is a quasi-judicial body; while working, it would be deemed as a Civil Court.
Definition of copyright is laid down in Chapter III; section 14 of the Act. Section 14(2) includes, ‘computer programs’ as a subject to this Act.
Chapter IV; deals with the ownership of copyright and the rights of the copyright owner. This Chapter starts from section-17; ends to section-23.
Chapter V of the Act; describes all about the term of different types of copyright. Generally the term extends from the lifetime of the author until sixty years from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the author dies; is at section-22. The section also provides that, copyright shall subsist in any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work (other than a photograph). Section-25 to section-32 of the Act narrates the duration of copyright for different types. For instance, posthumous work, cinematograph films, sound recordings, photograph, anonymous and pseudonymous works, Govt. works, work of any local body, work of international organizations.
Section-50 of the Act; deals with compulsory licenses in works withheld from public.
Chapter X of the Act is about, registration of copyright.
Chapter XII; section-71, describes about infringement of copyright and section-72 of the Act; provides acts not to be infringement of copyright.
Chapter XIV; is about Civil remedies, that are available against infringement of copyright. Exclusively, section-76 of the Act; provides, remedies against such infringement. According to section-81 if the Act; the Court of District Judge, is the Court of first instance of such proceedings.
Chapter XV of this Act; describes offences and punishment. According to section-82 of the Act; any person who knowingly infringes or abets the infringement of copyright; shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months. But, which may extend to four years and fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand taka but which may extend to Taka two lacks. But; where the infringement has not been made for gain in the course of trade or business; the Court may, adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand taka.
According to section-95 of the Act; an order made by the Registrar is a subject to appeal to Copyright Board. According to section-96; against any order; made by the Board; any aggrieved person, within thirty days of such order can file a petition of appeal to the High Court Division.7
PROBLEMES AND INSUFFICIENCY OF THE EXISTING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS:
PATENTS AND DESIGNS ACT:-
The defects are;-
Like any other national patent system, novelty is an essential requirement of an invention to be patentable under the existing law of our country. But it is clear from the definition of ‘invention’ in section-2(8) of the 1911 Act; the invention to be patentable need not have a commercial pecuniary success. In other words, utility of an invention is not required by this definition. Although lack of utility is a ground for revocation of a patent under section-26(f) of the Act, till now this has not been included in the definition of invention. The 1911 Act makes no difference between patentable and non patentable inventions. Considering the public interest certain items should be kept outside the domain of patent protection. Since under the existing law no item has been excluded from the domain of patent protection, any type of new invention may obtain patent protection although it should not be patentable for the greater interest of the public at large. Under the existing law, the application for a patent must contain a declaration that the applicant is the true and first inventor or the assignor or legal representative of such inventor. But the term, “true and first inventor” is left undefined. Thus any person importing an invention for the first time into Bangladesh or any person to whom an invention is first communicated from outside Bangladesh can claim to be the “true and first inventor” of that invention and thus, can take the advantage of the vagueness of the term. Here; a fact should be added that, such practice already has begun. Some pharmaceutical companies don’t having any research and develop cell, importing some drugs, and by claiming patent, under the ambiguity of the Act, getting patent. A statistic says that, at the 1st and 2nd week of March, 2006; on an average, 40 patents were granted by the patent office, in each week. Thus, the local producers are forced to remain non productive on that particular patented items. The standard of examination varies from country to country. In some countries like Netherlands, Germany, U.S.A. and Japan it is rigorously involving an extensive search for both novelty and obviousness among documents published in many countries, over a period of many years. But according to our existing patent law; examination is less rigorous involving for novelty only, and the extent of search is restricted. Term of patent protection shall, as laid down in section-14, be sixteen years from its date. But the term is not sufficient enough for the exploitation of the patent right. What constitutes infringement of patent isn’t defined in the Patents and Designs Act, 1911. Section-29(1) of the Act only says that, the patentee has a right to sue against the infringer during the continuance of the patent acquired by him. Section-30 of the Act says that, a patentee shall not be entitled to damages against an innocent infringer. But, ignorance of law is no defense. The infringer should pay for the project as compensation of damages. Under the existing law any process or manner of producing, preparing or making an article in patentable as appears from section-2 (8) read with section-2(16). But, the 1911 Act does not confer upon the patentee the exclusive right to exercise the process. The 1911 Act contains provisions regarding compulsory licenses of patent rights but the terms and conditions of conditions of compulsory licenses are not detailed in the Act.
TRADE MARKS ACT:-
1. Section-22(3) of Trade Marks Act defined infringement in a very narrow sense though the act has provisions against infringement.
2. Although Chapter X of the Act, describes about offences and restrictions of use of Royal Arms and state emblems but this chapter does not extends to the infringement of any registered trademark. Any deceptive use of any registered trademark; is not also included in this chapter.
3. There is no provision for protection of internationally recognized trademark in our existing Trademark Act 1940.
Our existing copyright law has been enacted in line with the copyright law of India. It has been enacted to cope with the prevailing international set up of copyright system. So, preventive measures have been adopted to tackle the future complications in copyright sector.
NECESSARY PROPOSAL FOR REFORMATIONS: The term ‘intellectual property’ is still at its nascent stage in our country and people are not aware of the concept and importance of intellectual property. But, in international arena, the concept and coverage of intellectual property is growing so fast than any other brunches of law. We have intellectual property laws but these laws are not sufficient to tackle the challenges that are imminent and threatening us. Keeping in mind the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) agreement and other relevant conventions the following reformation proposals can be made:
Reformations of the Patents and Designs act:
ü The Patent and Designs Act, 1911 should be revised thoroughly.
ü Essential requirements of patentable invention should be described clearly and there must be a clear distinction between patentable and non patentable inventions.
ü The standard of examining a patent application should be made more effective.
ü Term of patent protection shall, as laid down in section 14, be 16 years from its date. But the term should be extended to 20 years for patent and the term of a design, according to sec – 47(1) is 5 years from the date of registration, should be extended to 10 years.
ü Existing Act does not have any definition of infringement, it should be included.
ü The part of “designs;” have some confusing words, as in that part the term, “copyright” has frequently used. But it may create confusion. Such confusion should be effaced.
ü The Act does not have anything to do about the protection “Geographical indication” which could result a huge loss of losing our culture & heritage. So, it should be included.
ü Provisions relevant to PARIS convention should be incorporated.
ü The administrative provisions and complications should be avoided. The complications should be made more subject to judicial decision.
ü The provisions of offences and penalties should be revised and reformed with the need of the time.
Proposal for reformations of The Trademarks Act:
After studying present Trademark Act and different conventions, it is clear that our existing Trademarks Act 1940 should be amended as well. The following suggestions can be made:
ü The reformed trademark law should have a wide view about the marks which can be registerable and which marks cannot be.
ü Infringement of trademark should be defined more accurately. Besides, punishment for infringement should be made stricter.
ü How will we protect our renowned trademarks in international market and reciprocally how other countries trade marks can enjoy protection in our local market, should be defined in our trademarks act, with an assertive view.
ü Offences and penalties, in respect of violation of any provisions of this act, should be made more effective and harder.
ü If any complication or confusion arises in practicing of the act, the judicial body should be involved with more vigilance.
Proposed reformations to the copyright law:
The Copyright Act 2000 has been enacted to cover the rules and to cope with the international copyright system. Our existing copyright law has been enacted in line with the copyright law of India. It has been enacted to cope with the prevailing international set up of copyright system. So, preventive measures have been adopted to tackle the future complications in copyright sector. From the face of the Copyright Act 2000, it seems that our copyright law has fulfilled the need of the time.
Though computer programs, tables complications including data base are recognized to have the copyright protection, there is no legal recognition for transaction carried out by means of electronic data or other means ‘e-commerce’ which involves the use of alternativeness to paper based method of communication and storage of information to facilitate filing of documents with government agencies .
The growing global importance of the cyber law is posing new challenges and in view of the peculiarity involved in the fields, the understanding between the nations of the world by treaties or covenants, may be of considerable importance in the absence of which the implementation of the legislation would be near to impossibility. Our present act should be amended to fulfill the shortage.
Finally we can hope that a stronger protection system of the intellectual property rights, a qualified commission to observe the protection and thus policy making options to bring civil remedies for the violation of the rights and finally a complete law regulation in all sectors of intellectual property rights will surely lead us to a better future.
Notes and References:
Background reading materials on intellectual property: WIPO (Pp-3, 4).
P.Narayanan.(pp-1). TRIPs agreement. John Madely hungry for trudeyzed books UK (2000) pp-96-97. The Patents and Designs Act 1911 The Trade Marks Act 1940 The Copyright Act 2000
Most people are attentive of the numerous benefits of owning a trademark registration. Trademark registration in India becoming familiar with complete customer satisfaction. Trademark registration is the protection agreed by the government to the business entities as to reduce the possibility of getting the advantage of the business by others by the way of misuse and to raise the opportunities keeping the mark exclusive under the eye of law.
Generally, brand registration refers to the trade mark used to discriminate the goods or services among the consumers. The business group sells their services or goods under the precise name or brand that is called trade mark. Therefore, the brand is registered in order to evade the repetition or use the same mark by others. In vision of this, the brand registration referred to as trademark registration. Trademark brand was initially developed as a name, term, design, and symbol. Powerful brand can bring success in bloodthirsty and financial markets and thus become the markets worthless assets.
Trademark brand equity dealings the value of brand to the trademark owner. The brand name is used interchangeably with brand to designate written or spoken linguistic rudiments of the brand. Brand name is a form of trademark which identifies the brand owner as the money-making source of products or services. The brand owner may ask for to protect the proprietary rights in relation to a brand name during . Trademark brand is a appliance to create monopoly so that the brand owner can obtain some of the reimbursement to those related to decline price competition. There is legal magnitude as it is essential that the brand names and trademarks are protected by all means. An existing brand name can be used as a vehicle for new and modified products. Individual brand names allow greater suppleness by permitting different products to be sold without puzzling the consumer.
The trademark is registered for the business name, brand name and logo as to discriminate, popularize, create the goodwill and put aside the mark from competitors and fraudulent. The trademark office is an organization to provide protection to the inventors and dealing for their inventions and trademark registration in India provide protection and intellectual property recognition.
In addition, if some business entity desires to extend its dealing in more than one or several countries, it can ensue with International Trade mark registration. The titled name International Brand Registration is the usual form of the International Trade mark registration. It is meant, when the registration is done through any International pact, that gives the protection in all the countries allied with the treaty.
The is an agency, which provides protection to the inventors and business for their inventions and trademark registration for the product and intellectual property identification. The office is provided with funds by the fees, which are charged for processing the patents and trademark. The applications to trademark registration are examined by the trademark office.
Master sf Business Administratration Banking and Finance (MBF): Integrative Courses: MS-94 Technology Mangement
Video Rating: 0 / 5
- the various types of merchandising rights including intellectual property rights and monopoly in commonplace articles
- use of well-know images and features in advertising and unfair competition
- use of registered trade marks and service marks
- use of copyright and design law
- the civil remedies available
- international framework for the protection of merchandising rights
Find More Intellectual Property Rights Products
The service industry is a tricky landscape, due to the fact that, often times, no tangible property is transferred back and forth. Sure, you may purchase a software program that comes on a disk, but in reality, you are merely purchasing the right to use that program, not the rights to the program itself. The service industry is a world dominated by intellectual property, and protecting yours should be your utmost goal.
First you must define if intellectual property is yours or not. Let’s say you hire an employee to create a software program for you. He creates it, puts his name on it, and hands it over to you. If left unchecked, both of you could walk away thinking that you own the rights to the software, but in reality, only the employer does. Other items may fall under the umbrella of “intellectual property” including trade secrets, client information, and more. Your employees might have access to that information, but in order to legally prevent them from using that information to their own benefit, you must first get them to sign an employment contract informing them that they are not allowed to distribute any information gathered while under your employ.
As an employer, you should take pride in the knowledge, contacts, and experience you have accumulated over your years of doing business. Don’t risk letting that information out by avoiding employment contracts or other intellectual property agreements. Furthermore, don’t let subcontractors walk away with information you paid for, just because they created it. Understanding your rights as an employer is the first step towards protecting them. The final step is having the foresight to create contracts which will legally protect you should the situation ever call for it.
As part of the Center for Freedom and Prosperity Foundation’s video project, we sponsored a contest for students at the University of South Florida. The winning entry discusses the role of intellectual property rights.
Video Rating: 2 / 5
The relevant legal norms from the above point of view, although they involved Intellectual property rights The exercise of acts done some direct or indirect restrictions, but these provisions are very fragmented, incomplete, unclear, not specifically from the perspective of preventing the abuse of intellectual property rights to make rules; the majority of existing legal norms applicable to the foreign economic Trading Activities, and not generally applicable to the Chinese market, the exercise of acts of intellectual property, so its very limited scope; from the content point of view, it also needs to be common practice in the world at present updated and perfect.
Present, China has no clear regulation of the exercise of acts of intellectual property ” Antitrust Law “, Also led to the present does not exist in China, the corresponding administrative law enforcement and judicial practice, similar Microsoft , Cisco And DVD Alliance patentee of intellectual property rights abuse in China still can not be effective monopoly regulation.
Order to achieve Competition Request on behalf of the wider interests of society more important, China has continued to strengthen intellectual property protection, but also abuse of intellectual property should be to rule them. But now, people are more concerned about the previous problems, while the latter issue also seriously enough. Based on this, the urgent need to promptly establish and improve regulation of intellectual property rights abuse in China antitrust law system, give full play to intellectual property rights in the legal system to encourage innovation and promote scientific and technological progress of the positive role of the city and to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights to maintain a free and fair economic competition order.
The “anti-monopoly law,” the exercise of intellectual property regulation act to protect the interests of Chinese enterprises is significant. Trend of economic globalization is bound to be more Chinese enterprises to the market, they may encounter in the domestic market monopoly of multinational enterprises do nothing, and their behavior in foreign markets are subject to strict Competition Law problems. For example, earlier this year, some U.S. Pharmacy Enterprises in China 4 pharmaceutical companies in the United States filed an antitrust lawsuit accusing the Chinese companies in the U.S. market on price cartel. Can be expected, as more and more Chinese enterprises enter the international market, Chinese enterprises in foreign countries have been accused of anti-monopoly situation will be more. Therefore, whether for the maintenance of domestic order, or free and fair competition in international economic exchanges in safeguarding their own interests, China should be established as soon as possible “anti-monopoly law.” The core is to balance and handle competition in intellectual property protection and maintenance of the conflict between the ultimate goal of full respect for and protection of intellectual property rights, encourage innovation and play Excitation The role of competition, but also effectively prevent illegal monopoly by improper use (ie abuse), so on behalf of the interests of society as a whole will not be free and fair competition order of destruction; both the full protection of market competition, but also realistic and reasonable for the time being take care to limit competition business needs, a reasonable balance of intellectual property transactions, the parties (developers, producers, consumers, etc.) interests, in order to promote China’s scientific and cultural innovation and the parallel development of economic competition.
Specialized intellectual property law in the regulation of intellectual property rights abuse in the sound system, to further clarify, refine the terms of the abuse of intellectual property, which makes the related intellectual property rights infringement proceedings for the alleged infringer to provide a clear defense based on, or to the right people can be counter-claim, or even be prosecuted separately. This also requires our country, “Patent Law,” “Trademark Law”, “Copyright Law” and other specialized intellectual property law further modified, or other supporting measures. For example, should further improve our procedures for intellectual property litigation related to the legal system, clear that abuse complaint against compensation; in intellectual property cases should be taken provisional measures before litigation, scrutiny, careful decisions; improve the institute confirmed that the provisions of such non-infringement lawsuit .
In addition, to effectively safeguard the authority of our laws, to be taken seriously TNC Intellectual property dispute resolution and political trend.
As intellectual property rights are private rights, in essence, is a civil right, then the intellectual property dispute resolution, like other civil rights, are primarily to the court through the trial process carried out. Related Intellectual Property Rights in China Laws and regulations After recent amendments, has been full compliance with WTO rules, the minimum requirements, in some ways even more than that can provide effective intellectual property legal relief channel.
However, some multinational companies and Chinese enterprises in intellectual property disputes occur, often by virtue of its strong bargaining power directly to the Chinese government or by their home governments to pressure the Chinese government to meet their special benefit The purpose of treatment, so that would could also go through legal channels, in accordance with strict legal procedures to resolve political. The Chinese Government has always considered positive for a variety of administrative resources to address the use of foreign-related intellectual property disputes. Tasted the sweetness of the multinational corporations, the more value this way, and attract more multinational companies to make the same choice. Moreover, under WTO rules, the MFN principle, a country our government to give preferential treatment for enterprises in this regard should also be automatically and unconditionally to other WTO Organization Members of the business. This is both an expression of some multinational companies in China to protect intellectual property rights and the rule of law framework for the establishment of disrespect and distrust, often the interests of the enterprises in China causing undue damage.
Is therefore recommended that our government should be treated with a number of multinational corporations will solve the political disputes of intellectual property rights of the tendency to be guided in accordance with our existing law, to follow strict legal procedures to solve problems, in particular, be careful not to as being a political Pressure The expense of the legitimate interests of Chinese enterprises. Access to the judicial process for foreign-related intellectual property disputes, our courts must strictly in accordance with Chinese laws and relevant international rules, rule out all kinds of interference imposed by foreign parties, according to a just ruling, effectively protect the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese enterprises. Which claims the rights for the source of the right to conduct a strict review of the situation, to prevent the use of intellectual property claims on behalf of persons engaged in unfair competition.

The intent of this work is five fold: 1) To spatially characterize and monitor the distribution, abundance, and size of both reef fishes and macro-invertebrates (conch, lobster, Diadema); 2) To relate this information to in-situ data collected on associated benthic composition parameters; 3) To use this information to establish the knowledge base necessary for enacting management decisions in a spatial setting; 4) To establish the efficacy of those management decisions; and 5) To work with the National Coral Reef Monitoring Program to develop data collection standards and easily implemented methodologies for transference to other agencies and to work toward standardizing data collection throughout the US states and territories. Toward this end, the Center for Coastal Monitoring and Assessment's Biogeography Branch (BB) has been conducting research in Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands since 2000 and 2001, respectively. It is critical, with recent changes in management at both locations (e.g. implementation of MPAs) as well as proposed changes (e.g. zoning to manage multiple human uses) that action is taken now to accurately describe and characterize the fish/macro-invertebrate populations in these areas. It is also important that BB work closely with the individuals responsible for recommending and implementing these management strategies. Recognizing this, BB has been collaborating with partners at the University of Puerto Rico, National Park Service, US Geological Survey and the Virgin Islands Department of Planning and Natural Resources.
To quantify patterns of spatial distribution and make meaningful interpretations, we must first have knowledge of the underlying variables determining species distribution. The basis for this work therefore, is the nearshore benthic habitats maps (less than 100 ft depth) created by NOAA's Biogeography Program in 2001 and NOS' bathymetry models. Using ArcView GIS software, the digitized habitat maps are stratified to select sampling stations. Sites are randomly selected within these strata to ensure coverage of the entire study region and not just a particular reef or seagrass area. At each site, fish, macro-invertebrates, and benthic composition information is then quantified following standardized protocols. By relating the data collected in the field back to the habitat maps and bathymetric models, BB is able to model and map species level and community level information. These protocols are standardized throughout the US Caribbean to enable quantification and comparison of reef fish abundance and distribution trends between locations. Armed with the knowledge of where "hot spots" of species richness and diversity are likely to occur in the seascape, the BB is in a unique position to answer questions about the efficacy of marine zoning strategies (e.g. placement of no fishing, anchoring, or snorkeling locations), and what locations are most suitable for establishing MPAs. Knowledge of the current status of fish/macro-invertebrate communities coupled with longer term monitoring will enable evaluation of management efficacy, thus it is essential to future management actions.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA)/National Ocean Service (NOS)/National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS)/Center for Coastal Monitoring and Assessment (CCMA)/Biogeography Branch, 20101216, St. Croix, USVI Habitat Assessment and Monitoring Data (2001 - Present): NOAA's Ocean Service, National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS), Silver Spring, MD.
Horizontal positions are specified in geographic coordinates, that is, latitude and longitude. Latitudes are given to the nearest 0.00001. Longitudes are given to the nearest 0.00001. Latitude and longitude values are specified in Decimal Degrees.
This is a cooperative effort between NOAA's Biogeography Branch, the National Park Service and the Virgin Islands Department of Planning and Natural Resources.
1) To spatially characterize and monitor the distribution, abundance, and size of both reef fishes and macro-invertebrates (conch, lobster, Diadema); 2) To relate this information to in-situ data collected on associated benthic composition parameters; 3) To use this information to establish the knowledge base necessary for enacting management decisions in a spatial setting; 4) To establish the efficacy of those management decisions; and 5) To work with the National Coral Reef Monitoring Program to develop data collection standards and easily implemented methodologies for transference to other agencies and to work toward standardizing data collection throughout the US states and territories.
Data are collected on the following: 1) Logistic information - diver name, dive buddy, date, time of survey, site code, and meter numbers at which the quadrat is placed.
2) Habitat structure - to characterize the benthic habitats of the dive site, the habitat diver first categorizes the habitat structure of the site: hard, soft or mangrove.
3) Proximity of structure - on seagrass and sand sites, the habitat diver records the absence or presence of reef or hard structure within 3m of the belt transect. A score of zero (0) indicates that no reef or other hard structure is present; one (1) indicates that a reef or hard structure smaller than 4m2 is present; and (2) indicates that a reef or hard structure larger than 4m2 is present within 3m of the diver. The point-count diver also uses this scoring system to record the absence, presence, and proximity of reef or hard structures within their cylinder.
4) Transect depth profile - the depth at each quadrat position. Depth is measured with a digital depth gauge to the nearest 1ft.
5) Abiotic footprint - defined as the percent cover (to the nearest 1 percent) of sand, rubble, hard bottom, and fine sediments within each quadrat position. Rubble refers to rocks and coral fragments that are moveable; immovable rocks are considered hard bottom. The percent cover given as a part of the abiotic footprint should total 100 percent. In a seagrass area for example, despite the fact that seagrass may provide 50 percent cover, the underlying substrate is 100 percent sand so this is what is recorded. To estimate percent cover, the habitat diver first positions the quadrat at the chosen meter mark along the transect tape. If the meter mark is an odd number, then the quadrat is placed on the left side of the tape; if even, it is placed on the right. Next, the habitat diver lays the quadrat along the substrate (regardless of the slope) and estimates percent cover based on a two-dimensional (planar) view (e.g. if bottom is sloping, the quadrat is not held horizontally). Also, the diver should try to use the same planar view for all estimates of percent cover. The habitat diver then estimates, for each quadrat, the height (in cm) of the hardbottom from the substrate to get a sense of bottom relief. Note: Height is collected for all hardbottom substrates, excluding rubble; height is not collected for softbottom substrate.
6) Biotic footprint - defined as the percent cover (to the nearest 0.1 percent) of algae, seagrass, live corals, sponges, gorgonians, and other biota (tunicates, anemones, zooanthids, and hydroids) within each quadrat position. The remaining cover is recorded as bare substrate to bring the total to 100 percent. Again, the diver must use a planar view to estimate percent cover of the biota. Seagrasses and gorgonians should not be stacked upright. For example, if a single seagrass blade crosses 10 squares, then total seagrass coverage should be the sum of the area taken up by that blade in all 10 squares instead of the area covered if the blade was held upright. Species covering less than 0.1 percent of the area are not recorded. Taxa are identified to the following levels: stony coral-species, algae-morphological group (macro, turf, crustose, rhodolith, filamentous, cyanobacteria), sponge-morphological group, and gorgonians-morphological group. When estimating percent cover, it is important to realize there is a balance between precision and time. For stony corals, the approximate area covered by living coral tissue is recorded. Coral skeleton (without living tissue) is usually categorized as turf algae or uncolonized substrate. Data on the condition of coral colonies are also recorded. When coral is noticeably bleached, the entire colony is considered affected and is recorded to the nearest 0.1 percent. Coral colonies are reported as entirely bleached if they contain any portion of white, blotchy, mottled, or pale tissue. This protocol assumes stress throughout the colony and estimates maximum bleaching impact. Diseased/dead coral refers to coral skeleton that has recently lost living tissue because of disease or damage that is still visible, and has not yet been colonized by turf algae. Turf algae include a mix of short (less than 1cm high) algae that colonize dead coral substrate.
7) Maximum canopy height - for each soft biota type (e.g., gorgonians, seagrass, algae), structure is recorded to the nearest 1cm at the quadrat level.
8) Number of individuals - for sponges, gorgonians and "other" biota type (non-encrusting anemones and non-encrusting hydroids) the number of individuals at the quadrat level is recorded.
9) Rugosity - measured by placing a 6-m chain at two randomly selected positions along the 25m belt transect. The chain is placed such that it follows the substrate's relief along the centerline of the belt transect. Two divers measure the straight-line horizontal distance covered by the chain. The chain is placed on top of any hard substrate encountered, but not on top of soft corals or sponges since we are measuring hard bottom rugosity. Data on rugosity are collected for reef sites only. Rugosity measurements typically are made by the point-count and belt-transect divers while awaiting the completion of other benthic habitat measurements by the habitat diver. Upon completion of the dive, the rugosity data are transferred from the fish data sheet to the habitat data sheet by the habitat diver.
10) Abundance and maturity of queen conchs (Strombus gigas) - a count of the total number of conch encountered within the 25 x 4m belt transect are enumerated. The maturity of each conch is determined by the presence or absence of a flared lip and labeled mature or immature, respectively. If conch abundance is counted by a fish diver, the data are then reported to the habitat diver. The decision of who will collect conch data should be made prior to entering the water.
11) Abundance of spiny lobsters (Panilaurus argus) - a count of the total number of lobsters encountered within the 25 x 4m belt transect. No measurements are taken. If lobster abundance is counted by a fish diver, the data are then reported to the habitat diver. The decision of who will collect lobster data should be made prior to entering the water.
12) Abundance of long-spined urchin (Diadema antillarum) - a count of the total number of urchins encountered within the 25 x 4m belt transect. No measurements are taken. If urchin abundance is counted by a fish diver, the data are then reported to the habitat diver. The decision of who will collect urchin data should be made prior to entering the water.
NOTE: If rugosity, conch, lobster or urchin data are collected by a fish diver, data must be transferred to the habitat data sheet. The habitat diver is responsible for transferring the data to their data sheet; however, the fish diver should assist the habitat diver with this task by reporting the data once the dive concludes.
13) Marine debris - type of marine debris within the transect is noted. The size of the marine debris and the area of affected habitat is also recorded along with a note identifying any flora or fauna that has colonized the debris.
14) Photography - the point count or habitat diver will take at least two photos in different directions at each site to maintain an anecdotal and permanent visual description of the sites that were sampled. Proper care and maintenance is necessary for all camera and camera housings. It is important to maintain the cameras and housings before, after and in between dives.
Data Caveats: Overtime, some changes were made to the stratified random site selection process as follows: 1) Habitat strata initially consisted of hard bottom, sand, and seagrass. Sand and seagrass strata were subsequently combined into one soft bottom strata at all three locations (Puerto Rico, St. Croix, and St. John). This action was taken after the February 2002 mission to Puerto Rico. 2) A small subset of sites were resampled during each mission through June 2002 in Puerto Rico and October 2002 in St. Croix. These station names contain the letter 'P' indicating they are permanent stations. 3) The sample area in St. Croix has increased over time. Initially, samples were collected within historic Buck Island National Monument boundaries as well as outside up to a distance of 0.5 km from those boundaries. In February 2002 the sampling effort was increased to include the entire expanded monument boundaries. Finally in April 2003 the effort was increased again to include areas outside of the Monument for control sites. This area is now almost entirely enclosed within the East End Marine Park of St. Croix. 4) The habitat map utilized to stratify the samples in St. Croix was changed from the original habitat map created with a 1 acre minimum mapping unit to one with a 100m2 minimum mapping unit beginning with the April 2003 mission. 5) In 2007, algae data collection changed from identification of each alga to the genus level to grouping algae into six morphological groups: macro, turf, crustose, filamentous, rhodolith, and cyanobacteria for more efficient data collection. 6) Shelter characteristics ceased being recorded at the end of 2006. 7) Marine debris data collection began in 2007. 8) The spring St. Croix mission was cancelled in 2007, therefore only one mission was conducted that year. 9) Beginning in 2010, missions to St. Croix was reduced from twice per year (March/April and October) to once per year (October only).
Although the 1m-square-quadrat remained the basic method of choice for habitat data collection, overtime, changes in data collection methods were made for some habitat variables and several additional variables were added. These changes were deemed necessary to capture more precise information and as many variables as possible to explain better the observed variability in reef fish assemblage metrics. Detailed information on all changes to the protocols for collecting habitat data in St. Croix can be found at: <http://ccma.nos.noaa.gov/ecosystems/corealreef/reef_fish/protocols.html>
Process Date: 200102 - Present
These data consists of multiple fish community surveys across all nearshore marine habitats around St. Croix, US Virgin Islands. Sites were randomly selected and stratified across by habitat types using NOAA's benthic habitat maps of St. Croix, USVI.
Are there legal restrictions on access or use of the data?
- Access_Constraints: None
- Please reference NOAA/NOS/NCCOS/CCMA/Biogeography Branch when utilizing these data in a report or peer reviewed publication. Additionally, knowledge of how this dataset has been of use and which organizations are utilizing it is of great benefit for ensuring this information continues to meet the needs of the management and research communities. Therefore, it is requested but not mandatory, that any user of this data supply this information to the Program Manager: Kimberly Roberson (email: Kimberly.email@example.com).
These data were prepared by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, make any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference therein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. Any views and opinions expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof. Although all data have been used by NOAA, no warranty, expressed or implied, is made by NOAA as to the accuracy of the data and/or related materials. The act of distribution shall not constitute any such warranty, and no responsibility is assumed by NOAA in the use of these data or related materials.
|Data format:||tab delimited text file|

TamarinsTamarins live in the rainforests of South America. They are endangered because of deforestation, that is an indicator showing that tamarins are endangered because of the same reason pygmy marmosets are threatened. Pygmy marmosets could be endangered easily. Tamarins have the same diet of sap, fruit, small insects and small buds. Tamarins usually have twins and the father and siblings assist in caring for the babies.
Slightly smaller than squirrels, tamarins are commonly called kings of the jungle because manes around their neck make them look like lions. The lion tamarins are related to pygmy marmosets. They are 12 inches tall not including their tail which can reach up to 17 inches long, and weigh up to 2 pounds. Tamarins jump through trees using their fingers to hold onto branches. Tamarins live in family groups. Parents mate once a year producing 2 offspring per birth. Tamarins live in the eastern forests of Brazil. Tamarins are diurnal. They are sensitive to sunlight so in the day they stay in the dense forests. Tamarins are omnivores. They spend most of their day looking for food like fruits, insects, small lizards, and snakes.
Golden Lion Tamarin
Golden lion Tamarins are about 8-13 inches long not including the tail. If you include the tail they are about 21-26 inches long. The golden lion tamarin lives for 10-15 years
Cotton Top tamarin
Cotton Top tamarins are about 6-12 inches long, with tail being almost 16 inches! Their fur is dark brown and they have white tuft of hair on the top of their heads. Cotton Top Tamarins live for about 16 years.

Earthquake off the Coast of Venezuela
A strong earthquake struck off the Venezuelan coast on September 12, 2009. The magnitude 6.3 earthquake occurred underneath the Caribbean Sea near the city of Puerto Cabello. According to reports from Reuters some buildings in the Venezuelan countryside were damaged, but there were few injuries.
The United States Geological Survey indicated that the earthquake epicenter was in the region of the San Sebastián and El Pilar faults, both of which are seismically active. The fault zone is near the boundary of the South American and Caribbean tectonic plates. The Caribbean plate is moving 20 millimeters (0.8 inches) per year with respect to the South American Plate. Previous earthquakes in the region occurred in 1989 and 1967.
This image originally appeared on the Earth Observatory. Click here to view the full, original record.

Publisher Council on Foreign Relations
Release Date Last Updated: May 21, 2013
Scope of the Challenge
Oceans are the source of life on earth. They shape the climate, feed the world, and cleanse the air we breathe. They are vital to our economic well being, ferrying roughly 90 percent of global commerce, housing submarine cables, and providing one-third of traditional hydrocarbon resources (as well as new forms of energy such as wave, wind, and tidal power). But the oceans are increasingly threatened by a dizzying array of dangers, from piracy to climate change. To be good stewards of the oceans, nations around the world need to embrace more effective multilateral governance in the economic, security, and environmental realms.
The world's seas have always been farmed from top to bottom. New technologies, however, are making old practices unsustainable. When commercial trawlers scrape the sea floor, they bulldoze entire ecosystems. Commercial ships keep to the surface but produce carbon-based emissions. And recent developments like offshore drilling and deep seabed mining are helping humans extract resources from unprecedented depths, albeit with questionable environmental impact. And as new transit routes open in the melting Arctic, this once-forgotten pole is emerging as a promising frontier for entrepreneurial businesses and governments.
But oceans are more than just sources of profit—they also serve as settings for transnational crime. Piracy, drug smuggling, and illegal immigration all occur in waters around the world. Even the most sophisticated ports struggle to screen cargo, containers, and crews without creating regulatory friction or choking legitimate commerce. In recent history, the United States has policed the global commons, but growing Indian and Chinese blue-water navies raise new questions about how an established security guarantor should accommodate rising—and increasingly assertive—naval powers.
And the oceans themselves are in danger of environmental catastrophe. They have become the world's garbage dump—if you travel to the heart of the Pacific Ocean, you'll find the North Pacific Gyre, where particles of plastic outweigh plankton six to one. Eighty percent of the world's fish stocks are depleted or on the verge of extinction, and when carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere, much of it is absorbed by the world's oceans. The water, in response, warms and acidifies, destroying habitats like wetlands and coral reefs. Glacial melting in the polar regions raises global sea levels, which threatens not only marine ecosystems but also humans who live on or near a coast. Meanwhile, port-based megacities dump pollution in the ocean, exacerbating the degradation of the marine environment and the effects of climate change.
Threats to the ocean are inherently transnational, touching the shores of every part of the world. So far, the most comprehensive attempt to govern international waters produced the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). But U.S. refusal to join the convention, despite widespread bipartisan support, continues to limit its strength, creating a leadership vacuum in the maritime regime. Other states that have joined the treaty often ignore its guidelines or fail to coordinate policies across sovereign jurisdictions. Even if it were perfectly implemented, UNCLOS is now thirty years old and increasingly outdated.
Important initiatives—such as local fishery arrangements and the United Nations Environment Program Regional Seas Program—form a disjointed landscape that lacks legally-binding instruments to legitimize or enforce their work. The recent UN Conference on Sustainable Development ("Rio+20") in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, convened over one hundred heads of state to assess progress and outline goals for a more sustainable "blue-green economy." However, the opportunity to set actionable targets to improve oceans security and biodiversity produced few concrete outcomes. As threats to the oceans become more pressing, nations around the world need to rally to create and implement an updated form of oceans governance.
Oceans Governance: Strengths and Weaknesses
Overall assessment: A fragmented system
In 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) established the fundamental legal principles for ocean governance. This convention, arguably the largest and most complex treaty ever negotiated, entered into force in 1994. Enshrined as a widely accepted corpus of international common law, UNCLOS clearly enumerates the rights, responsibilities, and jurisdictions of states in their use and management of the world's oceans. The treaty defines "exclusive economic zones" (EEZs), which is the coastal water and seabed—extending two hundred nautical miles from shore—over which a state has special rights over the use of marine resources; establishes the limits of a country's "territorial sea," or the sovereign territory of a state that extends twelve nautical miles from shore; and clarifies rules for transit through "international straits." It also addresses—with varying degrees of effectiveness—resource division, maritime traffic, and pollution regulation, as well as serves as the principal forum for dispute resolution on ocean-related issues. To date, 162 countries and the European Union have ratified UNCLOS.
UNCLOS is a remarkable achievement, but its resulting oceans governance regime suffers several serious limitations. First, the world's leading naval power, the United States, is not party to the convention, which presents obvious challenges to its effectiveness—as well as undermines U.S. sovereignty, national interests, and ability to exercise leadership over resource management and dispute resolution. Despite the myriad military, economic, and political benefits offered by UNCLOS, a small but vocal minority in the United States continues to block congressional ratification.
Second, UNCLOS is now thirty years old and, as a result, does not adequately address a number of emerging and increasingly important international issues, such as fishing on the high seas—a classic case of the tragedy of the commons—widespread maritime pollution, and transnational crime committed at sea.
Third, both UNCLOS and subsequent multilateral measures have weak surveillance, capacity-building, and enforcement mechanisms. Although various UN bodies support the instruments created by UNCLOS, they have no direct role in their implementation. Individual states are responsible for ensuring that the convention's rules are enforced, which presents obvious challenges in areas of overlapping or contested sovereignty, or effectively stateless parts of the world. The UN General Assembly plays a role in advancing the oceans agenda at the international level, but its recommendations are weak and further constrained by its lack of enforcement capability.
Organizations that operate in conjunction with UNCLOS—such as the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), and the International Seabed Authority (ISA)—play an important role to protect the oceans and strengthen oceans governance. The IMO has helped reduce ship pollution to historically low levels, although it can be slow to enact new policy on issues such as invasive species, which are dispersed around the world in ballast water. Furthermore, ITLOS only functions if member states are willing to submit their differences to its judgment, while the ISA labors in relative obscurity and operates under intense pressure from massive commercial entities.
Fourth, coastal states struggle to craft domestic policies that incorporate the many interconnected challenges faced by oceans, from transnational drug smuggling to protecting ravaged fish stocks to establishing proper regulatory measures for offshore oil and gas drilling. UNCLOS forms a solid platform on which to build additional policy architecture, but requires coastal states to first make comprehensive oceans strategy a priority—a goal that has remained elusive thus far.
Fifth, the system is horizontally fragmented and fails to harmonize domestic, regional, and international policies. Domestically, local, state, and federal maritime actors rarely coordinate their agendas and priorities. Among the handful of countries and regional organizations that have comprehensive ocean policies—including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, the European Union, and most recently the United States—few synchronize their activities with other countries. The international community, however, is attempting to organize the cluttered oceans governance landscape. The UN Environmental Programme Regional Seas Program works to promote interstate cooperation for marine and coastal management, albeit with varying degrees of success and formal codification. Likewise, in 2007 the European Union instituted a regional Integrated Maritime Policy (IMP) that addresses a range of environmental, social, and economic issues related to oceans, as well as promotes surveillance and information sharing. The IMP also works with neighboring partners to create an integrated oceans policy in places such as the Arctic, the Baltic, and the Mediterranean.
Lastly, there is no global evaluation framework to assess progress. No single institution is charged with monitoring and collecting national, regional, and global data on the full range of oceans-related issues, particularly on cross-cutting efforts. Periodic data collecting does take place in specific sectors, such as biodiversity conservation, fisheries issues, and marine pollution, but critical gaps remain. The Global Ocean Observing System is a promising portal for tracking marine and ocean developments, but it is significantly underfunded. Without concrete and reliable data, it is difficult to craft effective policies that address and mitigate emerging threats.
Despite efforts, oceans continue to deteriorate and a global leadership vacuum persists. Much work remains to modernize existing institutions and conventions to respond effectively to emerging threats, as well as to coordinate national actions within and across regions. The June 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development , also known as Rio+20, identified oceans (or the "blue economy") as one of the seven priority areas for sustainable development. Although experts and activists hoped for a new agreement to strengthen the sustainable management and protection of oceans and address modern maritime challenges such as conflicting sovereignty claims, international trade, and access to resources, Rio+20 produced few concrete results.
Maintaining freedom of the seas: Guaranteed by U.S. power, increasingly contested by emerging states
The United States polices every ocean throughout the world. The U.S. navy is unmatched in its ability to provide strategic stability on, under, and above the world's waters. With almost three hundred active naval ships and almost four thousand aircraft, its battle fleet tonnage is greater than the next thirteen largest navies combined. Despite recently proposed budget cuts to aircraft carriers, U.S. naval power continues to reign supreme.
The United States leverages its naval capabilities to ensure peace, stability, and freedom of access. As Great Britain ensured a Pax Britannicain the nineteenth century, the United States presides over relatively tranquil seas where global commerce is allowed to thrive. In 2007, the U.S. Navy released a strategy report that called for "cooperative relationships with more international partners" to promote "greater collective security, stability, and trust."
The United States pursues this strategy because it has not faced a credible competitor since the end of the Cold War. And, thus far, emerging powers have largely supported the U.S. armada to ensure that the oceans remain open to commerce. However, emerging powers with blue-water aspirations raise questions about how U.S. naval hegemony will accommodate new and assertive fleets in the coming decades. China, for instance, has been steadily building up its naval capabilities over the past decade as part of its "far sea defense" strategy. It unveiled its first aircraft carrier in 2010, and is investing heavily in submarines outfitted with ballistic missiles. At the same time, India has scaled up its military budget by 64 percent since 2001, and plans to spend nearly $45 billion over the next twenty years on its navy.
Even tensions among rising powers could prove problematic. For example, a two-month standoff between China and the Philippines over a disputed region of the South China Sea ended with both parties committing to a "peaceful resolution."China, Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, and the Philippines have competing territorial and jurisdictional claims to the South China Sea, particularly over rights to exploit its potentially vast oil and gas reserves. Control over strategic shipping lanes and freedom of navigation are also increasingly contested, especially between the United States and China.
Combating illicit trafficking: Porous, patchy enforcement
In addition to being a highway for legal commerce, oceans facilitate the trafficking of drugs, weapons, and humans, which are often masked by the flow of licit goods. Individual states are responsible for guarding their own coastlines, but often lack the will or capacity to do so. Developing countries, in particular, struggle to coordinate across jurisdictions and interdict. But developed states also face border security challenges. Despite its commitment to interdiction, the United States seizes less than 20 percent of the drugs that enter the country by maritime transport.
The United Nations attempts to combat the trafficking of drugs, weapons, and humans at sea. Through the Container Control Program (PDF), the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) assists domestic law enforcement in five developing countries to establish effective container controls to prevent maritime drug smuggling. The UNODC also oversees UN activity on human trafficking, guided by two protocols to the UN Convention on Transnational Organized Crime. Although UN activity provides important groundwork for preventing illicit maritime trafficking, it lacks monitoring and enforcement mechanisms and thus has a limited impact on the flow of illegal cargo into international ports. Greater political will, state capacity, and multilateral coordination will be required to curb illicit maritime trafficking.
New ad hoc multilateral arrangements are a promising model for antitrafficking initiatives. The International Ship and Port Facility Security Code, for instance, provides a uniform set of measures to enhance the security of ships and ports. The code helps member states control their ports and monitor both the people and cargo that travel through them. In addition, the U.S.-led Proliferation Security Initiative facilitates international cooperation to interdict ships on the high seas that may be carrying illicit weapons of mass destruction, ballistic missiles, and related technology. Finally, the Container Security Initiative (CSI), also spearheaded by the United States, attempts to prescreen all containers destined for U.S. ports and identify high-risk cargo (for more information, see section on commercial shipping).
One way to combat illicit trafficking is through enhanced regional arrangements, such as the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control. This agreement provides a model for an effective regional inspections regime, examining at least 25 percent of ships that enter members' ports for violations of conventions on maritime safety. Vessels that violate conventions can be detained and repeat offenders can be banned from the memorandum's area. Although the agreement does not permit searching for illegal cargo, it does show how a regional inspections regime could be effective at stemming illegal trafficking.
Securing commercial shipping: Global supply chains at risk
Global shipping is incredibly lucrative, but its sheer scope and breadth presents an array of security and safety challenges. The collective fleet consists of approximately 50,000 ships registered in more than 150 nations. With more than one million employees, this armada transports over eight billion tons (PDF) of goods per year—roughly 90 percent of global trade. And the melting Arctic is opening previously impassable trade routes; in 2009, two German merchant vessels traversed the Northeast Passage successfully for the first time in recent history. But despite impressive innovations in the shipping industry, maritime accidents and attacks on ships still occur frequently, resulting in the loss of billions of dollars of cargo. Ensuring the safety and security of the global shipping fleet is essential to the stability of the world economy.
Internationally, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) provides security guidelines for ships through the Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea, which governs everything from construction to the number of fire extinguishers on board. The IMO also aims to prevent maritime accidents through international standards for navigation and navigation equipment, including satellite communications and locating devices. Although compliance with these conventions has been uneven, regional initiatives such as the Paris Memorandum of Understanding have helped ensure the safety of international shipping.
In addition, numerous IMO conventions govern the safety of container shipping, including the International Convention on Safe Containers, which creates uniform regulations for shipping containers, and the International Convention on Load Lines, which determines the volume of containers a ship can safely hold. However, these conventions do not provide comprehensive security solutions for maritime containers, and illegal cargo could be slipped into shipping containers during transit. Since 1992, the IMO has tried to prevent attacks on commercial shipping through the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, which provides a legal framework for interdicting, detaining, and prosecuting terrorists, pirates, and other criminals on the high seas.
In reality, most enforcement efforts since the 9/11 attacks have focused on securing ports to prevent the use of a ship to attack, rather than to prevent attacks on the ships themselves. Reflecting this imperative, the IMO, with U.S. leadership, implemented the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS) in 2004. This code helped set international standards for ship security, requiring ships to have security plans and officers. However, as with port security, the code is not obligatory and no clear process to audit or certify ISPS compliance has been established. Overall, a comprehensive regime for overseeing the safety of international shipping has not been created.
The United States attempts to address this vulnerability through the Container Security Initiative (CSI), which aims to prescreen all containers destined for the United States, and to isolate those that pose a high-security risk before they are in transit. The initiative, which operates in fifty-eight foreign ports, covers more than 86 percent of container cargo en route to the United States. Several international partners and organizations, including the European Union, the Group of Eight, and the World Customs Organization, have expressed interest in modeling security measures for containerized cargo based on the CSI model. Despite these efforts, experts estimate that only 2 percent of containers destined for U.S. ports are actually inspected.
Confronting piracy: Resurgent scourge, collective response
After the number of attacks reached a record high in 2011, incidences of piracy dropped 28 percent in the first three months of 2012. Overall, the number of worldwide attacks decreased from 142 to 102 cases, primarily due to international mobilization and enhanced naval patrols off the coast of Somalia. However, attacks intensified near Nigeria and Indonesia as pirates shifted routes in response to increased policing, raising fresh concerns over the shifting and expanding threat of piracy. In addition to the human toll, piracy has significant economic ramifications. According to a report by the nonprofit organization Oceans Beyond Piracy, Somali piracy cost the global economy nearly $7 billion in 2011. Sustained international coordination and cooperation is essential to preventing and prosecuting piracy.
Recognizing this imperative, countries from around the world have shown unprecedented cooperation to combat piracy, particularly near the Gulf of Aden. In August 2009, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization commenced Operation Ocean Shield in the horn of Africa, where piracy increased close to 200 percent between 2007 and 2009. This effort built upon Operation Allied Protector and consisted of two standing maritime groups with contributions from allied nations. Although the efforts concentrate on protecting ships passing through the Gulf of Aden, they also renewed focus on helping countries, specifically Somalia, prevent piracy and secure their ports. Meanwhile, the United States helped establish Combined Task Force 151 to coordinate the various maritime patrols in East Africa. Other countries including Russia, India, China, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, and South Korea, have also sent naval vessels to the region.
At the same time, regional organizations have also stepped up antipiracy efforts. The Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia was the first such initiatives, and has been largely successful in facilitating information-sharing, cooperation between governments, and interdiction efforts. And in May 2012, the European Union naval force launched its first air attack against Somali pirates' land bases, the first strike of its kind by outside actors to date.
Like individual countries, international institutions have condemned piracy and legitimized the use of force against pirates. In June 2008, the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1816, encouraging greater cooperation in deterring piracy and asking countries to provide assistance to Somalia to help ensure coastal security. This was followed by Resolution 1846, which allowed states to use "all necessary means" to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia. In Resolution 1851, the UN Security Council legitimized the use of force on land as well as at sea to the same end. Outside the UN, watchdogs such as the International Maritime Bureau, which collects information on pirate attacks and provides reports on the safety of shipping routes, have proven successful in increasing awareness, disseminating information, and facilitating antipiracy cooperation.
However, such cooperative efforts face several legal challenges. The United States has not ratified the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which governs crimes, including piracy, in international waters. More broadly, the international legal regime continues to rely on individual countries to prosecute pirates, and governments have been reluctant to take on this burden. Accordingly, many pirates are apprehended, only to be quickly released. In addition, many large commercial vessels rely on private armed guards to prevent pirate attacks, but the legal foundations governing such a force are shaky at best.
National governments have redoubled efforts to bring pirates to justice as well. In 2010, the United States held its first piracy trial since its civil war, soon followed by Germany's first trial in over four hundred years. Other agreements have been established to try pirates in nearby countries like Kenya, such as the UNODC Trust Fund to Support the Initiatives of States to Counter Piracy of the Coast of Somalia, established in January 2010. Under the mandate of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, the fund aims to defray the financial capital required from countries like Kenya, Seychelles, and Somalia to prosecute pirates, as well as to increase awareness within Somali society of the risk associated with piracy and criminal activity. Future efforts to combat piracy should continue to focus on enhancing regional cooperation and agreements, strengthening the international and domestic legal instruments necessary to prosecute pirates, and addressing the root causes of piracy.
Reducing marine pollution and climate change: Mixed progress
Pollution has degraded environments and ravaged biodiversity in every ocean. Much contamination stems from land-based pollutants, particularly along heavily developed coastal areas. The UN Environment Program (UNEP) Regional Seas Program has sponsored several initiatives to control pollution, modeled on a relatively successful program in the Mediterranean Sea. In 1995, states established the Global Program of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-Based Activities, which identifies sources of land-based pollution and helps states establish priorities for action. It has been successful in raising awareness about land-based pollution and offering technical assistance to regional implementing bodies, which are so often starved for resources. More recently, 193 UN member states approved the Nagoya Protocol on biodiversity, which aims to halve the marine extinction rate by 2020 and extend protection to 10 percent of the world's oceans.
Shipping vessels are also a major source of marine pollution. Shipping is the most environmentally friendly way to transport bulk cargoes, but regulating maritime pollution remains complicated because of its inherently transnational nature. Shipping is generally governed by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), which regulates maritime pollution through the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). States are responsible for implementing and enforcing MARPOL among their own fleets to curb the most pernicious forms of maritime pollution, including oil spills, particulate matter such as sulfur oxide (SOx) and nitrous oxide (NOx), and greenhouse gas emissions. Port cities bear the brunt of air pollution, which devastates local air quality because most ships burn bunker fuel (the dirtiest form of crude oil). The IMO's Marine Environmental Protection Committee has also taken important steps to reduce SOx and NOx emissions by amending the MARPOL guidelines to reduce particulate matter from ships. Despite such efforts, a 2010 study (PDF) from the Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation found that international shipping still accounts for nearly 3 percent of all greenhouse gasses.
The IMO has achieved noteworthy success in reducing oil spilled into the marine environment. Despite a global shipping boom, oil spills are at an all-time low. The achievements of the IMO have been further strengthened by commitments by the Group of Eight to cooperate on oil pollution through an action plan that specifically targets pollution prevention for tankers. The IMO should strive to replicate this success in its efforts to reduce shipping emissions.
Climate change is also exacerbating environmental damage. In June 2009, global oceans reached their highest recordedaverage temperature: 17 degrees Celsius. As the world warms, oceans absorb increased levels of carbon dioxide, which acidifies the water and destroys wetlands, mangroves, and coral reefs—ecosystems that support millions of species of plants and animals. According to recent studies, ocean acidity could increase by more than 150 percent by 2050 if counteracting measures are not taken immediately. Moreover, melting ice raises sea levels, eroding beaches, flooding communities, and increasing the salinity of freshwater bodies. And the tiny island nation of the Maldives, the lowest country in the world, could be completely flooded if sea levels continue to rise at the same rate.
Individual states are responsible for managing changes in their own marine climates, but multilateral efforts to mitigate the effect of climate change on the oceans have picked up pace. In particular, the UNEP Regional Seas Program encourages countries sharing common bodies of water to coordinate and implement sound environmental policies, and promotes a regional approach to address climate change.
Sustainable fisheries policies on the high seas: An ecological disaster
States have the legal right to regulate fishing in their exclusive economic zones (EEZs), which extend two hundred nautical miles from shore—and sometimes beyond, in the case of extended continental shelves. But outside the EEZs are the high seas, which do not fall under any one country's jurisdiction. Freedom of the high seas is critical to the free flow of global commerce, but spells disaster for international fisheries in a textbook case of the tragedy of the commons. For years, large-scale fishing vessels harvested fish as fast as possible with little regard for the environmental costs, destroying 90 percent of the ocean's biomass in less than a century. Overall, fisheries suffer from two sets of challenges: ineffective enforcement capacity and lack of market-based governance solutions to remedy perverse incentives to overfish.
Although there are numerous international and multilateral mechanisms for fisheries management, the system is marred by critical gaps and weaknesses exploited by illegal fishing vessels. Articles 117 and 118 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) enumerate the specific fisheries responsibilities of state parties, placing the onus on national governments to form policies and regional agreements that ensure responsible management and conservation of fish stocks in their respective areas. UNCLOS was further strengthened by the UN Fish Stocks Agreement (FSA), which called for a precautionary approach toward highly migratory and straddling fish stocks that move freely in and out of the high seas. Seventy-eight countries have joined the FSA thus far, and a review conference in May 2010 was hailed as a success due to the passage of Port State Measures (PSMs) to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. Yet fish stocks have continued to stagnate or decline to dangerously low levels, and the PSMs have largely failed to prevent IUU operations.
Regional fishery bodies (RFBs) are charged with implementation and monitoring. The RFBs provide guidelines and advice on a variety of issues related to fishing, including total allowable catch, by-catch, vessel monitoring systems, areas or seasons closed for fishing, and recording and reporting fishery statistics. However, only a portion of these bodies oversee the management of their recommendations, and some RFBs allow members to unilaterally dismiss unfavorable decisions. Additionally, RFBs are not comprehensive in their membership and, for the most part, their rules do not apply to vessels belonging to a state outside the body.
Even when regional bodies make a binding decision on a high-seas case, implementation hinges on state will and capacity. In 2003, the UN General Assembly established a fund to assist developing countries with their obligations to implement the Fish Stocks Agreement through RFBs. The overall value of the fund remains small, however, and countries' compliance is often constrained by resource scarcity. This results in spotty enforcement, which allows vessels to violate international standards with impunity, particularly off the coasts of weak states. Migratory species like blue fin tuna are especially vulnerable because they are not confined by jurisdictional boundaries and have high commercial value.
Some of the RFBs with management oversight, such as the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization, have been relatively effective in curbing overfishing. They have developed oversight systems and specific measures to target deep-water trawl fishing and illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing in the high seas. Many regional cooperative arrangements, however, continue to suffer from weak regulatory authority. At the same time, some regions like the central and southwest Atlantic Ocean lack RFBs. Some have suggested filling the void with market-based solutions like catch shares, which could theoretically alter the incentives toward stewardship. Catch shares (also known as limited access privilege programs) reward innovation and help fisheries maximize efficiency by dedicating a stock of fish to an individual fisherman, community, fishery association, or an individual state. Each year before the beginning of fishing season, commercial fishermen would know how much fish they are allowed to catch. They would then be allowed to buy and sell shares to maximize profit. By incorporating free-market principles, fisheries could reach a natural equilibrium at a sustainable level. According to research, more sustainable catch shares policies could increase the value of the fishing industry by more than $36 billion. Although allocating the shares at the domestic—much less international—level remains problematic, the idea reflects of the kind of policy work required to better manage the global commons.
Managing the Arctic: At a crossroads
Arctic ice is melting at unprecedented rates. At this pace, experts estimate that the Arctic could be seasonally ice free by 2040, and possibly much earlier. As the ice recedes and exposes valuable new resources, multilateral coordination will become even more important among states (and indigenous groups) jockeying for position in the region.
The melting ice is opening up potentially lucrative new sea routes and stores of natural resources. Since September 2009, cargo ships have been able to traverse the fabled Northwest and Northeast Passages, which are significantly shorter than traditional routes around the capes or through the canals. Widening sea routes also means that fishing fleets can travel north in search of virgin fishing stock, and that cruise ships can carry tourists chasing a last glimpse of the disappearing ice. At the same time, untapped resources such as oil, natural gas, rare earth minerals, and massive renewable wind, tidal, and geothermal energy hold enormous potential. In a preliminary estimate, the U.S. Geographic Society said that the Arctic could hold 22 percent of the world's hydrocarbon resources, including 90 billion barrels of oil and 1,670 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. Beyond oil and gas, the Arctic has valuable mineral commodities such as zinc, nickel, and coal.
But new opportunities in the Arctic also portend new competition among states. In August 2007, Russia symbolically planted a flag on the Arctic floor, staking a claim to large chunks of Arctic land. Other Arctic powers including the United States, Canada, Norway, and Denmark have also laid geographical claims. The European Union crafted a new Arctic policy, and China sent an icebreaker on three separate Arctic expeditions. Each country stands poised to grab new treasure in this increasingly important geostrategic region.
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) is a solid foundation on which to build and coordinate national Arctic policies, especially articles 76 and 234, which govern the limits of the outer continental shelf (OCS) and regulate activities in ice-covered waters, respectively. However, there remains a formidable list of nagging sovereignty disputes that will require creative bilateral and multilateral resolutions. The Arctic Council, a multilateral forum comprising eight Arctic nations, has recently grown in international prominence, signing a legally binding treaty on search and rescue missions in May 2011 and drawing high-level policymakers to its meetings. While these are significant first steps, the forum has yet to address other issues such as overlapping OCS claims, contested maritime boundaries, and the legal status of the Northwest Passage and the Northern Sea Route.
U.S. Ocean Governance Issues
The United States championed many of the most important international maritime organizations over the past fifty years. It helped shape the decades-long process of negotiating the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and has played a leading role in many UNCLOS-related bodies, including the International Maritime Organization. It has also served as a driving force behind regional fisheries organizations and Coast Guard forums. Domestically, the United States has intermittently been at the vanguard of ocean policy, such as the 1969 Stratton Commission report, multiple conservation acts in the 1970s, the Joint Ocean Commission Initiative, and, most recently, catch limits on all federally-managed fish species. The U.S.-based Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the Monterrey Bay Research Institute have long been leaders in marine science worldwide. And from a geopolitical perspective, the U.S. Navy secures the world's oceans and fosters an environment where global commerce can thrive.
Yet the United States lags behind on important issues, most notably regarding its reluctance to ratify UNCLOS. And until recently, the United States did not have a coherent national oceans policy. To address this gap, U.S. president Barack Obama created the Ocean Policy Task Force in 2009 to coordinate maritime issues across local, state, and federal levels, and to provide a strategic vision for how oceans should be managed in the United States. The task force led to the creation of a National Ocean Council, which is responsible for "developing strategic action plans to achieve nine priority objectives that address some of the most pressing challenges facing the ocean, our coasts, and Great Lakes." Although it has yet to make serious gains (PDF), this comprehensive oceans policy framework could help clear the way for the spadework of coordinating U.S. ocean governance and harmonizing international efforts.
Should the United States ratify the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea?
Yes: The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which created the governance framework that manages nearly three-quarters of the earth's surface, has been signed and ratified by 162 countries and the European Union. But the United States remains among only a handful of countries to have signed but not yet ratified the treaty—even though it already treats many of the provisions as customary international law. Leaders on both sides of the political aisle as well as environmental, conservation, business, industry, and security groups have endorsed ratification in order to preserve national security interests and reap its myriad benefits, such as securing rights for U.S. commercial and naval ships and boosting the competitiveness of U.S. companies in seafaring activities. Notably, all of the uniformed services—and especially the U.S. Navy—strongly support UNCLOS because its provisions would only serve to strengthen U.S. military efforts. By remaining a nonparty, the United States lacks the credibility to promote its own interests in critical decision-making forums as well as bring complaints to an international dispute resolution body.
No: Opponents argue that ratifying the treaty would cede sovereignty to an ineffective United Nations and constrain U.S. military and commercial activities. In particular, critics object to specific provisions including taxes on activities on outer continental shelves; binding dispute settlements; judicial activism by the Law of the Sea Tribunal, especially with regard to land-based sources of pollution; and the perceived ability of UNCLOS to curtail U.S. intelligence-gathering activities. Lastly, critics argue that because UNCLOS is already treated as customary international law, the United States has little to gain from formal accession.
Should the United States lead an initiative to expand the Container Security Initiative globally?
Yes: Some experts say the only way to secure a global economic system is to implement a global security solution. The U.S.-led Container Security Initiative (CSI) helps ensure that high-risk containers are identified and isolated before they reach their destination. Fifty-eight countries are already on board with the initiative, and many others have expressed interest in modeling their own security measures on the CSI. The World Customs Organization called on its members to develop programs based on the CSI, and the European Union agreed to expand the initiative across its territory. With its robust operational experience, the United States is well positioned to provide the technical expertise to ensure the integrity of the container system.
No: Opponents maintain that the United States can hardly commit its tax dollars abroad for a global security system when it has failed to secure its own imports. To date, more than $800 million and considerable diplomatic energy has been invested in CSI to expand the program to fifty-eight international ports, where agents are stationed to screen high-risk containers. Given the scale of world trade, the United States imports more than 10 million containers annually, and only a handful of high-risk boxes can be targeted for inspection. After huge expenditures and years of hard work to expand this program after September 11, 2001, only about 86 percent of the cargo that enters the United States transits through foreign ports covered under CSI, and of that, only about 1 percent is actually inspected (at a cost to the U.S. taxpayer of more than $1,000 per container). Despite congressional mandates to screen all incoming containers, critics say that costs make implementing this mandate virtually impossible. The limited resources the United States has available, they argue, should be invested in protecting imports bound specifically for its shores.
Should the United States be doing more to address the drastic decline in the world's fisheries?
Yes: Advocates say that the further demise of global fish stocks, beyond being a moral burden, undermines the commercial and national security interests of the United States. Depleting fish stocks are driven in large part by the prevalence of illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing and the overcapitalization of the global commercial fishing fleet from domestic subsidies. To protect domestic commercial fisheries and the competitiveness of U.S. exports in the international seafood market, the United States should enhance efforts by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to manage, enforce, and coordinate technical assistance for nations engaging in IUU fishing.
Domestically, the United States has taken important steps to address the critical gaps in fisheries management. In 2012, it became the first country to impose catch limits on all federally-managed fish species. Some species like the mahi mahi will be restricted for the first time in history. Many environmental experts hailed the move as a potential model for broader regional and international sustainable fisheries policy. To capitalize on such gains, the United States should aggressively work to reduce fishing subsidies in areas such as Europe that promote overcapitalization and thus global depletion of fish stocks. The United States could also promote market-based mechanisms, like catch shares and limited access privilege programs, to help fishermen and their communities curb overfishing and raise the value of global fisheries by up to $36 billion.
No: Critics argue that fisheries management is by and large a domestic issue, and that the United States has little right to tell other nations how to manage their own resources, particularly when such measures could harm local economies. They contend that the science behind overfishing is exaggerated, as are the warnings about the consequences of an anticipated fisheries collapse. Existing conventions like the 1995 Fish Stock Agreement already go far enough in addressing this issue. Any additional efforts, they contend, would be a diplomatic overreach, as well as an excessive burden on a struggling commercial fishing industry. Critics also question how market-based mechanisms, such as catch-shares, would be distributed, traded, and enforced, warning that they would lead to speculative bubbles.
Should the United States push for a more defined multilateral strategy to cope with the melting Arctic?
Yes: The melting Arctic holds important untapped political, strategic, and economic potential for the U.S. government, military, and businesses. This emerging frontier could potentially support a variety of economic activities, including energy exploration, marine commerce, and sustainable development of new fisheries. Countries such as Russia, Canada, Norway, and China have already made claims to the region, yet the United States remains on the sideline without a comprehensive Arctic strategy. The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) remains the premier forum of negotiating and arbitrating disputes over contested territory. As a nonparty, however, the United States loses invaluable leverage and position. In addition, the U.S. military does not have a single icebreaker, whereas Russia operates over thirty. Experts argue that the U.S. government should also adopt the recently proposed Polar Code, which is a voluntary agreement that "sets structural classifications and standards for ships operating in the Arctic as well as specific navigation and emergency training for those operating in or around ice-covered waters."
No: Opponents argue that Arctic Council activities and the 2009 National Security Presidential Directive, which updated U.S. Arctic polices, are sufficient. Any collaboration with Canada to resolve disputes over the Northwest Passage might undermine freedom of navigation for U.S. naval assets elsewhere, especially in the Strait of Hormuz and the Taiwan Straits, and this national security concern trumps any advantages from collaborating on security, economic, or environmental issues in the Arctic. Last, given the dominant Russian and Canadian Arctic coastlines, future Arctic diplomacy might best be handled bilaterally rather than through broader multilateral initiatives.
April 2013: Japan included in Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations
Japan agreed to join negotiations over the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), an ambitious free trade agreement between counties along the Pacific rim. Since the broad outline of the agreement was introduced in November 2011, sixteen rounds of negotiations have thus far brought eleven countries together to discuss the TPP. The addition of Japan, a major economic force in the region, as the twelfth participant comes as an important step in creating a robust agreement. Already, the South China Sea is the second-busiest shipping lane in the world, and should the TTP become a reality, transpacific shipping would dramatically increase. The seventeenth round of negotiations will take place in May and the current goal for agreement is October 2013.
March 2013: IMO pledges to support implementation of new code of conduct on piracy
At a ministerial meeting in Cotonou, Benin, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) pledged to support the implementation of a new code of conduct on piracy and other illicit maritime activity. The Gulf of Guinea Code of Conduct, drafted by the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic Community of West African States, in partnership with the IMO, contains provisions for interdicting sea- and land-based vehicles engaged in illegal activities at sea, prosecuting suspected criminals, and sharing information between state parties. The code builds on several existing frameworks to create a sub-regional coast guard. The agreement is set to open for signature in May 2013.
March 2013: New fishing restrictions on sharks and rays
Delegates attending the annual meeting on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) voted to place robust export restrictions on five species of sharks and two species of manta rays. Over the past fifty years, the three shark species—the oceanic whitetip, hammerhead, and porbeagle—have declined by more than 70 percent. Although experts cautioned that the new rules would be difficult to enforce in practice, the decision marked an important victory over economic interests, particularly of China and Japan.
January 2013: Philippines to challenge China's maritime claims in South China Sea
The Philippine government announced its intention to take China to an international arbitration tribunal based on claims that China violated the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. The dispute dates back to mid-2012, when tensions flared over the Scarborough shoal, which is claimed by both countries.
China, Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, and the Philippines have competing territorial and jurisdictional claims to the South China Sea, particularly over rights to exploit its potentially vast oil and gas reserves. Control over strategic shipping lanes and freedom of navigation are also increasingly contested, especially between the United States and China.
September 2012: Arctic ice reaches record low
In September 2012, ice in the Arctic Ocean reached an all-time low of 24 percent, shattering the previous record of 29 percent from 2007. The finding not only has implications for climate change and environmental stability, but also for heightened competition among states jockeying for access to critical resources in the region. For the first time, the melting Arctic has exposed troves of natural resources including oil, gas, and minerals, as well as newly accessible shipping routes. The United States, Russia, and several European states already control parts of the Arctic, and China is also an increasing presence.
September 2012: Tensions flare in the East China Sea
In September 2012, Japan purchased three islands in the East China Sea that form part of the Senkaku Islands, known as the Diaoyu Islands to the Chinese. The islands, claimed by both countries, have been controlled by Japan since 1895, but sovereignty remains hotly contested. Following Japan's announcement, protests broke out across China, and Chinese leaders accused Japan of "severely infringing" upon their sovereignty.
In a move to affirm its claim to the islands, China announced its intention to submit their objections to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf under the UNCLOS, and dispatched patrol ships to monitor the islands. In December 2012, tensions flared after a Chinese small aircraft flew into airspace over the islands, and both countries sent naval vessels to patrol nearby waters. Both sides remain adamant that there is no room for negotiations over their control of the islands, which are in close proximity to strategic shipping routes, fishing grounds, and potentially lucrative oil reserves.
Options for Strengthening Global Ocean Governance
There are a series of measures, both formal and informal, that can be taken to strengthen U.S. and global ocean governance. First, the United States must begin by finally ratifying the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. On this foundation, the United States should then tap hitherto underused regimes, update twentieth-century agreements to reflect modern ocean challenges, and, in some cases, serve as the diplomatic lead in pioneering new institutions and regimes. These recommendations reflect the views of Stewart M. Patrick, senior fellow and director of the International Institutions and Global Governance Program, and Scott G. Borgerson, former visiting fellow for ocean governance.
In the near term, the United States and its international partners should consider the following steps:
- Ratify UNCLOS
The United States should finally join the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), an action that would give it further credibility and make the United States a full partner in global ocean governance. This carefully negotiated agreement has been signed and ratified by 162 countries and the European Union. Yet despite playing a central role shaping UNCLOS's content, the United States has conspicuously failed to join. It remains among only a handful of countries with a coastline, including Syria, North Korea, and Iran, not to have done so.
Emerging issues such as the melting Arctic lend increased urgency to U.S. ratification. By rejecting UNCLOS, the United States is freezing itself out of important international policymaking bodies, forfeiting a seat at decision-making forums critical to economic growth and national security interests. One important forum where the United States has no say is the commission vested with the authority to validate countries' claims to extend their exclusive economic zones, a process that is arguably the last great partitioning of sovereign space on earth. As a nonparty to the treaty, the United States is forgoing an opportunity to extend its national jurisdiction over a vast ocean area on its Arctic, Atlantic, and Gulf coasts—equal to almost half the size of the Louisiana Purchase—and abdicating an opportunity to have a say in deliberations over other nations' claims elsewhere.
Furthermore, the convention allows for an expansion of U.S. sovereignty by extending U.S. sea borders, guaranteeing the freedom of ship and air traffic, and enhancing the legal tools available to combat piracy and illicit trafficking. Potential participants in U.S.-organized flotillas and coalitions rightly question why they should assist the United States in enforcing the rule of law when the United States refuses to recognize the convention that guides the actions of virtually every other nation.
- Coordinate national ocean policies for coastal states
The creation of a comprehensive and integrated U.S. oceans policy should be immediately followed by similar efforts in developing maritime countries, namely Brazil, Russia, India, and China (BRIC) . These so-called BRIC nations will be critical players in crafting domestic ocean policies that together form a coherent tapestry of global governance. Ideally, such emerging powers would designate a senior government official, and in some cases the head of state, to liaison with other coastal states and regional bodies to coordinate ocean governance policies and respond to new threats. Consistent with the Regional Seas Program, the ripest opportunity for these efforts is at the regional level. With UN assistance, successful regional initiatives could then be harmonized and expanded globally.
- Place a moratorium on critically endangered commercial fisheries
Commercial fishing, a multi-billion dollar industry in the United States, is in grave danger. The oceans have been overfished, and it is feared that many fish stocks may not rebound. In the last fifty years, fish that were previously considered inexhaustible have been reduced to alarmingly low levels. Up to 90 percent of large predatory fish are now gone. Nearly half of fish stocks in the world have been fully exploited and roughly one-third have been overexploited. The recent imposition of catch limits on all federally-managed fish species is an important and long overdue first step, which should be expanded and strengthened to a moratorium on the most endangered commercial fisheries, such as the Atlantic blue fin tuna. But tuna is hardly alone in this predicament, and numerous other species are facing the same fate. Policymakers should stand up to intense political pressure and place fishing moratoriums on the most threatened fisheries to give them a chance to rebound. Doing so would be a courageous act that would help rescue collapsing fish while creating a commercially sustainable resource.
In the longer term, the United States and its international partners should consider the following steps:
- Strengthen and update UNCLOS
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and related agreements serve as the bedrock of international ocean policy. However, UNCLOS is thirty years old. If it is to remain relevant and effective, it must be strengthened and updated to respond to emerging threats such as transnational crime and marine pollution, as well as employing market-based principles of catch shares to commercial fisheries, especially in the high seas. Lastly, UNCLOS Article 234, which applies to ice-covered areas, should be expanded to better manage the opening Arctic, which will be an area of increasing focus and international tension over the coming years.
The international community should also counter the pressure of coastal states that unilaterally seek to push maritime borders seaward, as illustrated by China's claim to all of the South China Sea. Additionally, states should focus on using UNCLOS mechanisms to resolve nagging maritime conflicts, such as overlapping exclusive economic zones from extended continental shelf claims, and sovereignty disputes, such as that of the Spratly and Hans Islands.
- Bolster enforcement capacity
Many ocean-related governance issues have shortcomings not because rules for better management do not exist, but because weak states cannot enforce them. A failure in the oversight of sovereign waters inevitably leads to environmental degradation and, in cases like Somalia, can morph into problems with global implications, such as piracy. Accordingly, the international community should help less developed coastal states build the capacity to enforce (1) fisheries rules fleets; (2) International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships regulations to reduce ocean dumping and pollution; (3) other shipping regulations in states with open registries such as Liberia, Panama, Malta, and the Marshall Islands; (4) and existing mandates created to stop illicit trafficking. Developed countries should also help less developed areas monitor environmental variables such as acidification, coral reefs, and fisheries.

Restoring a Waterway for the 21st Century
A resource for the local community and a habitat for wildlife
You may not have heard of the Wilts & Berks Canal as it has been derelict for nearly a century. There are ambitious plans to bring the waterway back to life.
Its called the Wilts & Berks because it is said that a lazy draughtsman could not be bothered to write in full the county names!
Swindon is mid point of the waterway which linked the Thames at Abingdon with the Kennet & Avon Canal near Melksham.
A further link was made from Swindon to the Thames & Severn Canal at Cricklade (The North Wilts Canal). There were also branches to Chippenham, Calne, Longcot (near Shrivenham) and Wantage. The waterway now is located in Wiltshire Swindon and Oxfordshire since Local Government boundary changes in the 1970's.
The Wilts and Berks Trust is committed to returning this historic waterway to a navigable state. The canal will restore an important link in the national waterways network, but the project will be part of the green infrastructure of the region, creating connections between existing wildlife habitats and creating aquatic and wetland habitats for endangered species.
Working with our partners we aim to restore the canal route, provide wildlife habitats, cycleways and routes for walkers along the restored towpath.
The Trust would like your help to complete this exciting project- please explore this website to find out more.
Latest news follow us on Twitter Donate on line

Integrated Circuits are found in every conceivable electronic device, and control the on-off behavior of a device capable of conductive behavior. They evolved from vacuum tubes and transistors to incorporate hundreds of thousands of transistors on a single chip today.
IC's and semiconductors now control computing, communications, networking, and other facets of daily modern life. They are created by "etching" a pattern onto a semiconductor platform, such as silicon, which can then be controlled by exposure to electrical current.
Semiconductors are the individual "on-off" switches that make up a electronic devices. By only allowing the conductance of electricity in specific situations (as opposed to conductors and insulators), semiconductors can produce complex and sophisticated behaviors, calculations, and measurements. By working in tandem, many semiconductors can constitute an mp3 player, computer processor, or wireless network adapter.

WebMD Medical News
Daniel J. DeNoon
Louise Chang, MD
Oct. 9, 2012 – About 13,000 people in 23 states got the fungus-contaminated steroid pain shots in the ongoing outbreak of fungal meningitis.
So far, 119 people who got the shots have come down with fungal infections of the fluid surrounding their spinal cords and brains.
Eleven of those people have died. The case count rises daily, as symptoms of fungal infection can take up to a month to appear, and there's often a delay in case reporting.
Most of the 13,000 who got the tainted shots will not get the infection, suggests John Jernigan, MD, director of the CDC's office of health care infection prevention, research, and evaluation.
"The attack rate is still to be determined, but so far it appears that the vast majority of patients who received the injection have not developed evidence of meningitis," Jernigan says in an email. "But the investigation is ongoing, and exposed patients and their physicians should be vigilant for signs of illness."
All of the fungal infections to date have been in patients who received spinal injections. Some of the patients who received the contaminated steroids got shots in painful joints such as the knee or elbow. To date, none of these patients has reported a fungal infection.
The source of the outbreak is a compounding pharmacy called New England Compounding Center (NECC). The company makes more than 2,400 different medicines sold throughout the U.S. All have been recalled.
All cases so far have been in patients who received one of 17,676 single-shot vials of a steroid, methylprednisolone, since May 21, 2012. An FDA investigation of the NECC facility, including studies of whether other medications might be contaminated, is ongoing.
There haven't yet been any reports of fungal infection in patients who got joint injections of the NECC steroids. Even so, the CDC is warning such patients to be on the lookout for symptoms of fungal infection:
Patients who have such symptoms should see a doctor for further tests. Doctors likely will collect joint fluid to test it for fungal infection.
If you suspect you may have received a dose of contaminated medicine, contact the health provider who gave it to you. Ask if the medication came from NECC. All NECC products carry the NECC logo.
Clinics that gave the suspect shots are contacting all patients to warn them to look out for symptoms. Symptoms may appear one to four weeks after getting a pain injection.
For patients who got spinal injections, early symptoms may be very mild. At first, most patients only feel a little worse than usual. For example, patients with back pain may feel slightly worse pain, or slightly more weakness.
The CDC warns patients who have had a spinal steroid shot since May 21, 2012, to call a doctor immediately if they have any of these symptoms:
Treatment of fungal meningitis is complicated. Antifungal drugs must be given intravenously, every day. At least at first, patients should be treated in a hospital.
Treatment often lasts for several months, and can have serious side effects.
As of Oct. 9, the CDC reports deaths and cases in these states:
SOURCES:Curtis Allen, public information officer, CDC, email interview.CDC web site.FDA web site.David Kibbe, public information officer, Massachusetts Department of Health.

A grooved pulley wheel like that used for ropes is called a sheave. A single sheave mounted in a block and fixed in place simply changes the direction of force exerted on the rope passing over it. If the end of the rope that ordinarily would attach to the load is passed around a second, unfixed pulley and back to the fixed pulley, a load attached to the free pulley can be raised with half the effort, or with a mechanical advantage of 2. Thus arranged, the device is called a block and tackle. The number of pulley wheels mounted in the fixed and free blocks can be increased indefinitely to get a higher and higher mechanical advantage, the mechanical advantage equaling the number of strands running to the free pulley. Therefore if the rope is run over the first fixed pulley wheel, around the free pulley, over a second pulley wheel in the fixed block, and back to the free block, the mechanical advantage is 3. A 300-lb load can be raised by a pull of 100 lb on the free end of the rope. To raise the load 10 ft, however, the free end of the rope must be pulled 30 ft.
Disregarding friction, work output will always equal work input. If the action is reversed by attaching the load to the free end of the rope and pulling on the free block, the mechanical advantage becomes a mechanical disadvantage, but a speed advantage. A rope block and tackle is usually for hand operation. To lift larger loads by hand, a chain is substituted for the rope and the pulleys have grooves for gripping the links. A differential pulley consists of two pulleys of different radii connected and rotating as one on a common axle. The pulleys have their circumferences grooved and spiked so that a chain will run in them without slipping. Over the pulleys an endless chain is run, forming two hanging loops. In one loop is placed a movable block, whose pulley is shaped to take the chain. The load is attached to the movable block and is raised by pulling on the other loop of the chain.
Power-operated machinery usually has cables, as in vertical-lift drawbridges, power shovels, and cranes. Before the extensive use of electric motors, steam engines or water turbines often supplied the power for factory machinery. One engine or turbine might run a whole factory through a complicated system of shafts, pulleys, and belts. Pulleys for flat belts are crowned to keep the belt centered. Raised flanges will serve the same purpose, but they wear the edges of the belt. Drive pulleys for conveyor belts often have a covering, called lagging, to provide better grip. Individual electric motors usually provide drive by means of V belts, the pulleys having raised flanges to form slots that match the trapezoidal cross sections of the belts. Cone pulleys consist of a number of pulleys of varying diameters massed in the shape of a cone. They are used with belt drives for machines (e.g., lathes) requiring a variety of speeds.
In mechanics, a wheel that carries a flexible rope, cord, cable, chain, or belt on its rim. Pulleys are used singly or in combination to transmit energy and motion. In belt drives, pulleys are attached to shafts at their axes, and power is transmitted between the shafts by means of endless belts running over the pulleys. One or more independently rotating pulleys can be used to gain mechanical advantage, especially for lifting weights. The shafts around which the pulleys turn may attach them to frames or blocks, and a combination of pulleys, blocks, and rope is called a block and tackle. The pulley is considered one of the five simple machines.
Learn more about pulley with a free trial on Britannica.com.
A pulley (also called a sheave or block) is a wheel with a groove between two flanges around its circumference. A rope, cable or belt usually runs inside the groove. Pulleys are used to change the direction of an applied force, transmit rotational motion, or realize a mechanical advantage in either a linear or rotational system of motion.
A belt and pulley system is characterized by two or more pulleys in common to a belt. This allows for mechanical power, torque, and speed to be transmitted across axes and, if the pulleys are of differing diameters, a mechanical advantage to be realized.
A belt drive is analogous to that of a chain drive, however a belt sheave may be smooth (devoid of discrete interlocking members as would be found on a chain sprocket, spur gear, or timing belt) so that the mechanical advantage is given by the ratio of the pitch diameter of the sheaves only (one is not able to count 'teeth' to determine gear ratio).
Belt and pulley systems can be very efficient, with stated efficiencies up to 98%.
In a system of a single rope and pulleys, when friction is neglected, the mechanical advantage gained can be calculated by counting the number of rope lengths exerting force on the load. Since the tension in each rope length is equal to the force exerted on the free end of the rope, the mechanical advantage is simply equal to the number of ropes pulling on the load. For example, in Diagram 3 below, there is one rope attached to the load, and 2 rope lengths extending from the pulley attached to the load, for a total of 3 ropes supporting it. If the force applied to the free end of the rope is 10 lb, each of these rope lengths will exert a force of 10 lb. on the load, for a total of 30 lb. So the mechanical advantage is 3.
The force on the load is increased by the mechanical advantage; however the distance the load moves, compared to the length the free end of the rope moves, is decreased in the same proportion. Since a slender cable is more easily managed than a fat one (albeit shorter and stronger), pulley systems are often the preferred method of applying mechanical advantage to the pulling force of a winch (as can be found in a lift crane).
Pulley systems are the only simple machines in which the possible values of mechanical advantage are limited to whole numbers.
In practice, the more pulleys there are, the less efficient a system is. This is due to sliding friction in the system where cable meets pulley and in the rotational mechanism of each pulley.
It is not recorded when or by whom the pulley was first developed. It is believed however that Archimedes developed the first documented block and tackle pulley system, as recorded by Plutarch. Plutarch reported that Archimedes moved an entire warship, laden with men, using compound pulleys and his own strength.
These are different types of pulley systems:
The simplest theory of operation for a pulley system assumes that the pulleys and lines are weightless, and that there is no energy loss due to friction. It is also assumed that the lines do not stretch.
In equilibrium, the total force on the pulley must be zero. This means that the force on the axle of the pulley is shared equally by the two lines looping through the pulley. The situation is schematically illustrated in diagram 1. For the case where the lines are not parallel, the tensions in each line are still equal, but now the vector sum of all forces is zero.
A second basic equation for the pulley follows from the conservation of energy: The product of the weight lifted times the distance it is moved is equal to the product of the lifting force (the tension in the lifting line) times the distance the lifting line is moved. The weight lifted divided by the lifting force is defined as the advantage of the pulley system.
It is important to notice that a system of pulleys does not change the amount of work done. The work is given by the force times the distance moved. The pulley simply allows trading force for distance: you pull with less force, but over a longer distance.
In diagram 2, a single movable pulley allows weight W to be lifted with only half the force needed to lift the weight without assistance. The total force needed is divided between the lifting force (red arrow) and the "ceiling" which is some immovable object (such as the earth). In this simple system, the lifting force is directed in the same direction as the movement of the weight. The advantage of this system is 2. Although the force needed to lift the weight is only W/2, we will need to draw a length of rope that is twice the distance that the weight is lifted, so that the total amount of work done (Force x distance) remains the same.
A second pulley may be added as in diagram 2a, which simply serves to redirect the lifting force downward, it does not change the advantage of the system.
The addition of a fixed pulley to the single pulley system can yield an increase of advantage. In diagram 3, the addition of a fixed pulley yields a lifting advantage of 3. The tension in each line is W/3, and the force on the axles of each pulley is 2W/3. As in the case of diagram 2a, another pulley may be added to reverse the direction of the lifting force, but with no increase in advantage. This situation is shown in diagram 3a.
This process can be continued indefinitely for ideal pulleys with each additional pulley yielding a unit increase in advantage. For real pulleys friction among rope and pulleys will increase as more pulleys are added to the point that no advantage is possible. It puts a limit for the number of pulleys usable in practice. The above pulley systems are known collectively as block and tackle pulley systems. In diagram 4a, a block and tackle system with advantage 4 is shown. A practical implementation in which the connection to the ceiling is combined and the fixed and movable pulleys are encased in single housings is shown in figure 4b.
Other pulley systems are possible, and some can deliver an increased advantage with fewer pulleys than the block and tackle system. The advantage of the block and tackle system is that each pulley and line is subjected to equal tensions and forces. Efficient design dictates that each line and pulley be capable of handling its load, and no more. Other pulley designs will require different strengths of line and pulleys depending on their position in the system, but a block and tackle system can use the same line size throughout, and can mount the fixed and movable pulleys on a common axle.
Shape up your pulleys: minimize costly downtime and extend conveyor belt life by keeping wing pulleys free of entrapped material.(SPECIAL SECTION: CONVEYING & MATERIAL HANDLING)
Aug 01, 2009; Consider the frequent task of dislodging material from the standard wing pulley. It's necessary yet annoying and time...

Measuring environmental impact
Our approach in adopting a responsible attitude to climate change starts with the assessment of the environmental impact of each stage in our products' life by the means of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA).
As part of our internal environmental program, Ecophon has carried out LCAs on our products in collaboration with Ecobilan SA (Pricewaterhouse Coopers), and according to the international ISO 14040 to ISO 14044 series of standards.
To give you an overview of the process and an idea of our products' carbon footprint, we will consider a fictitious panel, the "Ecophon index sound-absorbing acoustic panel" based on the most common physical characteristics of Ecophon products:
Format: 1000 x 1000mm
Edge design: Edge E
Surface: Akutex FT
Weight: 1.5 kg/m2
Based on "cradle-to-grave" LCA calculations, the total carbon footprint of our fictitious panel is 2.7kg CO2/m2, from extraction of raw materials through to the end-of-life phase (landfill). Click on the links below to find out more about the various phases of our panel's life and its environmental impact.

Skip to main content
More Search Options
A member of our team will call you back within one business day.
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) occurs when there is too little glucose (sugar) in your child’s blood. It can be caused by skipping meals or snacks, eating too little food, or taking too much insulin or diabetes medication. A lot of physical activity can also cause low blood sugar, even hours later. In severe cases, low blood sugar can lead to seizures or passing out.
Everyone’s symptoms are different. Your child may feel dizzy, weak, hungry, headachy, or shaky. Your child may seem cranky or confused. If lows happen very often over time, your child may no longer be able to sense them. Encourage your child to recognize his or her symptoms and tell you about them right away.
Stay calm so you can better help your child.
Check your child’s blood sugar to make sure that it is low. If you’re not able to check, treat for low blood sugar anyway.
Give your child 15 to 20 grams of fast-acting sugar such as 3 to 4 glucose tablets, a glass of nonfat milk, or 4 ounces (½ cup) of juice or regular soda. Diet soda will not help at all. Chocolate, cookies, and other fatty sweets will not work as quickly.
If possible, recheck blood sugar in 15 minutes. If it is still low, give your child another 15 to 20 grams of fast-acting sugar.
Once your child’s blood sugar is normal, give your child a snack or meal to eat.
If your child’s blood sugar does not go back up, call the doctor or take your child to the emergency room.
Be sure your child eats meals and snacks on time, and eats before exercising.
Have your child carry fast-acting sugar.
Don’t inject insulin near a muscle that’s going to be exercised.
Check your child’s blood sugar often, especially after exercise and at bedtime.
Keep fast-acting sugars handy.
Check blood sugar often, especially after activity and before bed.
For severe low blood sugar, your child may need a glucagon injection. Ask your child’s healthcare provider about glucagon emergency kits for home and school.

Modern laparoscopic surgeries may be minimally invasive, but they still require multiple incisions. To make laparoscopies even less intrusive, scientists and surgeons at Columbia University and Vanderbilt University have built a robot that can enter the body through a single 15-millimeter incision or through a natural opening like the mouth. Once inside the body the robot, which has not yet been tested in humans, unfolds like a NASA spaceship, communicates its position through a wire connected to an external computer, and follows instructions to advance, stop, tie sutures and perform other actions. It comes with a camera that tracks the movements of surgical instruments and projects them onto a computer console. Developers say it could perform appendectomies, hysterectomies, some types of kidney surgery, and possibly ear and throat surgery.
The Insertable Robotic Effector Platform (IREP) is entering animal testing this fall and could be available within five years. Until now, no study has offered conclusive proof that robotic surgery trumps traditional laparoscopic techniques, but IREP's developers say it is lighter and cheaper than da Vinci, the leading surgical system. “There is definitely a potential here,” says William Lowrance, a robotic surgery expert at the University of Utah, adding that it might offer more dexterity and precision than traditional laparoscopic tools.
This article was originally published with the title The Robot Will See You Now.

Posted September 1st, 2002
It's like "something from a bad horror movie"! This is how Maryland's Interior Secretary Gale Norton described the most widely reported environmental emergency
The emergency? The Asian snakehead fish.
The snakehead is an intriguing fish native to China. They have a voracious appetite, gobbling up everything they can get their teeth on. This includes other fish,
birds, frogs, and even their own offspring. Snakeheads seem to defy nature by being able to crawl on dry land for several days at a time, searching for prey.
In their native habitat, these three-foot oddities have natural predators and a specific habitat. However, in a small town in Crofton, Maryland (near Washington, D.C.),
the snakeheads made an unscheduled appearance.
A local resident bought the fish from a market in New York to make soup for an ailing relative. He kept the fish alive at home, but soon his relative got better and
the cost of feeding the carnivorous fish became too much. Hoping to get rid of the creatures, he dumped them in the pond.
In only a short amount of time, the snakehead fish thrived, producing more than 100 offspring. Even after state officials began treating the pond with herbicide in
hopes of killing off plant life and shutting down the oxygen supply to the fish, the snakeheads continued to survive. In fact, their uncanny nature to withstand treatment has earned
the snakeheads the nickname "frankenfish."
Maryland officials know that if the snakehead managed to escape the pond, they would wreak havoc in the local ecosystem. There are no natural predators of the snakehead
in Maryland, and officials feared that it would have a devastating affect on the local environment - especially if they reached the Little Patuxent River, which is located just 250 feet
from the pond.
As a secondary tactic, officials built a fence around the pond to catch any snakeheads slithering across the land. Then they sprayed the pond with a pesticide called
Rotenone. This poison blocks oxygen from getting to the fish's blood, killing them.
On September 4, 2002, officials sprayed the Rotenone onto the pond. The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) lobbied against the use of the poison because
it was inhuman, however, they agreed that the fish must be destroyed in this particular habitat.
By Thursday morning, September 5, game officials claimed victory over the alien creatures. Eight hundred pounds of dead fish - including a large number of snakeheads
- floated to the surface. Countless others had sunk to the bottom and are expected to resurface when they start decomposing.
Use the Internet to research the snakehead fish. In your Science Journal, write an essay about what could happen if the snakeheads were released in the wild throughout

Even a modest backyard garden can result in an overabundance of homegrown fruits and vegetables, leading to wasted food. You don't have to stuff yourself full of excess produce, give it all away or let it rot - just can it. Home canning is a great way to preserve your garden harvest. Fresher and tastier than store-bought canned goods, home-canned food saves money and reduces packaging waste, too.
Food can be preserved in glass mason jars using either hot water bath or pressure canner methods. Heating the jars kills microorganisms that cause spoilage, and as the jars cool, air pressure seals the lids tightly. When stored in a dark, cool, dry location, sealed home-canned goods have a shelf life of about one year. Canning your produce is an ideal way to maintain a more local diet year-round, rather than relying on store-bought goods outside the growing season.
You can preserve virtually anything you grow in your garden with home canning. Get creative and add herbs, spices and other items to your fruits and vegetables, or make salsa, sauces and soups.
Home Canning Materials
To get started, you'll need the following items:
- Glass mason jars with lids and sealing rings, sterilized in boiling water and fully dried
- Large pot or pressure canner
- Canning rack, to hold jars inside the pot
- Wide-mouth funnel and ladle, to fill jars
- Tongs or jar lifters, to remove cans from the pot
- Home canning guide, such as the USDA's Complete Guide to Home Canning
The Basics of Canning Food
High-acid foods such as tomatoes, jams and jellies can be canned in a hot water bath. Sterilized jars are packed with food, sealed and completely submerged in boiling water for 5 to 85 minutes depending on the type of food and the size of the jars. Boiling removes the oxygen that remains in the jar to form a tight seal. This method can only be used with foods that have a pH of 4.6 or less, as the heat used isn't high enough to prevent the growth of a bacteria called Clostridium botulinum.
Modern pressure canners make home canning easier and safer than ever before, and come in a variety of sizes fitting up to two layers of pint-sized jars. Jars filled with food are placed on a rack inside the canner with 2-3 ices of water and processed at high temperatures. This method is ideal for low-acid foods including most vegetables.
Home canning is not difficult, but the risk of bacteria growth from improperly canned food requires careful attention to safety guidelines. Always follow instructions from a reliable source of home canning information, such as the National Center for Home Food Preservation.

On the Lap of the Mighty Sagarmatha - Solu Khumbu or Everest region
The major mountains are the Mt.Everest, Mt.Lhotse, Cho Oyu, Nuptse, Pumori, Ama Dablam, Thamserku, Kantega, Mera Peak and Island Peak.
Mt. Everest, which is part of the Himalaya range, is located on the border between Nepal and Tibet. Rising to a height of 8848m, the world’s highest mountain was named in 1865 after Sir George Everest. The mountain got its Nepali name Sagarmatha during the 1960s, when the Government of Nepal gave the mountain the official Nepali name. In sanskrit Sagarmatha means "mother of the universe”. The Tibetan name for Mount Everest is Chomolungma or Qomolangma, which means “Goddess Mother of the Snows". Climbers wishing to scale the peak have to obtain an expensive permit from the Nepal Government, often costing more than $25,000 (USD) per person. Base Camp, which serves as a resting area and base of operations for climbers organizing their attempts for the summit, is located on the Khumbu glacier at an elevation of 5300 m (17,400 ft); it receives an average of 450 mm (18 in) of precipitation a year. The climate of Mount Everest is extreme In July, the warmest month, the average summit temperature is -19° C (-2° F).
When George Mallory, the British climber was asked why he wanted to climb Everest he replied ‘Because it is there’. After two unsuccessful attempts, in 1924 he again tried to climb the peak with Andrew Irvine. They started on June 8, 1924 to scale the summit via the north col route and never returned. Their bodies were later discovered by the Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition near the old Chinese camp in 1999. Edmund Hillary, a New Zealander and Sherpa Tenzing Norgay from Nepal were the first two climbers to set foot on the summit of Mt.Everest. They reached the summit at 11:30 a.m. on May 29, 1953 by climbing through the South Col Route. More than 300 climbers have scaled the highest mountain since then. Also there have been more than 100 deaths on the mountain where conditions are so difficult that most corpses have been left where they fell, some of them visible from standard climbing routes.
Mt. Lhotse (8516m) is the fourth highest mountain in the world. It lies south of Mt. Everest. It was first climbed by two Swiss climbers F. Luchsinger and E. Reiss in 1956 from the West face. The Czech scaled it via the South face in 1984. An impressive ring of three peaks makes up the Lhotse massif: Lhotse East or Middle, Lhotse and Lhotse Shar. The South Face of Lhotse is one of the largest mountain faces in the world.
Cho Oyu, (8201m) the sixth highest mountain in the world, has gained popularity among climbers just recently. The mountain sits on both sides of the border of Nepal and Tibet, about 30 km. west of Mount Everest. Cho Oyu in Tibetan means "the turquoise goddess ." The south face of Cho Oyu, facing Nepal, is quite steep and difficult, and is rarely climbed. The north side, accessed from Tibet, is more moderate, and there is a relatively safe route to the summit. In the autumn of 1954, an Austrian team made the first ascent via this route.
Ama Dablam (6856m) which means ‘mother’s jewellery box’, in sherpa language is considered to be one of the most beautiful mountains in the world. Seen from below, the mountain looks like a woman with outstretched arms or a woman wearing a long necklace. Ama Dablam lies alongside Everest in the heart of the Khumbu valley. Mt Lhotse, Mt. Makalu, Mt. Cho Oyu and Mt. Everest can be seen at close quarters from Ama dablam.
Nuptse (7,855m.) lies south west of Mt Everest. It is situated in the Khumbu Himal. From the Thyangboche Monastery Nuptse appears as a massive wall guarding the approach to Everest. The name Nup-tse in Tibetan means west-peak. The main ridge, which is separated from Lhotse by a 7556m high saddle, is crowned by seven peaks and goes west-northwest until its steep west-face drops down more than 2300m to the Khumbu-glacier. Nuptse I was first summited by a British expedition on May 16, 1961
Pumori peak at 7145m is just 8 km away from the world’s highest peak Mt.Everest. The ascent to this peak is described as a classic climb in the 7000m peak category. In Tibetan, ‘Pumo’ means girl and ‘Ri’, mountain. The peak was named by George Mallory, the famous English climber who lost his life trying to ascend Everest in 1924. The German climber Gerhard Lenser was the first to reach the summit of Pumori peak in 1962. Pumori is a popular climbing peak and the easiest. The best season to climb this peak is during autumn and spring.
Mera Peak (6,475m) is the highest of Nepal's trekking peaks. By its standard route, it is also the highest peak in Nepal that can be climbed without prior mountaineering experience. It was first climbed on 20 May 1953, by J.O.M. Roberts and Sen Tenzing, from the standard route at Mera La. The mountain lies to the south of Everest, dominating the watershed between the wild and beautiful valleys of the Hinku and Hongu.
Island Peak also known as Imja Tse at 6160m was named by Erick Shipton's group in 1953.It was so named as the peak resembles an island in a sea of ice when observed from Dingboche. The peak was first climbed in 1953 by a British group as preparation for climbing Mt. Everest. Among them one of the climbers was Mr. Tenzing Norgay. The peak is part of the south ridge of Lhotse Shar and the main land forms a semicircle of cliffs that rise to the north of the summits of Nuptse, Lhotse, Middle Peak and Lhotse Shar. Cho Oyu and Makalu lie to the east of the Island Peak. Baruntse, Amphu and Ama Dablam lie to the south.
Lobuche(6,119m) is known as Lhauche among the Locals. It rises above the town of Lhauche which is just a few kilometer from Mt. Everest. The first ascent on this peak was done by Laurice Nielson and Ang Gyalzen Sherpa on 25 April 1984.
Kalapattar is a small mountain 5,545 m (18,500 ft) high on the southern flank of Pumori (7,145 m). It is a trekking peak and every year tourists climb this peak to enjoy the fantastic panoramic views it offers of the Khumbu glacier, the Everest and nearby peaks like Lhotse and Nuptse. To the east, Makalu, Amadablam, Pumori, and Cho Oyu are visible.
Climate, Flora & Fauna
The climate in the Everest region can be divided into four climate zones owing to the gradual rise in altitude. The climatic zones include a forested lower zone, a zone of alpine scrub, the upper alpine zone which includes upper limit of vegetation growth, and the Arctic zone where no plants can grow. The types of plants and animals that are found depend on the altitude. In the lower forested zone, birch, juniper, blue pines, firs, bamboo and rhododendron grow. All vegetation that is found above this zone is shrubs. As the altitude increases, plant life is restricted to lichens and mosses. At an elevation of 5,750m begins the permanent snow line in the Himalayas. From this point there is no sign of greenery or vegetation. A common animal sighted in the higher reaches is the hairy animal yak. Dzopkyo a sterile male crossbreed between a yak and a cow is used to move goods along the trail. Red panda, snow leopard, musk deer, wild yak, and Himalayan black bear are some of the more exotic animals that are found in this region. A variety of birds can be sighted in the lower regions.
Sagarmata (Mt. Everest) National Park
The Sagarmatha National Park is the highest national park in the world. It was formally opened to public in July 19, 1976. The park covers an area of 1,148 sq km. It rises from its lowest point of 2,845 m (9,335 ft) at Jorsale to 8,850 m (29,035 ft) up to the summit of Everest. The park’s area is very rugged and steep, with its terrain cut by deep rivers and glaciers. It includes three peaks higher than 8,000 m, including Mt Everest. In 1979 the park was inscribed as a Natural World Heritage Site. The park's visitor centre is located at a hill in Namche Bazaar, where a company of the Nepal Royal Army is stationed for protecting the park. The park's southern entrance is a few hundred meters north of Monjo at 2,835 m. Trekking and climbing groups must bring their own fuel to the park (usually butane and kerosene), and the cutting of wood is prohibited. The Sagarmatha Pollution Control, funded by the World Wildlife Fund and the Himalayan Trust, was established in 1991 to help preserve Everest's environment. About a humdred species of birds and more than twenty species of butterflies have made this park their home. Musk deer, wild yak, red panda, snow leopard, Himalayan black bear, Himalayan thars, deer, langur monkeys, hares, mountain foxes, martens, and Himalayan wolves are found in the park
Early expeditions to climb Everest from the Nepalese side started from Jiri. Before the airstrip at Lukla came into existence all the trekking and climbing expeditions to the Everest region started from Jiri. Starting from Jiri, the route passes through the Sherpa villages of the Solu Khumbu, many of them having beautiful Buddhist monasteries.
Lukla, a village in Khumbu boast of the region’s sole airport.Lying at a height of 9000ft, most travelers to this region usually begin and end their adventure in Lukla. The airport was built in 1964 by Sir Edmund Hillary as part of his project in Khumbu region during the early 60s to transport the supplies for the Himalayan Trust projects in the Khumbu region. Today, somewhere between 90-95% of the foreign nationals who reach Lukla, arrive by a half hour flight from Kathmandu.
Namche Bazar is known as the sherpa capital. Namche is actually a village lying at the junction of the Dudh Koshi and a valley that leads to the frontier pass of Nangpa La . It is tucked away in a niche at a height of 7,845 ft. W. H. Tilman and C. Houston were the first westerners to enter it in 1950 and many more have come since then. Facilities like a bank, a post office, hotels and shops where one can purchase climbing equipment as well as tinned food have sprung up over the years. Namche Bazar is the major regional trading center. Its Saturday market or haat is the place where most of the trading takes place. The headquarters of the Sagarmatha National Park is located in Namche.
Thyangboche is famous for the Thyangboche gompa. It is one of the most important centers of Buddhism in the region. The gompa is the largest in the Khumbu region. It was first built in 1923. Destroyed by a fire in 1989, it was rebuilt later on partly with foreign aid. From Thyangboche, one gets a panoramic view of Kwangde, Tawache, Everest, Nuptse, Lhotse, Amadablam, Kangtenga, and Thamserku.
Buddhism is believed to have been introduced in the Khumbu region towards the end of the 17th century by Lama Sange Dorjee. According to the legend, he flew over the Himalayas and landed on a rock at Pangboche and Thyangboche, leaving his footprints embedded on the stone. He is believed to have been responsible for the founding of the first gompas in the Khumbu region, at Pangboche and Thami. Pangboche is the highest year-round settlement in the valley. The Imja Khola, coming from the right, joins the Dudh Koshi River a little above the village. The gompa (monastery) in Phyangboche is thought to be one of the oldest in the Khumbu region.
Khumjung , a village lying west of Thyangboche, is famous for the gompa where the skull of a supposed Yeti, the Abominable Snowman, is preserved under the supervision of the head Lama. The skull seems more like the outer skin of Himalayan Brown Bear, and this is proved by the report of a scientific exploratory expedition conducted by Sir Edmund Hillary, a copy of which is kept in the gompa.
Pheriche is located at an altitude of 13,845 ft. It lies on a level patch. Apart from the basic facilities available here, there is a medical-aid post maintained by the Himalayan Rescue Association of the Tokyo Medical College with Japanese doctors in attendance. Among other facilities, there is an air compression chamber installed for assisting victims of high altitude sickness
The scenic village of Gokyo lies below the hilly Gokyo Ri(5483m). The village is a cluster of stone houses and walled pastures.One has to pass by the holy Gokyo lakes on the way to the village. The Ngozumpa Glacier Nepal’s longest glacier at 25 miles has to be traversed enroute to this remote village. Gokyo Ri looms above the village on the northern edge of the lake. The summits of Everest, Lhotse and Makalu are visible from the summit of Gokyo Ri.
Thami at 3750m is in a large valley. The village has a police checkpost and a few lodges and tea shops. A little above the village is the Thami gompa, which is the site of the annual Mani Rimdu festival.
Sherpas live in the upper regions of Solu Khumbu. They emigrated from Tibet about 600 years ago. In the past they were traders and porters, carrying butter, meat, rice, sugar, and dye from India, and, wool, jewelry, salt Chinese silk and porcelain from Tibet and beyond. The closure of the border between India and China undermined their economy. Fortunately, with the mountaineering expeditions and trekkers, the Sherpa's found their load carrying skills, both on normal treks and high altitudes in great demand. The Khumbu region has provided a strong group of able bodied, hardy and fearless Sherpa porters and guides. The sherpas are Buddhists.
At the lower elevations lives the Kiranti Rai. The villages of Jubing, Kharikhola, Okhaldhunga, are inhabited by the Rais. Of mongoloid stock they speak their own dialect. Reference is made of their fighting spirit in the Hindu epic Mahabharata. The people from this group have supplied recruits to Gurkha regiments both in the British as well as Indian armies. The Rais follow a religion that is partly animistic with a strong Hindu influence. They revere their ancestors by observing Kul or Pitri puja every year.
The Jirels live in the area around Jiri. They are mongoloid and follow Buddhism.
Losar is celebrated in the month of February by the Sherpas. ‘Losar’ means New Year in Tibetan. Apart from the Sherpas and Tibetans, the Gurungs and Tamangs also celebrate Losar. Buddhist monks offer prayers for good health and prosperity at monasteries. People exchange various goods and gifts among them. Families organize feasts and perform dances.
Dumje is celebrated to mark the birthday of Guru Rimpoche (Padmasambhava).The celebration takes place in June and lasts for six days. It is celebrated in a big way in the villages of Namche, Thame and Khumjung.
Mani Rimdu is a festival that celebrates the victory of Buddhism over the ancient animistic religion of Bon. This festival is celebrated in the monasteries of Thyangboche, Chiwang and Thami. At Thangboche the celebration takes place during the November- December full moon. At Thami the Mani rimdu is festival is celebrated during the full moon in May.Chiwang Gompa generally celebrate this festival during autumn. The lamas wear elaborate brocade gowns and papier-mâché masks while performing. Through the dances, symbolic demons are conquered, dispelled, or converted to Dharma Protectors as positive forces clash with those of chaos. The dances convey Buddhist teaching on many levels from the simplest to the most profound, for those who do not have the opportunity to study and meditate extensively. It gives an opportunity to the Sherpas to gather and celebrate together with the monks.
Sakela (Chandi Dance) is a harvest festival celebrated by the Rai community. The harvest ceremony involves the worship of mother earth, called ‘Bhumi-Puja’. The festival is celebrated twice a year, once in spring before planting begins and once during autumn before harvesting. Ubhauli is celebrated during the spring season on Baishakh Purnima. In the autumn season on Mangsir Purnima, Udhauli is celebrated. The spring worship is done to propitiate mother earth for a good harvest and the rain god to bless the earth with enough rain. The festival is celebrated with more fervor in the remote hills. The Rai villagers celebrate it with priests (dhami) who perform rituals to worship their ancestors. The elders of the community begin the dance with a puja. Later on everybody participate in the dance forming a circle by holding each other’s hands. With drumbeats, they begin dancing at a slow pace but moves faster later with the drumbeats. The dance steps and hand gestures imitate the sowing and harvesting of crops .The festival also provides an opportunity for the Rai people to socialise.
The Classic Everest Base Camp Trek
Mt Everest Base Camp is the most popular destination for trekkers in Nepal. Its popularity has grown since the first expedition to the Nepalese side of Everest in the 1950s.One can do this trek the old way, by beginning the trek from Jiri. From Jiri it takes around nine days to reach Namche. On the way you will come across Rai settlements. The other (quicker) alternative is to take a flight to Lukla and to begin the trek from there. The trek follows the Dudh Kosi valley route with an ascent up to the Sherpa capital of Namche Bazaar. From Namche, you traverse along a high path from where you have the first good view of Everest. You head towards Thyangboche Monastery located on top of a mountain ridge and then descend the Imja Khola and continue to the villages of Pangboche and Pheriche. After that you arrive at the Khumbu Glacier. The trek through the glacier takes you first to Lobuche and then to Gorak Shep. From Gorak Shep you can climb up to Kala Pattar for even more spectacular views of the surrounding mountains, including Everest's south west face. Yhou then reach your destination, the Everest Base Camp at the foot of the Khumbu ice fall.

There are two well-known approved apparitions of Saint Joseph - but of which occurred in the context of a Marian apparition.
Our Lady of Knock (1879)
On the evening of Thursday, 21 August 1879 (Eve of the Octave of the Assumption) in Knock, Ireland, three mysterious persons appeared. The one in the middle was immediately identifiable as the Blessed Virgin Mary, veiled, crowned and praying. Immediately on her right was Saint Joseph with a gray beard, bowing toward Mary. To Mary's left was one appearing as a bishop who wore a short mitre. This last saint was the virginal Apostle Saint John the Evangelist.
Our Lady of Fatima (1917)
As we discussed a few days about on the significance of the three Marian visions of the Miracle of the Sun (See: Miracle of the Sun Signifies Rosary Mysteries), the first vision included Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, as Lucia described:
When Our Lady disappeared in the immense distance of the sky, next to the sun we saw Saint Joseph holding the Child Jesus and Our Lady dressed in white with a blue mantle. Saint Joseph and the Child seemed to be blessing the world making the sign of the cross.I find it startling that Saint Joseph, although not a priest, would give the sacerdotal blessing of the sign of the cross in union with his foster-Son, Christ.
What can we observe from these two apparitions of Saint Joseph?
- In both visions, Joseph does not speak.
- Joseph appears along with Mary.
- In the Knock vision, John appears, and John is the "son" of Mary is a special way. Is he also a "son" of Joseph in a special way?

S.A.D.D. is an acronym used to described the symptoms/signs/strong behavioral patterns that a nonwhite person is having sex with a white person and/or having frivolous contact with white people (not using the time with white people for constructive benefit).
S- Space for white people.
The nonwhite/victim of racism person will seek space for white people in discussion of racism. Often seeking space for white people who are not racist and have a high problem of not suspecting white people they come in contact with of being racist/white supremacist especially the white person they are having sex/sexual contact with.
The C.O.W.S. w/ Dr. Eddie Moore, Jr.
"Your definition sounds like it is not leaving space for white people who don't practice racism or is working against racism" Dr. Eddie Moore, Jr., after hearing Gus T. Renegade/Victim of Racism definition of racism/white supremacy.
A- Abstract thought and speech.
The nonwhite/victim of racism "They won't talk about racism as if it's live and experienced everyday" but they will talk about it as if it's "out there". They will use words like institutional racism as if institution's are not buildings and are run by the people inside them.
The C.O.W.S. w/ W. Kamau Bell
Victim of Racism known as W. Kamau Bell used the abstract term Halls of Power six times to describe the system of white supremacy.
D- Defend white people/Divided loyalties
Defend White People/Defend making white space
The nonwhite person will ferociously defend white people and that space they make for white people in discussion of racism. They will often experience from Cognitive Dissonance when they start to think about pondering that the white person they are sleeping with might be a racist/white supremacist.
The C.O.W.S. w/ Cynthia McKinney
A victim of racism called in after Cynthia McKinney left defending the space for white people.
D- Divided loyalties.
A metaphor of divided loyalties.
The nonwhite person will be on the battlefield of countering racism/white supremacy and instead of going full charge at their enemies, they will be discouraging nonwhite persons from fighting, causing conflict and confusion within the tents making it easy for the white supremacists to come slaughter them.

New York Manumission Society
The New York Manumission Society was an early American organization founded in 1785 to promote the abolition of the slavery of African descendants within the state of New York. The organization was made up entirely of white men, most of whom were wealthy and held influential positions in society. Throughout its 71-year history, which ended in 1849, the society battled against the slave trade and for the eventual emancipation of all the slaves in the state; it founded the African Free School for the poor and orphaned children of slaves and free people of color.
John Jay 
John Jay had been a prominent leader in the antislavery cause since 1777, when he drafted a state law to abolish slavery. The draft failed, as did a second attempt in 1785. In 1785, all state legislators except one voted for some form of gradual emancipation. However, they did not agree on what civil rights would be given to the slaves once they were freed. In 1799, an emancipation bill passed by not mentioning the subject of civil rights for freed slaves at all.
Jay brought in prominent political leaders such as Alexander Hamilton. He also worked closely with Aaron Burr, later head of the Democratic-Republicans in New York. The Society started a petition against slavery, which was signed by almost all the politically prominent men in New York, of all parties and led to a bill for gradual emancipation. Burr, in addition to supporting the bill, made an amendment for immediate abolition, which was voted down.
Jay founded the New-York Society for Promoting the Manumission of Slaves, and Protecting Such of Them as Have Been, or May be Liberated or the New York Manumission Society, and became its first president in 1785.
The organization was originally composed of Jay and a few dozen close friends, many of whom were slave-owners at the time. The first meeting was on January 25, 1785, at the home of John Simmons - who had space for the nineteen men in attendance since he kept an inn. Robert Troup and Melancton Smith were appointed to draw up rules; Jay was elected President. There were 31 members at the second meeting on February 4, including Alexander Hamilton. Several of the members were Quakers.
The Society formed a ways-and-means committee to deal with the difficulty that more than half of the members, including Troup and Jay, owned slaves (mostly a few domestic servants per household). The committee reported a plan for gradual emancipation: members would free slaves then younger than 28 when they reached the age of 35, slaves between 28 and 38 in seven years' time, and slaves over 45 immediately. This was voted down; and the committee dissolved.
This society was instrumental in having a state law passed in 1785 prohibiting the sale of slaves imported into the state, and making it easy for slaveholders to manumit slaves either by a registered certificate or by will. In 1788 the purchase of slaves for removal to another state was forbidden; they were allowed trial by jury "in all capital cases," and the earlier laws about slaves were simplified and restated. The emancipation of slaves by the Quakers was legalized in 1798. At that date, there were still about 33,000 slaves statewide.
Lobbying and boycotts 
The Society organized boycotts against New York merchants and newspaper owners involved in the slave trade. The Society had a special committee of militants who visited newspaper offices to warn publishers against accepting advertisements for the purchase or sale of slaves.
Another committee kept a list of people who were involved in the slave trade, and urged members to boycott anyone listed. As historian Roger Kennedy reports,
"Those [blacks] who remained in New York soon discovered that until the Manumission Society was organized, things had gotten worse, not better, for blacks. Despite the efforts of Burr, Hamilton, and Jay, the slave importers were busy. There was a 23 percent increase in slaves and a 33 percent increase in slaveholders in New York City in the 1790s."
Beginning in 1785, the Society lobbied for a state law to abolish slavery in New York, as all the other northern states (except New Jersey) had done. Considerable opposition came from the Dutch areas upstate (where slavery was still popular), as well as from the many businessmen in New York who profited from the slave trade. The two houses passed different emancipation bills and could not reconcile them. Every member of the New York legislature, but one, voted for some form of gradual emancipation, but no agreement could be reached on the civil rights of freedmen afterwards. Success finally came in 1799, when the Society supported a bill which said nothing about such rights. Jay signed this statement into law as governor.
The Act for the Gradual Abolition of Slavery 1799 declared that, from July 4 of that year, all children born to slave parents would be free. It also outlawed the exportation of current slaves. However, the Act held the caveat that the children would be subject to apprenticeship. These same children would be required to serve their mother’s owner until age twenty-eight for males, and age twenty-five for females.
The law defined the children of slaves as a type of indentured servant, while scheduling them for eventual freedom. The last slaves were emancipated by July 4, 1827; the process was the largest emancipation in North America before 1861. Thousands of freedmen celebrated with a parade in New York.
Other anti-slavery societies directed their attention to slavery as a national issue. The Quakers of New York petitioned the First Congress (under the Constitution) for the abolition of the slave trade. In addition, Benjamin Franklin and the Pennsylvania Abolition Society petitioned for the abolition of slavery in the new nation; but the NYMS did not act. (Hamilton and others felt that Federal action on slavery would endanger the compromise worked out at the Constitutional Convention, and so the new United States.) 
African Free School 
See also 
- Berlin, Ira and Leslie Harris, eds.. Slavery in New York. New Press, 2005. ISBN 1-56584-997-3.
- Gellman, David N. Emancipating New York: The Politics of Slavery And Freedom, 1777-1827 Louisiana State Univ Press, 2006. ISBN 0-8071-3174-1.
- Gellman, David N. "Pirates, Sugar, Debtors, and Slaves: Political Economy and the Case for Gradual Abolition in New York." Slavery & Abolition (2001) 22(2): 51-68. Issn: 0144-039x
- Gellman, David N. "Race, the Public Sphere, and Abolition in Late Eighteenth-century New York." Journal of the Early Republic (2000) 20(4): 607-636. Issn: 0275-1275 Fulltext: online in Jstor
- Leslie M. Harris. In the Shadow of Slavery: African Americans in New York City, 1626-1863 (2003),
- Horton, James Oliver. "Alexander Hamilton: Slavery and Race in a Revolutionary Generation" New-York Journal of American History 2004 65(3): 16-24. ISSN 1551-5486
- Roger G. Kennedy, Burr, Hamilton, and Jefferson: A Study in Character (2000)
- Littlefield, Daniel C. "John Jay, the Revolutionary Generation, and Slavery." New York History 2000 81(1): 91-132. Issn: 0146-437x
- Edgar J. McManus, History of Negro Slavery in New York (1968)
- Newman, Richard S. The Transformation of American Abolitionism: Fighting Slavery in the Early Republic. Univ of North Carolina Press, 2002. ISBN 0-8078-2671-5.
- Schaetzke, E. Anne. "Slavery in the Genesee Country (Also Known as Ontario County) 1789 to 1827." Afro-Americans in New York Life and History (1998) 22(1): 7-40. Issn: 0364-2437
- Jake Sudderth," John Jay and Slavery" (2002) at 
- "African-Americans in New York City, 1626-1863". Emory University Deptartment of History. Retrieved 2006-12-11.
- "Race and Antebellum New York City - New York Manumission Society". New-York Historical Society. Retrieved 2006-12-12.
- Davis, New York’s Manumission (Free the Slaves!)Society & Its African Free School 1785-1849, as cited.
- John Jay and Sarah Livingston Jay, Selected Letters of John Jay and Sarah Livingston Jay (2005) pp 297-99; online at 
- Edgar McManus, History of Negro Slavery in New York, Syracuse University Press, 1966
- Davis, op. cit.; Chernow, Alexander Hamilton p.214
- Ron Chernow, Alexander Hamilton, p. 215
- Peter Nelson. The American Revolution in New York: Its Political, Social and Economic Significance. (1926). p, 237.
- Roger G. Kennedy, Burr, Hamilton, and Jefferson: A Study in Character (2000) p. 92
- Herbert S. Parmet and Marie B. Hecht, Aaron Burr (1967) p. 76
- Edgar J. McManus, History of Negro Slavery in New York
- Edgar J. McManus, History of Negro Slavery in New York
- Jake Sudderth," John Jay and Slavery" (2002) at
- Forrest McDonald, Alexander Hamilton, a Biography(1982) p. 177

- OurWorld 2.0 - http://ourworld.unu.edu/en -
What does Cancún offer the climate generation?
Posted By Huw Oliphant On December 8, 2010 @ 8:30 pm In General | 4 Comments
Across the globe, young people are paying attention to what is happening at the COP16 climate negotiations in Cancun, Mexico. They are the “climate generation” — the ones who are going to have to live with our climate legacy, our tendency to prevaricate and our collective global failure to act sooner. The hope is that we will see substantive progress in Cancun towards an internationally binding agreement.
This hope was echoed by a group of 30 young climate champions (from Japan, Korea, Thailand, Indonesia, Australia and Vietnam) who met in Vietnam on 22-26 November 2010 and who called on the leaders of the world to stop talking and take action  on climate change.
They were brought together by the British Council Climate Generation Project  in a workshop that focused on green business and entrepreneurship, aimed to help participants develop their green projects through project management and leadership skills training, as well as interaction with experts in the field.
What can the climate generation do?
To begin with, business as usual is not an option. These young people are green entrepreneurs and they are all developing “cool” projects aimed at addressing climate and sustainability issues in their community.
These young people are green entrepreneurs and they are all developing cool projects aimed at addressing climate and sustainability issues in their community.
For instance, Syuichi Ishibashi from Japan has developed an impressive energy literacy project  to help monitor on-line energy use at home. Other projects include a factory  making furniture from recycled materials in Thailand; a community based conservation project  (link in Indonesian) near Lake Buret in Tulungagung, East Java; a green fashion show in Korea; and a project aimed at developing smart grid systems in Vietnam.
Young leaders can make a difference
Siti Nur Alliah, a British Council Climate Champion from Indonesia, is tackling a burning issue in the heart of Indonesia’s countryside in a quest to reverse climate change and lift a community out of poverty. As a community organiser, Alliah was keenly aware that farmers in Sekonyer village, central Borneo, remained poor no matter how much they burned surrounding forest to expand their farmland.
“Tragically, no matter how many resources are exploited, they are still considered as a community living under the poverty line,” she said.
So Alliah decided to see if there were more environmentally friendly agriculture methods that would have the added benefits of raising the quality and quantity of farm yields. The result was the Forest Farming project, which works with villagers in Sekonyer to expand their knowledge of agriculture to find better ways of managing their land.
Alliah says the project depended on cultivating local knowledge, encouraging the community to take action and fostering commitment in the village to sustained involvement. She says the great willingness of the indigenous people to work with her and her team to change their farming practices is a real sign that they are making a difference.
Climate Champion Hiroki Fukushima is part of a network of Japanese students who have issued the Climate Campus Challenge to educational institutions throughout the country. To help cut the education sector’s emissions of greenhouse gas, the students encourage universities to use renewable energy sources, retrofit campus buildings and buy green products. They then rank the colleges according to their success.
“We made an environmental survey of 334 universities and assessed them according to criteria, such as energy consumption per student, reduction in energy consumption, climate change policies, climate education for students and unique initiatives,” Hiroki said. “We published an Eco University Ranking and awarded certificates to universities with good environmental policies and activities, and organised a seminar to promote universities with good practice.”
Hiroki says the number of Japanese students participating in environmental activities has been on the rise since the 1990s but few of the activities were aimed at tackling climate change on campus. To remedy the situation, the core group studied projects overseas and thought how the activities could be best adapted to implement the campus challenge. They then enlisted students at various universities and established a network to realise the project.
Thai Climate Champion Panita Topathomwong is driving home her environmental message through her Cool Bus Cool Smile project. Panita is encouraging residents to cut their greenhouse gas emissions by leaving the car in the garage and hopping on public transport. She says that transport is one of the big sources of carbon dioxide emissions in urban centres and cutting back on car use would help lower the sector’s environmental impact and have the added benefit of easing gridlock.
So, with the support of the Bangkok Mass Transit Authority (BMTA) and the Ministry of Transport, Panita and her team organised a design competition to decorate three city buses and take the message to the road. The decorated buses toured Bangkok streets for three months after a high-profile launch in April 2009 attended by the Vice Minister of Transport, the Director of the BMTA, a representative from the British Embassy Bangkok and various media.
Climate Champions are young green entrepreneurs who are developing innovative projects aimed at addressing climate and sustainability issues in their community.
“We believe that by redecorating the buses with great images we conveyed the message about climate change to wider audiences in Bangkok. The buses were like mobile billboards which convinced everybody to be concerned about climate change,” Panita said.
It is cool to be a Climate Champion
Since 2008, the British Council Climate Generation has worked with over 120,000 young people from across the world interested in tackling climate change. Through the Climate Generation project, young people have the chance to come up with grassroots projects to combat and offset the effects of climate change. The participants are given the training and resources they need to realise their proposals and spread the word about the issue in their communities.
Climate Generation encourages young people interested in tackling climate change to connect with each other, come up with local solutions and reach out to local, national and international decision-makers.
As Climate Champions, programme participants have access to the training and information they need to ignite discussion in their communities and devise projects that will help people adapt to and mitigate climate change. The result is a global network of enthusiastic young people with the knowledge, contacts and on-the-ground resources to take action on climate change and make positive contributions to people’s lives.
Climate Champions have come from a wide variety of backgrounds including government, business, entrepreneurship, NGOs, education and media. Through training in communication and negotiation, they can learn how to put their plans into practice and give voice to the concerns of their generation.
Clearly, the Climate Champions are acting in advance of the outcomes at COP16 and “doing it themselves” but hope that real progress can be made at Cancun.
• ♦ •
For more information on the programme, please contact Huw Oliphant .
Article printed from OurWorld 2.0: http://ourworld.unu.edu/en
URL to article: http://ourworld.unu.edu/en/what-does-cancun-offer-for-the-climate-generation/
URLs in this post:
 stop talking and take action: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b8APNC8R57w
 Climate Generation Project: http://climatecoolnetwork.ning.com/
 energy literacy project: http://e-idea2010.climate-change.jp/en/ishibashi.php
 factory: http://www.kokoboard.com
 community based conservation project: http://www.pplhmangkubumi.or.id/
 Huw Oliphant: mailto:email@example.com
Copyright © 2008 OurWorld 2.0. All rights reserved.

Difference Between SD and SDHC Cards
SD stands for Secure Digital which is the most popular storage medium for mobile devices in use today. SD cards can reach up to 4GB of storage space and can come in 3 different form factors; the standard size, mini, and micro each one bigger than the next. SDHC (Secure Digital High Capacity) was developed to overcome the 4GB limit that SD faced, with its smallest capacity starting at 4GB and with a 32GB maximum capacity.
The move to SDHC came as more and more consumers start wanting higher capacity memory cards than what is available in the market. SD cards were once sufficient for use in digital cameras, but with portable media devices like mp3 players and video players, it becomes very apparent that more is always better.
SD was limited in the memory capacity not by the physical aspect of the device since you can always add more; it is because of the byte addressing system that is used in SD. Fat32, which is the most commonly used file system in mobile devices can only allocate up to 232 addresses or just under 4.3 billion. If each address is equivalent to 1 byte then there are only 4.3billion bytes or 4GB.
SDHC utilized sector addressing rather than byte addressing. Each sector is composed of 512 bytes each, allowing a theoretical maximum capacity of 2 terabytes. But currently, it is limited to a maximum of 32GB per card but will probably be increased once that threshold is reached.
SDHC cards are not necessarily faster than SD cards but the enforcement of minimum write speeds could potentially mean much faster read and write access. SD cards start out at 0Mb/s then gradually increases to its max speed then slows back down. The minimum speed of SDHC cards can range from 2Mb/s to 6Mb/s, meaning it starts at a much faster speed compared to SD cards.
In order to maintain backwards compatibility, most devices that take SDHC memory cards can also work with SD cards. Most memory cards are pretty easy to identify as SD or SDHC cards due to their capacities, but cards that have a 4GB capacity would need to be examined further since those could be either.
1. SD memory cards can only reach 4GB maximum while SDHC can reach 32GB
2. SD cards use byte addressing while SDHCS utilized sector addressing
3. SDHC cards can be potentially faster than SD cards
4. SDHC readers are backwards compatible with SD cards
Search DifferenceBetween.net :
Email This Post : If you like this article or our site. Please spread the word. Share it with your friends/family.
- Difference Between SD and HD | Difference Between
- Difference Between N95 and N96 | Difference Between
- Difference Between SD and XD | Difference Between | SD vs XD
Leave a Response

OHIO DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Division of Plant Industry – Apiculture
8995 East Main Street
Reynoldsburg, Ohio 43068-3399
“SWARM PREVENTION AND CONTROL”
When honey bees swarm it is a natural process where the colonies divide. In essence, it is nature’s way of trying to increase bee colony populations. Beekeepers can not stop all swarming. However, swarm prevention should be incorporated info a beekeeper’s management program, if he/she is interested in obtaining a good honey crop.
The following are some things that can be done to reduce swarming.
- Colonies should be requeened every 2 to 3 years. This can be done in the spring, fall, after a honey flow or as conditions dictate.
- Clipping the wings on a new queen is another attempt to prevent swarming. This procedure slows down swarming, but may resutt in the colony swarming anyway with a virgin queen.
- Reversing the hive bodies in the spring results in having an empty hive body being placed above the brood chamber, thus providing more room for queen laying, pollen and honey storage. This procedure may be done several times in the spring.
- Colonies can be split. This entails dividing the colony population in half to make up 2 hives. This is an effective method in swarm control.
- Cutting queen cells is a method many beekeepers use. However, the bees usually win out. Once the queen cells are eliminated the bees will produce more queen celIs.
|Prepared by:||Gordon Rudloff
Ohio Department of Agriculture

Inflammation Key to the Asthma-Sinus Connection
People with asthma frequently experience problems with their sinuses. And more than half of those who have chronic sinusitis also suffer from asthma.
Is there a connection? Each condition is marked by inflammation, which is to blame for both the symptoms of asthma—cough, chest tightness, shortness of breath, and wheezing—and sinusitis. Researchers speculate inflammation in the lungs or sinuses affects both. As a result, people with lung symptoms likely will eventually get symptoms in the nose, and vice versa. Plus, sinusitis can trigger asthma attacks.
What is sinusitis?
Sinusitis occurs when air-filled spaces behind the nose, forehead, cheeks, and eyes become inflamed and blocked with mucus. Often, infection results.
Symptoms usually occur after a cold that fails to improve or gets worse after five to seven days. They include:
People with asthma who experience sinus problems should talk with their doctor about treatment. Studies show that resolving sinusitis often improves asthma and decreases the need for asthma medication.
How you can protect yourself
Those with asthma need to be vigilant about colds and the flu. Viral respiratory infections often worsen asthma. Some prevention tips:
Avoid smoke and pollution.
Drink plenty of fluids.
Take decongestants for upper respiratory infections.
Get help for allergies.
Use a humidifier to increase moisture in nose and sinuses.

Sepia is a dark brown-grey color, named after the rich brown pigment derived from the ink sac of the common cuttlefish.
The word sepia is Greek for "cuttlefish".
Sepia in human culture
In the last quarter of the 18th century, Professor Jacob Seydelmann of Dresden developed a process to extract and produce a more concentrated form for use in watercolors and oil paints.
It has been suggested that the actual skin color of most black people would be most accurately represented by the color sepia.
There is a magazine for African-Americans called Sepia, which was started in 1947.
Sepia ink was commonly used as writing ink in classical times.
Sepia tones are used in photography; the hue resembles the effect of aging in old photographs and photographs chemically treated for archival purposes, an effect sometimes created by purpose. Many digital cameras include a sepia tone effect as well.

The Durban climate change negotiations are about three gaps.
The first is scientific and has to do with the amount of Greenhouse gases we are pumping into the atmosphere, and the levels we need to reduce to in order to prevent irreversible changes to the climate system. The second is political and affects the course of the negotiations. The third is the gap between public perception of climate change and the reality of the change that has already begun.
All of these gaps are interrelated.
In 2009 countries made pledges to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to keep global average temperature from increases below 2 degrees Celsius. Last week the United Nations Environment Programme issued “The Emissions Gap Report: Are the Copenhagen Accord Pledges Sufficient to Limit Global Warming to 2oC or 1.5oC?”
Following the conclusion of the 15th Conference of the Parties (COP 15) in Copenhagen, 42 industrialized countries submitted “economy-wide” emissions targets for 2020. Another 43 developing countries also submitted “nationally appropriate mitigation actions.” While the Copenhagen negotiations failed to produce an expected new climate change treaty, these pledges have become the basis for “analyzing the extent to which the global community is on track to meet long-term temperature goals” (for details, see the Emissions Gap Report).
They are also the source of much of the wrangling that continues in the Durban negotiations. The 2020 date is significant because that’s the date by which the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states that emissions cuts need to start being made if the global average temperature increases are to be kept below 2oC.
The report states that while it is possible to reach the required level of reductions by 2020, the current reduction pledges “are not adequate to reduce emissions to a level consistent with the 2°C target, and therefore lead to a gap.”
Research tells us that annual emissions need to be around 44 gigatonnes (Gt) of CO2 equivalent by 2020 to have a likely chance of holding global average temperatures to 2°C or less. (A gigatonne is equal to 1 billion tonnes of carbon. According to the International Energy Agency, the world emitted a record 30.6 tonnes of CO2 in 2010 - a 5% increase over the previous record level in 2008.
The report states that if the “highest ambitions” of all the countries that signed the Copenhagen Accord are implemented, annual emissions of greenhouse gases would be cut by around 7 (Gt) of CO2 equivalent by 2020.
This represents a cut in annual emissions to around 49 Gt of CO2 equivalent, which would still leave a gap of around 5 Gt compared with where we need to be—”a gap equal to the total emissions of the world’s cars, buses and trucks in 2005.”
However, if only the lowest ambition pledges are implemented, and if no clear rules are set in the negotiations, emissions could be around 53 Gt of CO2 equivalent in 2020 – “not that different from business-as-usual so the rules set in the negotiations clearly matter.” If it’s “business as usual” emissions could rise to 56 Gt by the same date.
This points to the second gap -- in political will. The differences between those who are feeling the brunt of rapid climate change right now -- primarily many of the Small Island Developing States and Least Developed Countries -- and the major emitters, is growing. The Framework Convention on Climate Change, negotiated nearly 20 years ago in Rio de Janeiro, calls on all nations to cooperate “...in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and their social and economic conditions.”
This has been traditionally interpreted to mean that the industrialized nations of Europe and North America bear a large portion of the responsibility for dealing with the problem since they are primarily responsible for the vast majority of historical emissions. Indeed, the United States was only recently surpassed by China as the largest GHG emitter. However, the US, Canada and others have higher per capita emissions levels.
Nevertheless, Canada has led the charge of developed nations that now say that it is “unfair” for developed countries to cut total emissions while developing nations such as China, India and Brazil are not bound to reduce in the same way. Canada has become the first nation in the world to say it will not abide by the Kyoto Protocol, nor will it agree to a second commitment period.
This approach has widened the gap between those that support a renewed Kyoto Protocol -- most of the developing world and the European Union (subject to developing nations such as China getting onboard) -- and those that say they don’t want a second commitment period. This group is led by Canada, Russia and Japan but others have now joined, so many that there is little chance that the Kyoto Protocol, which lapses next year, will be renewed in Durban.
Such positioning and politicking is widening the gap between developed and developing countries. For some, like the Small Island Developing States, there is a sense of being abandoned to their fates. Delay does not bode well for the Arctic either. People from both regions need immediate and sustained emissions reductions.
The third gap is between what we think or believe is (or is not) happening and what the facts are telling us. The latter are based on observation and a growing body of scientific knowledge. There are literally thousands of peer reviewed scientific papers that demonstrate that the climate is changing and we are primarily responsible.
The public in developed countries -- and many developing nations -- still has not embraced this reality. While millions of people are mobilized and calling for action, there is still a strong predilection to ignore the signals that are all around us, or to use the current economic downturn as an excuse for inaction. Both lead to the same end -- they are further narrowing the window in which we have time to act. And they are passing the problem of adaptation on to future generations, when the price will be much higher.

Physical examination by a health care provider confirms the abnormal curve of the spine. The doctor will also look for any nervous system (neurological) changes (weakness, paralysis, or changes in sensation) below the curve.
MRI (if there may be a tumor, infection, or neurological symptoms)
Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder:
Congenital kyphosis requires corrective surgery at an early age.
Scheuermann's disease is treated with a brace and physical therapy. Occasionally surgery is needed for large (greater than 60 degrees), painful curves.
Multiple compression fractures from osteoporosis can be left alone if there are no nervous system problems or pain. However, the osteoporosis needs to be treated to help prevent future fractures. For debilitating deformity or pain, surgery is an option.
Kyphosis caused by infection or tumor needs to be treated more aggressively, often with surgery and medications.
Treatment for other types of kyphosis depends on the cause. Surgery is needed if neurological symptoms or persistent pain develop.
Adolescents with Scheuermann's disease tend to do well even if they need surgery, and the disease stops once they stop growing. If the kyphosis is due to degenerative joint disease or multiple compression fractures, surgery is needed to correct the defect and improve pain.
Decreased lung capacity
Disabling back pain
Neurological symptoms including leg weakness or paralysis
Round back deformity
Treating and preventing osteoporosis can prevent many cases of kyphosis in the elderly. Early diagnosis and bracing of Scheuermann's disease can reduce the need for surgery, but there is no way to prevent the disease.
Spiegel DA, Hosalkar HS, Dormans JP. The spine. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 18th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2007:chap 678.
Thomas N. Joseph, MD, Private Practice specializing in Orthopaedics, subspecialty Foot and Ankle, Camden Bone & Joint, Camden, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Inc.

Dying Suddenly - Sudden Cardiac Death
People at Risk
- Individuals who have coronary artery disease, especially those who have suffered myocardial infarctions ("heart attacks") in the past
- Individuals who have congestive heart failure of any cause
- Individuals with intrinsic heart muscle disease such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
- Individuals with family history of heart muscle disease and SCD
- Individuals with syncope of unknown cause
- Individuals who abuse cocaine or heroin
Coronary artery disease is the underlying heart disease in 70 to 90% of individuals who succumb to SCD. Although many episodes of SCD are called "heart attacks," most of them, in fact, do not represent new myocardial infarctions. The arrhythmias that occur originate in previously damaged regions of the heart, and no new heart damage is necessary to start the arrhythmias.
Patients with congestive heart failure are at high risk of SCD. As left ventricular ejection fraction falls, the risk of SCD increases regardless of the underlying cause of the heart disease. Ironically, CHF patients who receive certain types of antiarrhythmic drugs are particularly prone to suffer proarrhythmic side effects of the medications because of interactions between the medications and the diseased tissue. Some non-antiarrhythmic medications, the beta blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, have been shown to decrease the risk of SCD in CHF patients, but the degree of risk is still much higher than that of a normal healthy person.
SCD is frequently seen in individuals with heart diseases where the primary problem lies with the heart muscle cells themselves; these diseases are called cardiomyopathies. Different cardiomyopathies are caused by different cellular defects, but most of the cardiomyopathies are associated at one time or another with congestive heart failure and the formation of scar tissue in the ventricles. Since many cardiomyopathies are genetically transmitted, individuals in families that exhibit cardiomyopathy who have family members that have died suddenly appear to be more prone to SCD than those without a family history of SCD.
Syncope is spontaneous loss of consciousness. Since arrhythmias may cause syncope and may also be the first and only manifestation of heart disease, thorough cardiac evaluation following an episode of syncope is very important. Although the most common causes of syncope are relatively benign, "aborted" SCD should be considered as a possible cause of syncope, especially in a patient who has not been evaluated. If no heart disease is found after thorough evaluation and the history suggests a simple drop in blood pressure in the absence of arrhythmias, one can be reassured that the likelihood of life-threatening disease is low.
Many drugs have been associated with serious arrhythmias. Antiarrhythmic medications, when administered to patients with heart disease, can have proarrhythmic effects as noted above. Cocaine has been noted to cause spasm of the coronary arteries and, in large repeated doses, to have a direct toxic effect on the heart muscle. The cocaine-induced cardiomyopathy shows the same tendency toward arrhythmias as other cardiomyopathies. In addition, cocaine increases adrenaline and catecholamine levels in the bloodstream that further stresses the heart and exacerbates the tendency toward arrhythmias.

William Gilly has seen a Kraken. The mythical squid beast with
ship-dooming tentacles surely exists, Gilly says, because he's seen
a baby one. "It was this big around," he says, making a circle as
big as a tire with his arms, a proud, boyish smile on his face.
Fishermen spotted the carcass of the 2.4-metre-long, 181-kilogram
baby giant squid in Monterey Bay three years ago, according to
"If you're an assistant professor proposing to study it, I don't
think you'd get tenure," he says. "But one has to exist."
laboratory at Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station
in Pacific Grove brims with squid décor: stuffed animals, preserved
specimens, glass figurines, drawings, photographs, plastic toys,
and piñatas. He has studied these denizens of the sea for almost
four decades, and he's handled countless numbers of the fabled
Kraken's smaller cousins, the very real jumbo Humboldt squid. Like
their giant counterparts, Humboldt squid are enigmatic. No one has
seen them mate or lay eggs. No one has watched them develop from
egg to adult. No one knows how many exist.
These tentacled titans have now ensnared marine biologists with
another riddle: they have left their normal gathering grounds in
the Sea of Cortez in Baja California, Mexico. Fishermen worry that
a critical part of their livelihood may be gone. Many families have
depended on Humboldt squid since the slippery creatures moved in
droves into the Gulf of California's Guaymas Basin in the
"We have a huge problem on our hands," says coordinator Juan
Pedro Vela Arreola of the Alianza de Ribereños y
Armadores, an association of fishermen and producers in Mexico.
"Fishermen are desperate."
Gilly blames the most recent El Niño in the Pacific Ocean for
forcing some Humboldt squid to migrate away. Others have physically
shrunk -- just one bizarre adaptation among their many strange
body-shifting traits. Leaders of Mexican fisheries and scientists
are banding together to figure out whether the diablos
rojos (red devils) will come back, and how to cope in the
"You have to learn to live in a very unpredictable way," says
Unai Markaida of El Colegio de la Frontera Sur (ECOSUR)
in Campeche, Mexico. "You live like a squid, and you adapt to the
life it leads."
"They're very mysterious," says marine biologist Danna Staaf,
stressing very in a slightly higher pitch. "And
Staaf, a self-described "cephalopodiatrist,"
completed her PhD with Gilly's team. She studied Humboldt squid on
two summer research cruises in the Gulf of California before the
latest El Niño drove them away. She and her crewmates pulled up to
15 squid out of the water every night, when they would come up to
the surface from depths of more than 975 metres to feed. Many of
the 9-kilogram cephalopods she caught were about 1.2 metres long.
Most were a year old. Scientists can tell their age by looking at
the number of rings on tiny crystals located near their brain
called statoliths, like botanists can age a tree by counting its
rings. These stones help a squid detect gravity and maintain their
balance and sense of space.
The scientists stored some of the catch in their "squid condo,"
an oversize cooler with continuously flowing water and six clear,
plastic tubes. They housed squid in separate tubes to keep them
from attacking one another. Over the next few days, they studied
the squids' behaviours and neurophysiology. For instance, altering
the temperature and oxygen content of the water could trigger or
change their escape response -- the way squid dart away when
startled by a predator.
Staaf dissected other squid to study their development, the
focus of her dissertation. She used their eggs and sperm to make
squid babies. She wanted to discover the temperature range at which
their eggs could hatch and develop. At the time, Humboldt squid had
spread to waters off the coast of Monterey. Marine scientists
thought the squid might establish new colonies there, but Staaf
wanted to know whether it was even possible for the animals to grow
in the much cooler waters of California's Pacific coast. In the
lab, she found, their
eggs can grow between temperatures of 15 and 25 degrees
Celsius, suggesting it is possible they could set up a breeding
population. Whether squid babies have the same preferences in the
wild is still unknown, Staaf says.
Other team members studied squid chromatophores, structures in
their muscles that allow them to change colour. Humboldts sometimes
flash from red to white as they propel themselves through dark
waters. Scientists don't know how they control these colour shifts,
whether it's the brain or local nerve cells that set off the
flickering. They also don't fully understand why they suddenly
change colours, but some speculate it's a form of
When they're not in direct contact with other squid, their flesh
flickers from red to white in a random, mosaic-like pattern. Gilly
compares this to visual white noise. But as they interact with
their species, the irregular colour waves become more organised,
like a cephalopod Morse code, Gilly says. They can change the
intensity of the flashing, as well as the rhythm and frequency.
Squid might use these "calls," together with arm posturing, to
attract mates or to establish hierarchies, for example.
Gilly and his team have seen some of these behaviours through
underwater "Crittercams," about
the size of 340-gram drink bottle, attached to a squid's back.
"Ideally, we'd also like to see what they eat," Gilly says, because
that might help his team study these animals. Scientists can't get
Humboldts to eat in the lab, so squid last only a few days in
Indeed, squid dislike being trapped, strongly. Sometimes they
get so anxious, they ram themselves against the tank. "They've
never seen the bottom. They've certainly never seen the wall of a
tank," Gilly says. "They're intelligent organisms. And when you put
one in an abnormal situation, they get totally freaked out. They
don't do their flickering in the lab," he notes.
Scientists do know that during the day, Humboldt squid forage
for silvery lanternfish and other small animals in the oxygen
minimum zone, a dark, cold netherworld more than 900 metres deep.
Here, oxygen is scarce, and while few animals can withstand its
hostile environment, Humboldts seem to thrive. "Living in low
oxygen -- that's surprising, especially for an animal that's an
athlete," Markaida says. How they move and how their nervous system
functions under these conditions is still a mystery.
Widespread changes in the temperatures of Earth's oceans have
compelled many creatures, including the powerful Humboldt squid, to
seek new climes. Their dominion usually stretches from Argentina to
California, but more recently they've been spotted in Canada and
Alaska. Scientists don't yet understand how the squid are settling
into their new hangouts. This month, a few Humboldts stranded
themselves on the beaches of Pacific Grove, Calif, while
whale-watching boats have spotted them near Point Pinos. These
sightings might be a sign they are returning, Gilly says.

Midnight Rising: John Brown & the Raid that Sparked the Civil War
November 2, 2011
Abolitionist John Brown is best known for his foiled attempt to seize the federal armory and arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, on October 16th 1859. Three years after he and his sons raided and viciously killed five men at a pro-slavery settlement in Kansas, Brown led 18 men, including five blacks and two of his sons, to what is now Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. Ten of the men were killed in the raid, one got away, and seven were hanged, including Brown. Our guest, Pulitzer-prize winning journalist TONY HORWITZ, considers if Brown’s intention was to be a martyr for his vehement anti-slavery war stance, as he deepened and exposed the divide between the North and the South and forced people to take sides. In his new book, Midnight Rising: John Brown and the Raid that Sparked the Civil War, he researches the beginnings of Brown’s Calvinist, anti-slavery family and ponders the question whether John Brown's legacy is as a hero or a zealous vigilante.

Asbestos Exposure in the Workplace
Asbestos exposure is common among those who work in the trades or do manual labor. Discuss your work history with your doctor if you fall into one of the high risk categories listed below. This will keep your doctor on the alert for symptoms of asbestos–related diseases, which often take decades to develop after the initial asbestos exposure (see asbestosis, mesothelioma, and lung cancer for details).
If your asbestos exposure took place during the course of private employment, you may be eligible to file a workers' compensation claim. You may also have a case against the manufacturer of the asbestos product involved. To learn more about workers' compensation options, visit the asbestos workers' compensation section.
Additional Information About High Risk Jobs
The following list of trades have a high incidence of asbestos exposure. More specific information about asbestos exposure on the following jobs can be found at Asbestos Network.
Insulators, or people that worked extensively around asbestos insulation, are especially at risk for the development of an asbestos related disease. Common products that insulators worked with are:
- asbestos pipe covering,
- asbestos block insulation,
- asbestos containing cement,
- asbestos lagging, or
- Zonolite Attic Insulation.
Those involved with the building or maintenance of ships are at risk for high doses of airborne asbestos. Commonly used around boilers and steam pipes, asbestos insulation may become air borne during simple routine maintenance.
Power Plants, Refineries and Industrial Settings
Power plants, refineries and industrial settings are jobsites where asbestos was used extensively.
Asbestos products were used extensively in both home and commercial construction. Fireproofing, insulation, joint compounds, plaster and patching compounds are just a few of the commonly used products that contained asbestos. Plumbers and pipefitters are also at risk—exposed through asbestos laden cement pipes, deteriorating asbestos insulation and pipe coverings.
Pipefitters and Plumbers
Miners of asbestos, talc and vermiculite are at significant risk for heavy asbestos exposure and asbestos disease. Large amounts of asbestos dust, poor ventilation and lack of proper breathing protection were contributing factors to the high incidence of mesothelioma in the Iron Range miners.
The textile industry used asbestos in heat resistant products like heat–resistant pads, asbestos gloves, and woven into cloth coverings and protective blankets.
There was extensive use of asbestos in brake pads and shoes, as well as asbestos clutch discs and linings. For mechanics, the danger from asbestos resides in asbestos fibers becoming airborne during brake, clutch, and gasket installation, removal, and inspection.
The high heat output of steam and diesel locomotives made them a perfect candidate for the heat resistant properties of asbestos heat insulation. Boilers, steam pipes, hot water lines and refrigeration units were common applications of asbestos heat wrap and insulation. Regular maintenance involved the removal and replacement of asbestos insulation; exposing workers to airborne asbestos fibers.
Appliance shops, where older asbestos–containing consumer products are dismantled and repaired.
Helping Those With Asbestos & Work Related Injuries
Our asbestos attorneys have helped asbestos victims for over 30 years. If asbestos exposure has affected you and you are suffering from an asbestos–related disease, contact our team of expert asbestos attorneys to learn more about how we can help you.

Definition of Alveoli
Alveoli: The plural of alveolus. The alveoli are tiny air sacs within the lungs where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide takes place.
Last Editorial Review: 6/14/2012
Back to MedTerms online medical dictionary A-Z List
Need help identifying pills and medications?
Get the latest health and medical information delivered direct to your inbox FREE!

Will our beaches become an example of the Tragedy of the Commons?
Click on image for full size
NCAR Digital Library
The Tragedy of the Commons
The term "Tragedy of the Commons" was coined by Garrett Hardin in a 1968 article in Science magazine. The concept, however, dates back to the days of Aristotle. Briefly, it states that a shared resource is inevitably ruined by uncontrolled use.
The metaphor that Hardin uses to explain the concept is that of a community common or park on which the town’s people bring their cows to be fed. In the back of everyone’s mind is the fact that the common is going to be ruined because the grass is going to be eaten to depletion. Still, everyone wants to get grass for their cows. No one thinks or cares about the consequences of so many cows eating the grass, and the Tragedy of the Commons occurs.
Human actions that many categorize as examples of the phenomenon include human-created air pollution; the hunting of the American buffalo to near extinction in the 1800s; the widespread abuse and destruction of rainforests and our oceans’ coral reefs; and human-induced climate change due largely to the burning of fossil fuels for energy use.
Some people believe that the Tragedy of the Commons can only be averted by making most commodities private property. But how does someone own the air or the ocean? And can either the air or ocean stay unpolluted with populations of 10 million or more in the world’s megacities? Others believe the "Tragedy of the Commons" can be avoided through laws and taxing devices which make it more costly to serve one’s self interest over the common good.
What almost everyone can agree on for now is that such vital resources need some form of control so that the world’s natural resources can be sustained and the Tragedy of the Commons can be avoided.
Last modified February 19, 2006 by Teri Eastburn.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!Cool It!
is the new card game from the Union of Concerned Scientists that teaches kids about the choices we have when it comes to climate change—and how policy and technology decisions made today will matter. Cool It! is available in our online store
You might also be interested in:
What do smog, acid rain, carbon monoxide, fossil fuel exhausts, and tropospheric ozone have in common? They are all examples of air pollution. Air pollution is not new. As far back as the 13 th century,...more
Rainbows appear in the sky when there is bright sunlight and rain. Sunlight is known as visible or white light and is actually a mixture of colors. Rainbows result from the refraction and reflection of...more
The Earth travels around the sun one full time per year. During this year, the seasons change depending on the amount of sunlight reaching the surface and the Earth's tilt as it revolves around the sun....more
Scientists sometimes travel in specially outfitted airplanes in order to gather data about atmospheric conditions. These research aircraft have special inlet ports that bring air from the outside into...more
An anemometer is a weather instrument used to measure the wind (it can also be called a wind gauge). Anemometers can measure wind speed, wind direction, and other information like the largest gust of wind...more
Thermometers measure temperature. "Thermo" means heat and "meter" means to measure. You can use a thermometer to measure the temperature of many things, including the temperature of...more
Weather balloons are used to carry weather instruments that measure temperature, pressure, humidity, and winds in the lowest few miles of the atmosphere. The balloons are made of rubber and weigh up to...more

How can we create more effective education systems that provide access and highquality education for all students; capitalizing on emerging technologies for learning anywhere, anytime; and responsive to the 21st century context of an interconnected global economy and rapidly emerging global society?
That was an organizing question for more than a thousand people who gathered in Doha, Qatar, for the inaugural World Innovation Summit for Education (WISE) last November. Organized by the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science, and Community Development, the summit brought together key individuals from more than 120 countries on every contintent. The summit’s goal was to examine the key challenges facing education around the globe and to promote visionary thinking about new education models.
The summit was opened by Her Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser al-Missned, chair of the foundation, who said, “Today, we place great faith in the power of education to prepare world citizens for a peaceful and cooperative future and to prepare citizens of our individual nations for the cultural transformations that result from globalization.” The WISE Summit was designed to be a multidisciplinary platform to promote international dialogue about best practices, to recognize exceptional impact through an annual WISE awards program, and to promote innovation and educational engagement on a global scale.
The summit builds on and extends the Qatar Foundation’s domestic efforts to modernize Qatar’s own education system, including its flagship Education City, where more than eight top-flight American universities offer degree courses to students from a host of countries.
This article cannot deal with every issue on the summit agenda. What follows are a few examples of the challenges and innovations under discussion.
Access to Education
At the most fundamental level, the world has still not achieved the commitment made by the world’s governments to provide basic education for all children. While there has been remarkable progress worldwide in giving millions of children, including girls, access to primary education, 75 million children never receive any schooling, primarily girls and children in conflict zones. Governments usually provide basic education, but since many of these children are in “weak states,” much of the discussion focused on the role of nongovernmental schools and organizations in reaching the hardest to reach and on the need for schools to be declared “protected zones” in times of conflict.
Quality of Education
Although the size of education systems has increased enormously in recent decades, the quality has not. Therefore, in higher education, summit participants addressed the role of accreditation systems in improving quality in higher education, making education more relevant in the dynamic global knowledge economy, and moving from measuring inputs to outputs. In elementary and secondary education, the growth of international assessments has increasingly led countries to compare themselves to emerging global standards of excellence and to examine how their education systems can emulate the effectiveness of the highest performing education systems.
In keeping with the summit’s emphasis on innovation, central themes included using technology to increase access, improve performance, and promote a new conceptualization of education. For example, in Brazil, a distance learning initiative transmits live classes via videoconference to 25,000 students in 700 secondary school classrooms throughout the remote reaches of the Amazon forest. In sub-Saharan Africa, a consortium of 15 universities in nine countries delivers open educational resources to almost one quarter million teachers, many of whom are not formally trained.
And in India, the provocative “hole in the wall” experiments, in which computers are installed in walls in slum areas and left for children to use unsupervised, show just how much children can learn on their own, without teachers, in “self-organized learning environments.” There was also lively debate about the potential educational uses of Twitter, videogames, and, especially, mobile phones, which now have four billion customers around the world (compared with 1.5 billion e-mail accounts).
Given this huge penetration of mobile phones, could strong educational applications be developed so that poorer countries can leapfrog the lack of Internet access?
Finally, there was widespread recognition that the content of education itself needs to change--that a global world requires a global education. Echoing Confucius’ sentiment that “It is better to take a journey of 10,000 li than to read 10,000 books,” there was agreement that more students need to study outside their own countries. Currently, only about 2% of higher education students do so. Migration and increasing diversity within countries also require that schools, from kindergarten on, teach tolerance and respect for other cultures and faiths.
And the rapid pace of globalization is causing countries everywhere to recognize that their young people need to be more globally minded and to ask: What should all education systems teach their young people about other cultures, languages, and global challenges? How can education bring the world to students and students to the world? Overall, the summit made a convincing case that significant rethinking of education is needed. All nations share an interest in creating more effective education systems that provide access and high-quality education for all students, that capitalize on emerging technologies for learning anywhere and anytime, and that are responsive to the 21st-century context of an interconnected global economy and rapidly emerging global society. The WISE Initiative and annual summit were attempts to provoke some answers to the questions that concern all nations.
Author: Vivien Stewart
Originally published on pdkintl.org.

As previous research has demonstrated, HIV attacks the host's immune system, including an important category of T cells critical for fighting infection called CD4+ T cells. The virus specifically destroys those CD4+ T cells that reside in the tissues of the body like the intestine and lung that interface with the outside environment. As HIV replicates in the human body, the tissue levels of CD4+ T cells are killed and, when the number of these cells drop below a certain level, a patient develops AIDS. At this point, the patient's immune system is weakened enough to allow infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites that are normally held at bay by a healthy human body. The infected body's inability to fight off these "intruders," leads to death.
"To learn more about HIV, its impacts and possible treatments, we study simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), a close relative of HIV that infects and causes AIDS in nonhuman primates," explained the study's lead author Louis Picker, M.D. Picker serves as director of the VGTI's vaccine program and associate director of the VGTI. He is also a professor of pathology, and molecular microbiology and immunology in the OHSU School of Medicine; and director of the Division of Pathobiology and Immunology at the OHSU Oregon National Primate Research Center.
"What we were able to discover using SIV-infected monkeys was that a certain naturally occurring protein called interleukin-15 (IL-15) caused a dramatic restoration of tissue CD4+ T cel
Contact: Jim Newman
Oregon Health & Science University

Certain lifestyle factors greatly increase your risk of contracting HIV infection and developing AIDS. By avoiding behaviors that are associated with increasing your risk, you can greatly reduce your risk.
Risk factors include:
Having Unprotected Sex
Most people become infected with HIV through sexual activity. You can contract AIDS by not using a condom when having sexual relations with a person infected with HIV. Not using condoms properly can also put you at increased risk for acquiring HIV infection. During sex, the vagina, vulva, penis, rectum, and mouth can provide entry points for the virus.
Other risky behaviors include having:
- Sex with someone without knowing his or her HIV status
- More than one sex partner
- Sex with someone who has more than one sexual partner
- Anal intercourse
Men who have sex with other men may be at a higher risk of being infected with HIV. Having unprotected sex and using drugs (eg, methamphetamines) during sex can increase this risk. Women who engage in risky behaviors and have both male and female partners may also be at a greater risk.
If you inject illegal drugs, this increases your risk of becoming infected with HIV. Using a needle or syringe that contains even a small amount of infected blood can transmit HIV infection.
Having Certain Medical Conditions
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and vaginal infections caused by bacteria tend to increase the risk of HIV transmission during sex with an HIV-infected partner. Examples of STDs include:
For men, not being circumcised can also increase the risk of getting HIV infection.
Having Certain Medical Procedures
Having a blood transfusion or receiving blood products before 1985 increases your risk of HIV infection and AIDS. Before blood banks began testing donated blood for HIV in 1985, there was no way of knowing if the blood was contaminated with HIV, and recipients could become infected through transfusions.
Receiving blood products, tissue or organ transplantation, or artificial insemination increases your risk of HIV infection and AIDS. Even though blood products are now screened for HIV, there is still some degree of risk because tests cannot detect HIV immediately after transmission.
Being a Healthcare Worker
Exposure to contaminated blood and needles puts healthcare workers at risk for HIV.
- Reviewer: Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
- Review Date: 12/2011 -
- Update Date: 12/30/2011 -

Chapter 31 of the Book of Proverbs in the Hebrew Bible is presented as advice, which Lemuel's mother gave to him about how a virtuous king should reign and also describing how an ideal wife or virtuous woman should behave. The second section of text of this chapter directs women to be industrious and of good report; however, the first section is directed exclusively to men. It seems to me that we normally associate Proverbs 31 with finding a wife of noble character; hence, the popular phrase "Proverbs 31 Woman," while ignoring the advice for men. However, only vv.10-31 talks about the woman of noble character. What about the beginning of the chapter? What about the “Proverbs 31 Man?” On an openminded review of the chapter, it occurred to me that verses 1-9, 23 & 28 talks about male behavior and wise steps towards being a good leader, character and husband.
Men are called to be nobles. We are to be "kings," or leaders, especially in the house and in the church. More so, just as the nobility are set apart from the common people and are to be distinguished with virtues and high standards, we are to be set apart-set apart from the world, or holy to God-and we are to be marked with honor, dignity, integrity, loyalty, righteousness and holiness. A commentary in my Bible says that "Lemuel" means "belonging to God." In other words, the noble man belongs to God, is set apart for God's use only. Proverbs 31:2- 3 -- a noble man guards his heart and sets his priorities straight.
Proverbs 31:4-7 -- a noble man does not get drunk on wine but is instead filled with the Spirit; a noble man does not love the world or anything in the world. Proverbs 31:8-9 -- a noble man stands up for what is right and shows concern for others. Such are the sayings of King Lemuel, a noble man belonging to God. Many biblical scholars believe that Lemuel is another name for King Solomon, whose mother was Bathsheba.
Interesting enough while King Solomon is often given credit for being the wisest man in the Bible, he did not follow the advice of his mother especially in Proverbs 31: 3 Do not spend your strength on women, your vigor on those who ruin kings. There are countless numbers of prominent men whom felt the consequences of playing loosely with the advice of Proverbs 31:3. Interestingly enough, Solomon had numerous wives and concubines and suffered the repercussions thus do many men of current times.
As Christian men fall short of the “Proverbs 31 Man” on so many different levels, it seems hypocritical for men to continue without change in their own lives expect every Christian women to be a “Proverbs 31 Woman.”
Nevertheless, there are Proverbs 31 men and women men but they are not found among the violent, drunkards, or whoremongers we find in our churches and sitting in high places everywhere. We must stop preaching so loudly about the Proverbs 31 woman until we at least take a closer look and begin to teach about the Proverbs 31 man.
|< Prev||Next >|

On Cancer’s Trail
by Florence Williams
Stefanie Raymond-Whish was 9 years old when her grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer. A traditional Navajo who raised 15 children after her husband died in a car wreck, Raymond-Whish's ama' sa' ni seldom spoke about her illness. Even after her surgery, when she lived with the grandchildren and their mother, she always acted strong around the kids. It became a pattern: When Raymond-Whish was 13, her 38-year-old mother, Nellie Sandoval, was also diagnosed with breast cancer. And Sandoval was equally reserved on the subject. "My mother was really good about not appearing sick in front of us," says Raymond-Whish, now 32. "As a little girl, I knew about cancer, but didn't understand the impact of it at the time."
She understood it better by the time she was in college, in Flagstaff, Ariz., when a new tumor appeared in her mother's other breast. "When my mom had her recurrence, that's when it really hit me ... it was really upsetting. I went home to Farmington for her lumpectomy." Sandoval survived the disease, but not without a long struggle that included chemotherapy, radiation, and finally a double mastectomy. "My breasts were pretty mangled," says Sandoval, now 58. "So I said, 'Just get rid of them.' " Both Sandoval and her daughter have made breast cancer and its impact on Navajos the focus of their lives. Sandoval became an activist and filmmaker, working out of her papaya-colored home in Farmington, N.M. Raymond-Whish has taken her mission a step further: She works as a molecular biologist at the University of Northern Arizona, searching for breast cancer's root causes. "Is there any difference in how breast cancer develops in Native Americans and non-Native Americans?" she asks. One possible - and provocative - answer is emerging from her lab at the university: uranium.
Scientists have long known that uranium damages human cells. But in over six decades of atomic health testing, no one had ever noticed that uranium, at low doses, can act like an estrogen. No one, that is, until recently, when Raymond-Whish and her coworkers observed some unusual effects in lab animals.
Uranium can be found in several of the Jurassic sandstones that lie beneath the Four Corners region like a wrecked layered pastry. The target of frenzied mining throughout the Cold War, uranium ore has been wrenched from the ground, pulverized, milled and tossed in tailings across the Navajo Reservation. Low-level radioactive waste has dissolved into groundwater, escaped onto dust particles and blown off thousands of passing trucks to settle uneasily on surface soils. Over 1,000 abandoned uranium mines pockmark Navajo lands, but only half of them have been reclaimed. Exposure to uranium and its daughter elements has been linked to lung cancer, kidney damage and bone disease in Navajos, and it is the suspected culprit in numerous other medical conditions, from degenerative nerve disease and birth defects to a variety of other cancers.
Raymond-Whish's research lab is tucked inside a neo-Grecian edifice on the Northern Arizona University campus. With her gloved hands in a ventilated booth, the white-coated scientist carefully measures out uranium in solution into small test tubes. The solution will be injected into dishes of cultivated human breast cells, donated by a nun who died of breast cancer in 1979. The MCF-7 cells, as they are known, have been kept alive by the Michigan Cancer Fund through 178 generations of cell division. They are famous among researchers for the properties they exhibit in lab experiments. For example, estrogen causes them to proliferate rapidly - exactly as it does in real-life breast tissue, which is why many women diagnosed with breast cancer have their estrogen-producing ovaries removed. Raymond-Whish wants to see if the cells react in the same way to uranium.
"What I'm really interested in is the development of the mammary gland," says Raymond-Whish, who at this point is just weeks away from finishing her doctoral dissertation. A former teen rodeo star in barrel racing, she once wanted to be a veterinarian. But NAU didn't have a vet school, so she majored in zoology. That eventually landed her in the Discovery Research lab, where she studied the effects of pollution on tadpoles. She found she loved research. "It's like being a detective," she says.
The lab's discoveries have already demolished the conventional wisdom on the properties of uranium. Not only does the heavy metal appear to alter mammary cells at very low doses, but it also seems to interfere with normal hormonal signals. Sometimes the uranium follows the same pathways as estrogen, but sometimes it doesn't, which means it's triggering other endocrine responses as well. "We don't yet know the mechanism of how uranium is affecting these cells," Raymond-Whish says, "but we do know an estrogen receptor is involved. We see it in both animals and MCF-7 cells."
Although the work in Raymond-Whish's lab is considered pure research science, it is impossible to sift it from the real-world context of her family, her culture and her beliefs. Breast, uterine and ovarian cancers have risen steeply in Indian country since the advent of uranium mining. Having watched her grandmother and mother suffer, and now with two kids of her own, 14 and 4 years old, Raymond-Whish can't help but wonder if she's next in line.
But while Raymond-Whish's intimate acquaintance with cancer may harm her credibility as a dispassionate scientist, it may also propel her to help make startling discoveries where no one else has thought to look.
The lab's investigation started several years ago, when Northern Arizona University became part of a team that received a five-year grant from the National Cancer Institute. The project is designed to address community health care, so the local Navajo elders had a few suggestions. They told the scientists they wanted to know more about the health effects of uranium pollution.
"So I started adding uranium to the drinking water of my lab animals," recalls physiologist Cheryl Dyer, who was Raymond-Whish's faculty advisor at the time. "And because I'm an ovarian physiologist, I wanted to see what happened in the ovary." Uranium has long been known to be radioactive and toxic, but no one had ever looked at its effects on follicle counts, or the number of "pre" eggs - eggs in the ovary that have not yet been released for fertilization. Dyer and Raymond-Whish found that the number of pre-eggs declined with low exposure to uranium, and that the mice developed heavier-than-normal uteruses. Normally, a toxic chemical will cause an organ such as a kidney to shrink, not expand. "I said, 'Whoa, what is going on here?' " says Dyer. "I started to wonder if there were other heavy metals that cause these changes, and it turns out cadmium does the same thing. That's when a light bulb went off in my head. Cadmium is an estrogen mimic." All those decades of lab work with atomic elements, and "they had completely missed the boat on estrogen mimicry."
Raymond-Whish was the lead author of a paper showing the unexpected effects of uranium on mouse follicle counts, uterine weights and accelerated puberty. "Drinking Water with Uranium below U.S. EPA Water Standard Causes Estrogen Receptor Dependent Responses in Female Mice" was published in December in Environmental Health Perspectives, a peer-reviewed journal put out by the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences. Raymond-Whish concluded that uranium acts as an estrogen, and she recommended that Navajo girls and women be followed closely for reproductive cancers. In conversation, Dyer makes her opinion clear: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency should lower its drinking water standard for uranium from 30 micrograms per liter to 20 micrograms, the Canadian standard. But Dyer and Raymond-Whish are tip-toeing out on a treacherous scientific limb by suggesting policy changes that are based on controversial data.
Raymond-Whish's work and its results have landed her in the middle of a scientific and regulatory quagmire. It's one thing to regulate a chemical known to be toxic at high doses; it's entirely another to suggest regulating minute levels of a substance that is readily found across a large swath of the American West. Many communities, not just those on the reservation, are affected by uranium. Recent tests in Colorado, for example, revealed that 37 cities and towns in the state depend on drinking water that exceeds federal levels for uranium and its daughter nuclides.
Uranium is not just an emotional issue for Raymond-Whish, but for the tribe as a whole. The legacy of mining the element on the 27,000-square-mile reservation is so deeply and collectively felt that the Navajo Nation banned it altogether in 2005 in the face of globally rising ore prices. During the '40s and the Cold War period, the U.S. government used yellow cake - or milled and concentrated uranium ore - to build nuclear weapons. The government stopped buying the ore for weapons in 1971, but the commercial nuclear energy market picked up the slack until the early 1980s. Only about a quarter of all U.S. uranium miners were Native American - Laguna, Hopi, Zuni and Ute as well as Navajo. But Native Americans have been disproportionately affected: Their tribal lands are still contaminated, and former miners suffer illnesses and deaths for which many families are still awaiting compensation.
Despite the tribal ban, at least five companies are seeking state permits in New Mexico to mine lands just off the reservation, including on tribal allotment land. In Arizona, 700 individual mining claims were filed in 2005. The prehistoric sea and river beds that run underground from Naturita, Colo., to Grants, N.M., and across to Moab, Utah, still hold an estimated 600 million pounds of low-grade ore. But for every 4 pounds of uranium extracted, 996 pounds of slightly radioactive waste is left over, in piles, in pits and eventually in the soil, arroyos and underground aquifers.
Some Western tailings piles, like those outside of Monticello, Utah, or Grand Junction, Colo., have been cleaned up. But those on tribal lands have fallen through yawning bureaucratic and regulatory gaps. It's estimated that up to 25 percent of unregulated water sources on the Navajo Reservation exceed federal drinking water standards for uranium. And many families still haul water from these wells, despite warnings by health providers and advocacy groups.
In her lab experiments, Raymond-Whish applies concentrations of uranium that match those of water supplies in parts of the Four Corners, at or slightly above the current EPA standard. She will treat the mammary cells - which come bathed in a red wash of nutrients that resembles weak Kool-Aid - twice in nine days with differing doses. She will then collect the breast cells, extract their protein signatures, and use a tedious process to examine differences in the number of their estrogen receptors. She will also feed rats different mixtures of uranium-tainted water and examine their mammary glands for altered development. She will compare those results to rats fed a well-known synthetic estrogen, diethylstilbestrol, or DES, and to rats that have drunk plain tap water. She'll look for changes to the mammary glands' terminal end buds, lobules and milk ducts, changes that may make them more prone to breast cancer. The work is controversial, and its implications, both for the science of breast cancer and for the treatment of past and future mining pollution, could be profound.
Like Marie Curie over a century before, Raymond-Whish is both repelled and fascinated by the heavy element's mysterious abilities to alter living cells. In some respects, Raymond-Whish and Curie are not dissimilar. Curie, a Polish Jew working in anti-Semitic France, was the first woman to teach at the Sorbonne. As the first Navajo to be awarded a Ph.D. in the Biology Department of NAU, Raymond-Whish displays a confident ease in navigating a different dominant culture. Like Curie, she is driven by an unrelenting curiosity.
If it was a difficult journey from being Rookie of the Year in barrel racing to creating stunning presentations on heavy metals, Raymond-Whish doesn't show it. She moves through the fluorescent-lit lab in a quiet, deliberate fashion, her long, shiny hair neatly in place.
"I like it that you're working on something no one knows the answers to and you're finding the answers," says Raymond-Whish. She grew up in Colorado and New Mexico with her siblings, stepfather and mother, who was a high school guidance counselor before becoming a breast-cancer activist. Forty-four percent of Navajos do not graduate from high school, but Raymond-Whish's mother made sure that she did. "Everybody's saying it's a big deal for me to get a Ph.D. For me, nothing less was expected than, 'You're going to college.' "
The lab work is routine - even tedious - but it's also demanding and consuming. She is tired. With her oral defense looming before a committee of distinguished faculty, she doesn't slow down. In the mornings, she drops her two kids at school. Her husband, Bryan, a Wichita Indian, works nearby in the university's admissions office. She shuttles from the tissue culture room down a long linoleum-floored corridor to the animal histology lab with its wide-screened computer that magnifies mouse ovary sections 40 times over. Scrolling across the screen to count the follicles is her least favorite job. "I get motion sick," she says. The ovaries dominate the screen like giant pink potato chips, lightly salted.
The science of endocrine disruptors, which studies chemicals that mimic hormones, is a little over 10 years old and still rife with skeptics. It has only been in recent years that very low doses of chemicals - in the parts-per-billion range - have been measurable. (A part per billion is the equivalent of one kernel of corn in a corn-filled silo 45 feet tall.) But natural hormones do their work at these very low levels in the human body. One theory holds that certain environmental chemicals, both natural and man-made, can bind to and deceive the hormone receptors.
These receptors are the signal towers that trigger - or prevent - cellular responses that govern everything from metabolism to sex. Artificial chemicals scramble the signals. They appear to be interfering with normal cellular communication and altering how and when the cells, glands and organs develop. Endocrine disruptors have been implicated in obesity, infertility and the timing of puberty as well as in cancer. When many older women stopped taking synthetic estrogen a few years ago, breast cancer rates in this country dropped for the first time in 40 years. DES, the control substance used by Raymond-Whish, was given to pregnant women to prevent miscarriages up until 1971. Their daughters, who were exposed to it in the womb, have been stricken with unusual reproductive cancers, and recent studies have shown an increased risk of breast cancer as well.
Typical carcinogens cause a cell's DNA to mutate, eventually leading to cancer. Radiation causes the fragile chains of DNA to break, also leading to errors and mutations. Scientists know a lot about these two types of cancer-causing agents. But endocrine disruption is far more mysterious.
Which is why scientists like Raymond-Whish find themselves at a unique moment in science, just as the traditional models of understanding disease are shifting. The field of breast cancer research in particular is driving the debate. Chemicals such as atrazine and DDT (an herbicide and a pesticide, respectively), plastics - such as the bisphenol A compound found in Nalgene that was banned from baby bottles this spring in Canada - and now uranium, are challenging and confounding scientists seeking to understand the actions of chemicals in the human body.
In the dynamic field of environmental health, toxicologists - who study traditional dose-response curves of carcinogens - and endocrinologists - who study extremely low levels of chemicals that do not always follow expected linear curves - frequently disagree. Because it is not yet known exactly how chemicals like uranium act upon cells, some scientists flatly dispute Raymond-Whish's findings. "Uranium is not plausibly linked as an endocrine disruptor," says toxicologist Margaret Ruttenber, director of the environmental health studies program of the Colorado Department of Public Health and the Environment. "There is an absence of a known mechanism."
Louise Canfield, director of the Native American Cancer Research Partnership at the University of Arizona, says: "My personal opinion is that obesity and other lifestyle factors are key risks (for breast cancer), along with access to care. Uranium in drinking water is a health hazard for sure, but I'm not sure it's a primary cause of cancer."
But others consider the work groundbreaking. "This is a science of subtlety," explains Andrea Gore, a neuroendocrinologist at the University of Texas, Austin, and former advisor to the National Science Foundation. "(Dyer's and Raymond-Whish's) work is consistent with other good labs. People criticize the field of endocrine disruption because we don't always understand the mechanisms, but the effects are still real. This is why animal studies are so important. The responses we see in lab animals can happen in humans, because we share the exact same hormones. The estrogen receptor is similar."
Still, more evidence is needed before scientists concede a link between uranium and breast cancer in humans. "You can make a very strong case with animal studies, but it will never be definitive," says cancer expert Joaquin Espinosa, professor of molecular, cellular and developmental biology at the University of Colorado, Boulder. "You hope that nature would have done the experiment for you out there at some point. You need to show that real people are affected."
But epidemiological data on the reservation is hard to come by. For one thing, it's difficult to sort out reliable cancer statistics and their changes over time. Some Navajo elders consult only medicine men, so some cancers go unreported. Cancer itself is translated in Navajo as Lood doo nadziihii, "the sore that does not heal." Some patients do not seek treatment, nor do they even speak of the disease for fear of wishing it upon their families, according to Fran Robinson, a nurse oncologist at San Juan Regional Medical Center in Farmington. Until recently, the Indian Health Services kept haphazard records in which diagnoses went unconfirmed and doctors came and went. For a variety of reasons, including instances of abuse of trust by researchers, the Navajo Nation guards its own data as closely as any member of the former Soviet bloc.
The New Mexico State Tumor Registry keeps statistics on cancers by county, including those on the New Mexico portion of the reservation, which is also where many uranium mines were located. In her published paper, Raymond-Whish cites registry data from the late 1970s showing a 17-fold increase in childhood reproductive cancers there compared to the U.S. as a whole. These are extremely rare cancers that are related to hormone systems. Another study looking at registry data from 1970-1982 showed a 2.5-fold increase in these cancers among all Native Americans in New Mexico. (Although these statistics are not broken down by tribe, most of the Native Americans in the state are Navajo.) A 1981 paper showed a possible link between incidents of birth defects in families and the proximity of those families to uranium mine tailings. The sample sizes of the first two studies were too small to draw solid conclusions, and the birth defects study was flawed, cautions Charles Wiggins, director of the Tumor Registry. He plans to re-examine childhood cancer statistics this fall, using new data gathered since 1982.
Overall, Native Americans in New Mexico actually suffer less cancer than the rest of the country, including about half the rate of breast cancer. But even as breast cancer rates in the U.S. have leveled or dropped slightly in recent years, they continue to grow among Native Americans, and the rate has increased more steeply over the past three decades. Breast cancer is the number-two killer (after heart disease) of Navajo women and the most common cancer found in Navajos. (In the U.S. as a whole, lung cancer is the most common cancer.) Navajos with cancer also suffer higher mortality rates due to poor access to medical care. One study found that between one-third and one-fifth of Navajo breast cancer patients receive substandard care. Relatively more young Navajo women get breast cancer, although much of this can be explained by demographics: Navajos have a younger population than other groups. To the doctors working on the reservation, the anecdotal evidence is disturbing. "When we see women in their 30s with breast cancer, it really knocks everyone for a loop," says physician Tom Drouhard, who has been practicing in Tuba City, Ariz., for 30 years. "Our ladies come in with later stages and higher death rates. It's hard to say what the trends are. All of these tumors are multi-factorial, and uranium could be another thing thrown at it. We are very paranoid about the situation with uranium. We had uncovered tailings five miles from Tuba City for 20 years. It's a reasonable concern."
Two other hormonally active cancers, uterine and ovarian cancers, have doubled or tripled in New Mexico Indians since 1970 while remaining essentially the same for Anglos and Hispanics. But although lung cancer in the Navajo population has been authoritatively linked to uranium exposure, it's harder to make the case for other cancers.
"It's a tough nut to crack," says Wiggins. "The rise in breast cancer everywhere almost certainly has to do with hormones more than anything else. Is something going on with hormones and hormone receptors? Our data is not going to make or break any one hypothesis, because there are a zillion factors going up or down. But you have to take seriously any proposition anyone comes out with, because we just don't have answers yet."
It's difficult to trace a disease to an environmental exposure that may have occurred years earlier. And so far, cancer cases have not been mapped in concert with drinking water sources. "Is there more breast and reproductive cancer here?" asks Dyer. "Yes, but you can't localize it geographically. It would be nice to establish a connection between where people are getting sick and where they drink their water. It's hard to get the data. It's frustrating."
One major effort is currently under way to do just that, but the sickness in question is kidney disease, not cancer. This five-year, $2.5 million study, a collaboration between the University of New Mexico Community Environmental Health Program, the Eastern Navajo Health Board and the Dine Network for Environmental Health, is being funded by U.S. Health and Human Services. The team is compiling illness data from 1,300 Navajos, backed up by urine and blood samples, and then overlaying the results on a map of 160 drinking wells that have been studied for uranium, arsenic and other contaminants. Preliminary data from 550 residents and 100 wells have already shown that living within .8 kilometer of an abandoned mine is a significant predictor of kidney disease and diabetes. Although the science linking uranium with kidney disease is solid, it's never before been demonstrated on a real-life map showing proximity to mines, says Chris Shuey, an environmental scientist at the Southwest Research and Information Center. Once the kidney data are in, the researchers might look at cancer next, he says.
Of course, Navajos are not the only population exposed to uranium. What about breast cancer rates in other areas with better data?
Susan Pinney is an epidemiologist at the University of Cincinnati. She and her colleagues looked at the population surrounding a nuclear processing facility in Fernald, Ohio, which operated between 1952 and 1989. The facility, which made fuel rods for nuclear power plants, was the site of numerous accidental releases of uranium into the surrounding air and water. As a result of a $73 million class action lawsuit in 1990 against National Lead of Ohio and the U.S. Department of Energy, the Fernald Medical Monitoring Project has accumulated 17 years worth of data on illnesses and exposures. Pinney examined the medical records of 8,770 people, including nearly 5,000 women, for a variety of cancers, and was able to model the exposure level of each individual. Her work is still being prepared for publication, and she declined to discuss it. However, a presentation of her preliminary, statistically significant findings last November to the annual conference of the Breast Cancer and the Environment Research Centers is now available on-line. Its provocative conclusion: "For women living within five miles of a uranium processing plant, degree of exposure to uranium particulates was related to risk of incident breast cancer."
A few months ago, Raymond-Whish held a traditional Kinaalda ceremony for her daughter, Darby, to mark her passage into puberty. One of the most important Navajo rituals, it celebrates fertility, the natural order and harmony with the earth through song and prayer. Raymond-Whish's mother was there along with dozens of other relatives, and Dyer from the biology department at NAU also attended. For Raymond-Whish, it was a happy, soulful event, but shadowed by the uncomfortable realities of her career in cancer research. From now until late middle age, Darby will produce the large pulses of estrogen that have been linked to breast and other cancers in so many women. And natural harmony, as her mother knows, is not what it used to be, especially now that pollutants are acting like even more estrogen in our bodies. Raymond-Whish can only hope that Darby's cells have the normal number of receptors, and that her genes and her environment haven't somehow conspired to reprogram her development.
"What does artificial estrogen do to the breast?" she asks. "It depends on the time of exposure. If you look at cells of a younger individual who's not yet through puberty, and you expose them to uranium, then that could promote earlier onset of puberty, earlier breast budding. And if they're exposed in the womb, you could be changing the way the receptors are expressed through life."
In breast cancer research in general, there is a fundamental shift from large epidemiological studies that look at women's current lifestyles and exposures to an examination of what the women were exposed to as children. "Most epidemiology starts with the moment a tumor is diagnosed," said Irma Russo, a molecular biologist at the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. "We need to look at when normal cells may have transformed many years earlier."
Suzanne Fenton, a research biologist at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, agrees. "We think one of the main drivers of breast cancer is what changes occurred in very early life to alter breast development. It's a fairly radical re-thinking."
Among other experiments, Raymond-Whish is exposing pregnant rats to uranium in order to track what happens in their offspring. When she tried this earlier with mice, the female pups exposed in the womb entered puberty approximately two days earlier, just as they did when exposed to DES. It's a subtle difference, but when combined with other real-life exposures, it may add up.
Explains Fenton: "It's important to remember that breast cancer risk is likely determined by a number of compounds interweaving with genetic factors and not just any one exposure."
Certainly, lifestyles on the reservation have changed in many ways over the past 50 years. "Once upon a time there was no diabetes here, no diverticulitis, no colon cancer," says physician Drouhard. "We are now exposed to the same things you are: plastics, fast food, obesity. Now everybody I know eats at Kentucky Fried Chicken." One way to learn more is by working with all those nose-twitching rodents in the lab. In the coming months, Raymond-Whish will repeat her experiments, prepare to publish again, and spend more time staring at the nauseating giant ovaries on the computer screen. The rats are euthanized before they actually get sick. Still, she says, they do have to offer up their organs to science. It's not easy for her to kill the animals. "Culturally, it's an issue," she says. "But I'm searching for something that's going to help somebody or even lots of people. I always say, 'Thank you for your life.' "
Florence Williams is a 2007-2008 Scripps Fellow at the
University of Colorado, where she is researching endocrine
disruption and cancer. A former HCN staffer, she currently serves
on the HCN board.
This story was funded by a grant from the McCune Charitable Foundation.
Kathleen Tsosie, who has devoted her life to helping others, now faces the frightening possibility that her breast cancer has returned.
Glenda Rangel and her family grew up drinking from and swimming in water tanks dangerously polluted with uranium.
Nellie Sandoval, the mother of scientist Stefanie Raymond-Whish, has become an outspoken activist as a result of her own struggle with breast cancer.© High Country News

Columbia Disaster: What Happened, What NASA Learned
On Feb. 1, 2003, space shuttle Columbia broke up as it returned to Earth, killing the seven astronauts on board. NASA suspended space shuttle flights for more than two years as it investigated the disaster.
An investigation board determined that a large piece of foam fell from the shuttle's external tank and fatally breached the spacecraft wing. This problem with foam had been known for years, and NASA came under intense scrutiny in Congress and in the media for allowing the situation to continue.
A fatal strike
Columbia, on mission STS-107, left Earth for the last time on Jan. 16, 2003. At the time, the shuttle program was focused on building the International Space Station. However, STS-107 stood apart as it emphasized pure research.
The seven-member crew — Rick Husband, commander; Michael Anderson, payload commander; David Brown, mission specialist; Kalpana Chawla, mission specialist; Laurel Clark, mission specialist; William McCool, pilot; Ilan Ramon, payload specialist from the Israeli Space Agency — spent 24 hours a day doing science experiments in two shifts. They performed around 80 experiments in life sciences, material sciences, fluid physics and other matters.
During the crew's 16 days in space, NASA was investigating a foam strike during launch. About 82 seconds after Columbia left the ground, a piece of foam fell from a "bipod ramp" that was part of a structure that attached the external tank to the shuttle. Video from the launch appeared to show the foam striking Columbia's left wing.
Several people within NASA pushed to get pictures of the breached wing in orbit. The Department of Defense was reportedly prepared to use its orbital spy cameras to get a closer look. However, NASA officials in charge declined the offer, according to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) and "Comm Check," a book about the disaster.
On Feb. 1, 2003, the shuttle made its usual landing approach to the Kennedy Space Center. Just before 9 a.m. EST, however, abnormal readings showed up at Mission Control. They lost temperature readings from sensors located on the left wing. Then, tire pressure readings from the left side also vanished.
The Capcom, or spacecraft communicator, called up to Columbia to discuss the tire pressure readings. At 8:59:32 a.m., Husband called back from Columbia: "Roger," followed by a word that was cut off in mid-sentence.
At that point, Columbia was near Dallas, travelling 18 times the speed of sound and still 200,700 feet (61,170 meters) above the ground. Mission Control made several attempts to get in touch with the astronauts, with no success.
It was later found that a hole on the left wing allowed atmospheric gases to bleed into the shuttle as it went through its fiery re-entry, leading to the loss of the sensors and eventually, Columbia itself.
Searching for debris
Twelve minutes later, when Columbia should have been making its final approach to the runway, a mission controller received a phone call. The caller said a television network was showing video of the shuttle breaking up in the sky.
Shortly afterward, NASA declared a space shuttle "contingency" and sent search and rescue teams to the suspected debris sites in Texas and later, Louisiana. Later that day, NASA declared the astronauts lost.
“This is indeed a tragic day for the NASA family, for the families of the astronauts who flew on STS-107, and likewise is tragic for the nation,” stated NASA's administrator at the time, Sean O’Keefe.
The search for debris took weeks, as it was shed over a field of some 2,000 square miles (5,180 square kilometers) in east Texas alone. NASA eventually recovered 84,000 pieces, representing nearly 40 percent of Columbia. Among them were the crew remains, which were identified with DNA.
Much later, in 2008, NASA released a crew survival report detailing the Columbia crew's last few minutes. The astronauts probably survived the initial breakup of Columbia, but lost consciousness in seconds after the cabin lost pressure and then died as it disintegrated.
Report calls for more funding, emphasis on safety
In the weeks after the disaster, a dozen officials began sifting through the Columbia disaster, led by Harold W. Gehman Jr., former commander-in-chief of the U.S. Joint Forces Command. The Columbia Accident Investigation Board, or CAIB, as it was later known, later released a multi-volume report on how the shuttle was destroyed, and what led to it.
Besides the physical cause – the foam – CAIB had a damning assessment about the culture at NASA that led to the foam problem and other safety issues being minimized over the years.
"Cultural traits and organizational practices detrimental to safety were allowed to develop," the board wrote, citing "reliance on past success as a substitute for sound engineering practices" and "organizational barriers that prevented effective communication of critical safety information" among the problems found.
CAIB recommended NASA ruthlessly seek and eliminate safety problems, such as the foam, to help astronaut safety in future missions. It also called for more predictable funding and political support for the agency, and added that the shuttle must be replaced with a new transportation system.
"The shuttle is now an aging system but still developmental in character. It is in the nation's interest to replace the shuttle as soon as possible," the report stated.
Returning to flight
The shuttle's external tank was redesigned, and other safety measures implemented. In July 2005, STS-114 lifted off and tested a suite of new procedures, including one where astronauts used cameras and a robotic arm to scan the shuttle's belly for broken tiles. NASA also put more camera views on the shuttle during liftoff to better monitor foam shedding.
Due to more foam loss than expected, the next shuttle flight did not take place until July 2006. After STS-121's safe conclusion, NASA deemed the program ready to move forward and shuttles resumed flying several times a year.
"We're still going to watch and we're still going to pay attention," STS-121 commander Steve Lindsey said at the time. "We're never ever going to let our guard down."
Columbia's loss – as well as the loss of several other space-bound crews – receives a public tribute every year at NASA's Day of Remembrance. That date is marked in late January or early February because, coincidentally, the Apollo 1, Challenger and Columbia crews were all lost in that calendar week.
The crew has received several tributes to their memory over the years. On Mars, the rover Spirit's landing site was ceremonially named Columbia Memorial Station. Also, seven asteroids orbiting the sun between Mars and Jupiter now bear the crew's names.
— Elizabeth Howell, SPACE.com Contributor

One ugly legacy of the Reaganite drug war of the 1980s has found a home in the nation's schools. "Zero tolerance," a term first brought into the national consciousness courtesy of Reagan Attorney General Edwin Meese, who used it to refer to his policy of seizing vehicles and properties no matter how tiny the amount of drugs found, has evolved from a term of propaganda for drug warriors into a fuzzy philosophy for educators. Loosely translated, it means that any violation of the rules, no matter how minuscule or what the circumstances, will be punished severely.
Zero tolerance didn't work for the drug war; the Customs program championed by Meese choked on its own absurdities, finally dying a quiet death after Customs agents attempted to seize a scientific vessel belonging to the Woodshole Oceanographic Research Institute (Cape Cod, MA) because a crewman had a joint in his cabin. Zero tolerance in the schools is generating the same kind of absurd outcomes while failing to increase school safety, according to a new study from the University of Indiana's Indiana Education Policy Center.
The report, "Zero Tolerance, Zero Evidence: An Analysis of School Disciplinary Practice," reviewed the use of zero tolerance in schools since its inception in the 1980s. It found that not only does zero tolerance not achieve its stated goals, but that its most common punishments, suspension and expulsion, lead to increased drop-out rates and other negative consequences and that African American students are "overexposed" to such punishments.
"Zero tolerance is a political response, not an educationally sound solution," said Indiana University Professor Russell Skiba, director of the Safe and Responsive Schools Project in the IU School of Education and author of the report. "It sounds impressive to say that we're taking a tough stand against misbehavior, but the data say it simply hasn't been effective in improving student behavior or ensuring school safety."
Tell it to Congress. The Gun-Free Schools Act of 1994 mandates zero tolerance policies for weapons violations at schools. But Congress does not deserve all the blame. States such as California, Kentucky and New York began implementing zero tolerance policies for drugs, fighting and gang activity as early as 1989. By 1993, the trend had swept the nation, broadening as it went to include alcohol, truancy, insubordination, unauthorized use of pagers and laser pointers, and swearing.
As Berkeley researcher Joel Brown, head of the Center Research and Development, noted in his recent survey of drug education programs (http://www.drcnet.org/wol/187.html#cerdstudy), although zero tolerance is not a federal mandate when it comes to drug violations, under federal "no-use" guidelines, "students are to be suspended or expelled from school for use, possession or distribution of alcohol, tobacco or drugs." Brown found that such policies are in effect in nearly 90% of US schools, and their impact is staggering. In 1997, the only year for which national statistics are available, more than 177,000 students were suspended or expelled for drug, alcohol or tobacco violations. Eighty percent of those students, or about 136,000 kids, were suspended for more than five days or expelled. That ranked drug related reasons second only to physical fights as a reason for school discipline, Brown wrote. "Young people are removed from mainstream education for drugs nearly three times more often than they are removed for weapons, and ten times more often than the number of young people removed for carrying firearms," he noted.
"The extent to which those who are removed from school have a drug abuse problem versus the legal problem of being caught with drugs is not known," Brown noted wryly. He also reported that no demographic data on those students was available.
While the Indiana study did not explicitly look at racial disparities in zero tolerance drug punishments, it did find clear racial disparities in the administration of zero tolerance policies overall. In his survey of the literature, report author Skiba reported that "racial disproportionality in the use of school suspension has been a highly consistent finding." When Skiba controlled for socioeconomic status, he found that students from poor families were more likely to receive zero tolerance punishments, but that family wealth alone did not explain the difference between punishments for whites and blacks. Nor was there evidence that black students acted out more than white students, wrote Skiba.
There are signs of hope, according to the report. Zero tolerance policies, ridiculed for excesses such as suspending five-year-olds for kissing or junior high students for possessing organic cough drops, are beginning to lose favor in some districts, Skiba reported. For those districts pondering a change, the study has several commonsense recommendations:

About the Dictionary of Old English
The Dictionary of Old English (DOE) defines the vocabulary of the first six centuries (C.E. 600-1150) of the English language, using twenty-first century technology. The DOE complements the Middle English Dictionary (which covers the period C.E. 1100-1500) and the Oxford English Dictionary, the three together providing a full description of the vocabulary of English. Under the direction of editors Angus Cameron, Ashley Crandell Amos, and now Antonette diPaolo Healey, the Dictionary has published (as of 2009) the following major research tools: the Dictionary of Old English Corpus on the World Wide Web, the DOE: A to G online, the DOE: A to G on CD-ROM, the fascicles for the letters A-G on microfiche, and an online bibliography of Old English texts and Latin sources cited in the DOE. More than one third of the Dictionary -- eight of the 22 letters of the Old English alphabet -- has been published, and more than 60% of the total entries have been written to date. See DOE on YouTube.
The Dictionary of Old English Corpus
The DOE is based on a computerized Corpus comprising at least one copy of each text surviving in Old English. The total size is almost five times the collected works of Shakespeare. The body of surviving Old English texts encompasses a rich diversity of records written on parchment, carved in stone and inscribed in jewelry. These texts fall into several categories: prose, poetry, glosses to Latin texts and inscriptions. In the prose in particular, there is a wide range of texts: saints' lives, sermons, biblical translations, penitential writings, laws, charters and wills, records (of manumissions, land grants, land sales, land surveys), chronicles, a set of tables for computing the moveable feasts of the Church calendar and for astrological calculations, medical texts, prognostics (the Anglo-Saxon equivalent of the horoscope), charms (such as those for a toothache or for an easy labour), and even cryptograms.
From the outset, the project has employed innovative methods and technologies. Most dictionaries tend to be deeply indebted to their predecessors. By contrast, it is the database of the Dictionary of Old English Corpus which determines the headwords, definitions and quotations. Research based on a comprehensive analysis of the surviving records of Old English is perhaps the most significant difference between the DOE and the work of earlier scholars. The project has followed in the footsteps of those who have established new standards in modern lexicography by providing parsed lists of all attested spellings, grammatical information, and detailed sense divisions (supported by illustrative citations from the Corpus) for each word. The DOE has an International Advisory Committee with members from Canada, Great Britain, the United States and Germany. The editors also consult with scholars throughout the world who have expert knowledge of specialized vocabulary, such as legal, medical and botanical terms.
Use of Technology
The DOE is a pioneer in the application of technology to lexicography. In 1997 the project launched its most sophisticated research tool--the Dictionary of Old English Corpus on the World Wide Web, which makes the Corpus with its complex search capabilities available to any institution in the world with access to the Internet. In 2007, the Web Corpus was made available to individual subscribers. Also in 2007, the project released DOE: A to G online, the first web version of the first eight letters of the Dictionary. It offers Boolean searches on multiple fields of the Dictionary as well as links to the Oxford English Dictionary.
The DOE has received research grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, Ottawa; the British Academy, London; the Connaught Fund, University of Toronto; the Gladys Krieble Delmas Foundation, New York; the Early English Text Society, Oxford; the Marc Fitch Fund, Oxford; the Jackman Foundation, Toronto; the McLean Foundation, Toronto; the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, New York; the National Endowment for the Humanities, Washington, an independent federal agency; the Salamander Foundation, Toronto; the TAPoR (Text Analysis Portal) Project, funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation; the University of Toronto; Lulu, Raleigh, NC; and Xerox Corporation, Palo Alto and Toronto, among others. Support has also been given by many scholars and friends throughout the world. The search for funds is ongoing.

Outer space is a term used to describe everything existing outside of the Earth's atmosphere. It mostly consists of empty space with clusters of stars, but also solid matter such as comets and meteoroids.
There is currently little knowledge on the subject of outer space. The basic observations of astronomy have given an understanding of planetary movements as well as basic predictions; from basic waxing and waning of the moon to the arrival of comets and eclipses.
The word "space" was specifically mentioned as the place from where the meteorite that made Toph's bracelet and Sokka's sword came. The characters demonstrated knowledge that the meteorite did not originate from Earth.

Chemotherapy is poison that happens to kill cancer cells faster than it kills healthy cells; that it wreaks havoc on the bodies of patients is unsurprising. But chemo may also affect their unborn children. According to a new study in PNAS, the offspring of mice treated with chemotherapy have higher rates of mutation, even though the offspring themselves were never exposed to the drugs.
The results suggest that these mutations arise from genome destabilization caused by exposure to chemo, rather than just mutated sperm from the treated father. Male mice in the study were exposed to one of three common anticancer drugs—cyclophosphamide, mitomycin C, or procarbazine—and then allowed to mate with untreated females. After sequencing a small piece of DNA from the offspring, the researchers found that mice with treated fathers had mutation rates up to twice that of mice with untreated fathers. Notably, these mutations were present in DNA inherited from both the treated father and untreated mother.
What this likely means, according to the researchers, is that chemotherapy induces epigenetic changes in the sperm. Epigenetic changes don’t affect the underlying DNA sequence, but they alter chemical tags that control how genes are expressed. This in turn lead to genome destabilization in the offspring, allowing sequence mutations to arise in DNA from the mother or father. The exact mechanism for genome destabilization and how it’s inherited is unknown.
Lead author Yuri Dubrova is also cautious about how this data translates to humans. Since most cancer patients are too old to reproduce or are sterilized by treatment, childhood cancer survivors seem to be the only group this can potentially affect. Because of their short life span, the mice in this study reproduced only a few months after chemotherapy, but humans would likely have years in between. If the phenomenon applies to humans though, the nasty effects of chemotherapy might be longer-reaching than we realized.
[via Nature News]

- Browse Cases
- Search Cases
- Browse Methods
Niger women campaign for inclusion in National Assembly, 1991
The 1990s in Africa was a period of broad political movement towards the greater involvement of women in positions of power—this campaign is a part of that change.
In November of 1990 in Niger, President Ali Saibou announced that a Preparatory Committee to organize a National Conference would take place before May 27 of the following year, on which date the National Conference would begin. The agenda of this National Conference, to be held at the National Assembly building in Niger's capital city of Niamey, was to transition the country from 17 years of military-led rule to a multi-party democracy. Out of 68 delegates for the Preparatory Committee, one, Houa Alio, was a woman.
On May 11, 1991, the Prime Minister Aliou Mahamidou met with a number of interest groups that were involved with the Preparatory Committee. The meeting participants agreed on a structure of representation in which the Union of Niger Women would have seven representatives at the Preparatory Committee.
However, many Niger women did not accept this low level of representation and wanted a greater input in the future direction of the nation. The first, and most well known protest showing disapproval of the scarce representation of women in the Preparatory Committee took place on May 13, 1991, two weeks before the scheduled National Conference date. Several thousand women marched from the national assembly to the Prime Minister's office in the center of the capital, and occupied the Ministry of External Affairs, where the Preliminary Committee was meant to meet. The women carried signs that read, "Down with the National Conference without women!", "Stop Injustice!", and "Equal Rights!" They also shouted, "Away with the National Conference without Women!"
Alio resigned from the Preparatory Committee in solidarity. Acting as the spokesperson of the movement, she had earlier given the Prime Minister a nine-point letter demanding to have female representation in all of the delegations taking place during the Preparatory Committee.
Despite the May 13th protest, the Prime Minister began the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee at noon of the same day.
Six days later, on May 19, the General Assembly of Niger Women urged the people of Niger to become more involved in the political process by joining unions, associations, and political parties with the end goal of contributing to the National Conference's nation building process. The women organized a general assembly in order to begin compromising with members of the Preparatory Committee for greater representation in the soon-to-be-held National Conference.
As of May 21, the General Assembly of Niger Women agreed to allow four more women to join the representation. A political party also said it would replace one of its own representatives on the commission with a woman.
The date of the conference was postponed allegedly due to a lack of funds, although several political parties in opposition to the Prime Minister at the time saw this postponement as an attempt on his part to keep himself in power, and to slow transitional movements towards a multi-party democracy. The National Conference was rescheduled to take place on July 15, and then postponed again to July 29. Upon this second postponement, women marched again in opposition to their lack of equal representation in the Preparatory Committee and scheduled National Conference.
By the spring of 1991 the women of Niger were able to increase their numbers in the formal reform efforts, going from one to five women representatives. Still, that was vastly lower than participation by men
On November 25, 1992, May 13th was designated as "National Women's Day" to commemorate the march held on that date the previous year.

Removal of Parathyroid Glands
Parathyroidectomy is surgery to remove hyperactive parathyroid glands.
Parathyroid disease is the most common cause of elevated blood calcium levels in adults. Elevated calcium levels can lead to kidney stones and other disturbing symptoms. Most parathyroid disease is due to a benign tumor of a single parathyroid gland that produces excess parathyroid hormone (PTH).
WHAT ARE PARATHYROID GLANDS?
There are typically four parathyroid glands (two pairs) that are located behind the thyroid lobes in the neck. The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) that regulates the calcium level in the body. Parathyroid hormone signals the release of calcium from the bones and increases calcium absorption from the intestines. The correct secretion of the parathyroid hormone maintains a normal level of calcium in the bloodstream to ensure the normal function of muscles and the normal conduction of electrical currents along the nerves.
If one or more of the parathyroid glands secretes too much PTH (hyperparathyroidism), sustained elevations of blood calcium levels occurs. This event usually occurs in adults and is rare in children. Hyperparathyroidism is usually caused by an adenoma (non-cancerous tumor) of a single gland. It can also result from regulation problems within all of the glands (hyperplasia) or from parathyroid cancer – which is extremely rare.
SYMPTOMS OF PARATHYROID DISEASE
- Loss of energy & persistent fatigue (just don’t feel well)
- Inability to concentrate or changes in mood
- Bone pain due to osteoporosis (bone breakdown)
- Trouble sleeping and general irritability
- Kidney stones
- GERD – gastric acid reflux
It is not uncommon for people to suffer mildly with 2 or more of these problems at the same time. Due to increased blood testing, hyperparathyroidism is now diagnosed more frequently and often before patients are symptomatic. If left untreated, however, symptoms are likely to arise and worsen with time.
Over the years physicians have tried to treat parathyroid disease with medications – often without success. Removal of the parathyroid glands continues to be the most effective treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism. Because of the numerous glands and other important structures in the neck, the surgery can be technically challenging and usually is performed in conjunction with preoperative localization studies to help determine which parathyroid glands are responsible for the problem. Surgeons with extensive head and neck surgical training usually perform the operation. The procedure has been proven to have a >94% cure rate when performed by an experienced specialist. Dr. Gunnlaugsson has extensive experience with parathyroid surgery and uses minimally invasive techniques to achieve the best functional and cosmetic result.

|Huang Ti about 1000 BC|
That left as the oldest known medical book through most of history as Nei Ching written by Huang Ti about 2,697 BC. The work basically consists of conversations between the emperor and his physician Ch'i Pai. Parts of the dialog are recorded medical descriptions of asthma-like symptoms and possible remedies.
Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wen was known as the Yellow Emperor who reined over Ancient China from approximately 2697-2598 B.C. He is known as the Father of Chinese Medicine. (1)
He is believed to have ruled China as the third of China's first five rulers from 2696-2598 B.C. There is an ongoing debate as to whether he actually existed or was the work of legends. There's also an ongoing debate as to whether he actually wrote the Nei Ching Su Wen or whether it was actually written about 1000 B.C and antedated "as to enhance it's value," according to one historian. Veith quotes one historian who questioned that Ti could possibly rule a nation and still have plenty of time for dialog with his physician ch'i Pai and also time to write it all down. (2)
Of significance in the Nei Ching is the relevance of Yang, Yin and Tao. Ilza Veith, in her 2002 book, "The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine," described that in the beginning there was chaos between the three primary substances -- force, form and substance. This ultimately results in a light substance rising to form heaven, and a heavy substance sinking to form the earth.
|The Nei Chung|
This whole concept was similar to other civilizations, such as in the West the belief was that disease was the result of an imbalance of the four humours. In China disease was believed to be caused by too much of the essence yang and/ or too little yin.
So in order to maintain health one would have to maintain a balance of Yang and Yin, which was ultimately accomplished by good behaviours towards Tao, which refers to "the way." Veith explains that man must completely adjust to the "flow" of the Universe, which was the responsibility of Tao. For example, the earth was dependent on the heavens, such as rain was needed to end drought, sun was needed to melt snow, etc. In this way the yearly cycle of life flowed smoothly and was completed in a year. This was Tao, or the way. Essentially, there was "the Tao of Heaven, the Tao of the Earth, and the Tao of Man, one fitting into the other as an indivisible entity."
The first paragraphs of the first chapter of the Nei Ching has the emperor asking his physician, Ch'i Po, why it is that ancient people used to live to be 100 years old and now people only live half that long. The physician answered:
"In ancient times those people who understood Tao (the way of self cultivation) patterned themselves upon the Yin and the Yang (the two principles of nature) and they lived in harmony with the arts of divination.... There was temperance in eating and drinking. Their hours of rising and retiring were regular and not disorderly and wild. By these means the ancients kept their bodies united with their souls, so as to fulfill their allotted span completely, measuring unto a hundred years before they passed away.... nowadays people are not like this; they use wine as beverage and they adopt recklessness as usual behavior. They enter the chamber (of love) in an intoxicated condition; their passions exhaust their vital forces; their cravings dissipate their true (essence); they do not know how to find contentment within themselves; they're not skilled in the control of their spirits. They devote all their attention to the amusement of their minds, thus cutting themselves off from the joys of long (life). Their risings and retiring is without regularity. For these reasons they reach only one half of the hundred years and then they degenerate." (3)
It is this "degeneration" then that causes diseases which plague a person in life, and many of which cause an early death. People that lived to be 100 are "in harmony with Tao, the Right Way." Health, or longevity, was completely dependent on a person's "behavior towards Tao, Veith explained. "Thus, man saw the universe endowed with a spirit that was indomitable in its strength and unforgiving toward disobedience." Longevity, thus, was a "token of sainthood." (4)
So asthma-like symptoms were believed to be caused by an imbalance of Yin and Yang. The lungs were believed to be responsible for metabolism and flow of fluids through the body, and an imbalance of Yang and Yin in the lungs will cause too much phlegm, edema, sweat and cause diseases such as breathing disorders. (5)
This ultimately obstructs Qi (also referred to as Chi). Imbalances of Yang and Yin are believed to be caused by obstruction of Qi, which may be described as the energy or life force that keeps the humors in balance and the body functioning properly.
The force of Qi was the essential force of keeping the body healthy, and it was inhaled with each breath after birth. Once inhaled it was up to each healthy organ to transfer both Qi and nutrients throughout the body.
In order for the organs of the body to function properly, Qi must continue to flow properly throughout the body. So dysfunction of the lung will result in failure of respiration, "leading to failure of fresh air to be inhaled and the turbid Qi of the body to be exhaled, with the resultant inadequate formation of Qi." (6)
Likewise, the lungs were associated with mucus. Yang was heat and Yin was cold. Cold was believed to diminish Yin in the lungs, and this resulted in an imbalance of Qi in the lungs, which resulted in an increase in mucus, which ultimately resulted in difficulty in breathing, or asthma-like symptoms.
It should be noted here that unlike Western medical doctrines such as the Hippocratic Corpus, the Nei Ching failed to specifically define any diseases. So terms equivalent to asthma and dyspnea were not used. Instead, diseases were referred to as "'injuries of the heart,' 'injuries of the lungs,' etc." (7)
The Nei Ching basically called for diagnosing diseases by measuring the pulse, and treating diseases by remedies that reset Yang and Yin, which mainly involved mental balance, herbal medicine, diet, massage, acupuncture (inserting needle into certain regions of the body) or moxibustion (placing cones of powdered leaves on various regions of the body and burning them until blisters form). Since diseases of the lungs were caused by an imbalance of Yin caused by cold, asthma remedies were believed to warm the lungs, balance Yin, decrease mucus, and make breathing easier.
Another neat similarity between the Nei Ching and the later written document the Hippocratic Corpus (such as the Hippocratic Oath) is that both writings mention the use of careful technique and responsibility by the physician.
The Nei Ching notes that "The most important requirement of the art of healing is that no mistake or neglect occur... poor medical workmanship is neglectful and careless and must therefore be combated, because a disease that is not completely cured can easily breed new disease or there can be a recurrence of the old disease... illness is comparable to the root; good medical work is comparable to the topmost branch; if the root is not reached, the evil influences cannot be subjugated... The superior physician helps before the early budding of the disease. The inferior physician begins to help when the disease has already developed; he helps when destruction has already set in. And since his help comes when the disease has already developed, it is said of him that he is ignorant. " (8)
While Nei Ching is the oldest known recorded Chinese medical treaties, Shen Nung, who lived from 2838-2698 is often considered as the founder of Chinese Medicine as well as the "Fire Emporor." (9)
|Shen Nung (2838-2698)|
The leaves and/ or stems of the Ma Huang plant were dried prepared in such a way that it was served as a drink, often as a bitter tasting tea. Nung believed Ma Huang worked by reversing the flow of Qi.
One of the truly interesting things about ancient Chinese asthma treatment is the use of Ma Huang to treat asthma-like symptoms. The modern world refers to this plant as ephedra, and from it was derived the bronchodilator ephedrine in 1901
Leaves of the plant were crushed and served in a bitter tasting yellow tea. This may actually have provided relief from an asthma attack. While Veith describes that Western medicine reached China early in the 17th century, (10) it would be another 300 years before ephedrine would play a significant role in the treatment of asthma in the U.S. and Europe, as I describe in this post.
So while Ancient Chinese asthmatics may have been able to obtain asthma relief by using ephedra, the rest of the world (except for maybe Japan and Korea) would have to wait.
Click here for more asthma history.
- Saunders, M, J.B. Dec, "Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wen -- The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Mediciner," Calif Med. 1967 July; 107(1): 125–126
- Veith, Ilza, author /translator, "The Yellow emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine," 2002, Los Angeles, pages 4-6
- Ibid, page 97-8
- Ibid, pages pages 98 and 10-14
- "Qi Theory, damo-qigong.net, http://damo-qigong.net/qi-theory1.htm
- Ibid, http://damo-qigong.net/qi-theory.htm
- Veith, op cit, pages 49 and 50
- Veith, op cit, pages 57-8, also see chapter 26 beginning on page 217
- Navara, Tova, "The Encyclopedia of Asthma and Respiratory Disorders," 2003, New York, page 177
- Veith, op cit, page 1

Understanding the functioning of brain network is one of the grand challenges of Science: many methods have been applied to analyze and study its structure and function. Interest is clearly motivated by the fact that the some general principles of brain functioning seem to govern also other complex networks, including social, biological and communications networks.
In principle, a brain network can be modelled as graph representing activities in the brain, where the vertices represent anatomical regions and the edges their functional connectivity. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used to extract data about how networks of neurons are performing tasks. In these experiments the activity of the brain is measured, in time steps of a few seconds, in data associated to a number of “voxels” of dimension of about 27 mm3. Data are organised in correlation matrices (also with Multidimensional Scaling techniques) to see where there is a correlation among the variables. A correlation matrix can describe correlation among M variables: it is a square symmetrical MxM matrix with the (ij)th element equal to the correlation coefficient r_ij between the (i)th and the (j)th variable.
Over the last two decades, said data analysis techniques have transformed neuroscience: some scientists are even claiming they can identify the brain regions responsible for musical ability, food preference, fairness and even skills by analysing and correlating voxels data.
Also the recent explosion in gene expression experiments has generated a large amount of data to be correlated: think about The Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP), a program of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) that is researching the molecular patterns changes occurring when a normal cell is transformed into a cancer cell or the relationships between the gene expression profile of a tissue and the pattern of its neighbours.
These are just two example where the capabilities of correlating data have an incredibly high impact value. Analysing interconnectivity is so fundamental to understanding the behaviour of any complex networks.
Also Telecom Operators have huge amount of data, still to be leveraged: in this sense, methods and techniques adopted by neuroscience and genomics can provide valuable lessons learnt.

The Flat Rocks fossil site at Inverloch is located approximately 150 km south-east of Melbourne, on the south coast of Victoria. The area has special significance to Australia’s fossil history as the discovery of Australia’s first dinosaur bone, the Cape Paterson Claw, was found at a nearby site in 1903 by William Ferguson. The currently active site was discovered in 1991 when a group of researchers from Monash University and Museum Victoria were prospecting that part of the coastline for suitable locations for potential fossil dig sites.
The Cape Paterson claw, found by William Ferguson in 1903 at Eagle’s Nest, was Australia’s first dinosaur bone. Source: Museum Victoria.
The first formal dig at Inverloch was in 1992 when researchers spent two weeks testing the productivity of the site. In this time more than 300 fossil bones buried below the surface of the shore platform were recovered. The site proved so productive that organised annual summer digs called ‘Dinosaur Dreaming’ commenced in 1994 and have collected an average of 700 fossil bones and teeth from each field season. The fossil layer at the Flat Rocks site is still producing as many fossil bones and teeth as when digging first started. The Dinosaur Dreaming dig will continue for as long as financial support continues to fund the dig.
The sedimentary rocks along the Strzelecki coastline were laid down approximately 120 to 115 million years ago in the Early Cretaceous period. The rocks have been dated using both Fission Track Dating (based on radioactive content) and Palynology (based on the fossil pollen in the rock). Both methods of dating correlate the age of the rocks to about 120 million years plus or minus five million years.
The fossil bones of many different animals have been found at the Flat Rocks site. There is evidence of at least five different types of dinosaur as well as the fossil bones of other reptiles, birds, mammals and fish. The fossil bones found at the site are the remains of animals that lived in an ancient river and the surrounding valley. The bones were washed into the river during flooding events and concentrated in the river bed.
The Dinosaur Dreaming field dig at Inverloch. Photographer/Source: Lesley Kool
The most commonly found dinosaur at Flat Rocks is a small plant eater belonging to the Hypsilophodont family. This dinosaur was the size of a small wallaby and ran on its hind legs. Qantassaurus intrepidus is the latest hypsilophodontid dinosaur to be named from the site, however there are at least two other members of the hypsilophodontidae family represented. Evidence of tiny dinosaur bones at the site suggests that the area may have been a nesting ground for part of the year. There is also evidence of other dinosaurs including ankylosaurs and theropod dinosaurs at Flat Rocks and surrounding areas.
Flying reptiles (pterosaurs) are sometimes mistakenly called dinosaurs, but belong to a different group of reptiles. A number of unusual teeth found at the Flat Rocks site have been assigned to pterosaurs, as well as some limb bones. The turtles of Flat Rocks appear to have been rather primitive. They had short necks, unlike most of Australia’s modern turtles. A number of isolated teeth have been identified as belonging to small fresh-water plesiosaurs.
In 1997, a fossil jaw only 17mm long with four teeth was found. The jaw belonged to an insectivorous mammal no bigger than a mouse and was named Ausktribosphenous nyktos. The teeth resembled those of a placental mammal. However, because all previous fossil evidence supported the idea that marsupials arrived in Australia long before placental mammals, the description of this discovery as a placental mammal was not accepted by many researchers. There has been much debate since the discovery of this jaw, and there is still no agreement as to which group of mammals it belongs to.
Since 1997 a further 36 mammal jaws have been found at the site, some of which belong to a new group of monotremes (Teinolophos trusleri) and represent the world’s oldest and smallest monotremes. In 2004 a single tooth in a jaw fragment was found that may represent evidence in Australia of a group of extinct mammals called Multituberculates.
The fossilised remains of fish are very common at the Flat Rocks site. Before 1997 the only evidence of Early Cretaceous birds in Victoria came from Koonwarra, 40 km north of the Flat Rocks site. In 1997 the first definitive bird bone was found at Flat Rocks. A number of other possible bird bones have since turned up at the site and are currently being studied.
Please note: the Dinosaur Dreaming dig project is not currently accepting volunteers.
Vickers-Rich, P., Monaghan, J. M., Baird, R. F. and Rich, T. H. 1991. Vertebrate Palaeontology of Australasia. Pioneer Design Studio, Novacek.
Vickers-Rich, P. and Rich, T. H. 1993. Australia’s polar dinosaurs. Scientific American, July 1993: 50–55.
Vickers-Rich, P., and Rich, T., 2000. Dinosaurs of Darkness. Allen & Unwin, Crows Nest.
Interesting point, John. While projects like these may appear to have an eerie side, it's also true that almost everything we know about prehistoric life depends on palaeontology projects like this one.
Hi Justin, thanks for the enquiry. You are welcome to visit the beach at Inverloch and search for your own fossils, just as you can go and have a look at the Dinosaur Dreaming site. You will find the many links on this and the other Museum Victoria dinosaur information sheets useful in identifying fossils.
Hi Bob, the Discovery Centre has a free identification service. If you think you may have found a fossil, you can take advantage of this service. You can read all about the details and guidelines for identifications here
Hi Michael – If you contact the Queensland Museum through their Inquiry Centre they may also be able to provide you with advice about fossil hunting in the Ipswich region. Have fun!
Hi Alexander - sorry to say, but unfortunately you need to be over 18 to be involved in the the digging at Dinosaur Dreaming. However, on Sunday February 13 there will be a ‘Friends of Dinosaur Dreaming’ day onsite, where visitors are welcome to come and watch the dig in process, talk to the volunteers and see a selection of some of the fossils found there.
If you are interested in going and seeing this, you can visit the site on Feb 13 from late morning. Access to the dig is from ‘The Caves’ carpark on the Inverloch-Cape Paterson road; a few km outside Inverloch, take the steps down to the beach access and look for the Dinosaur Dreaming flags at the site not far from the base of the steps.
Hi Alexander's mum, thank you for checking in and doing the right thing. As the area is a reserve any fossicking/digging on the beach at Dinosaur Dreaming can only be undertaken by Dinosaur Dreaming workers and volunteers who have the required permission to dig in the Bunurong Marine Park from Parks Victoria.
Thank you for the feedback Christopher, however it's not clear to us which of the comments above this relates to; we think it is important that enquirers, regardless of their age, are given accurate information on the legal and safety issues associated with collecting fossils. This isn't intended as a 'brush off', more as responsible advice from our perspective at Museum Victoria.
Feel free to contact us via the 'Contact Us' link at the bottom of this page if you wish to discuss this further.
Hi Jacqui - there are a few legal issues about excavating fossils, and there is no single permit that is available which allows you to fossick - you would need to get the appropriate permission from the landholder of your fossicking locality; be they private land owners, or government bodies responsible for parks, reserves, council and crown land. Please also be aware of some of the safety precaustions when fossicking, there is some helpful information on this on our Information Sheet at http://museumvictoria.com.au/discoverycentre/infosheets/fossil-collecting---methods/
Hope this helps
Hello Brett; the Friends day for 2012 has not yet been scheduled, but once it is it will be posted here or you can simply call us in the Discovery Centre in early January 2012, and we will hopefully have clearer details by that date.
Hi Naomi and Josh; we'd be most happy to meet you on the 'Friends Day' onsite at Inverloch and show you some of the fossils and the work that is being done, but I'm sorry to say that all active participants in the dig must be 18 years or older for health and safety reasons.
The date and details of the 2012 Friends Day will be published on this page soon, stay tuned for an update...
Hi Belinda; unfortunately applications for prospective volunteers closed on September 30th, and the selection process for new volunteers based on these applications is now well underway. As a result, I am sorry to say we can’t assist you with becoming involved in the 2012 dig.
Should you be interested in participating in the 2013 dig, we recommend you contact the Discovery Centre via the "Contact us" link at the bottom of this page around August 2012; by this time we hope to commence the recruitment of new volunteers for the 2013 dig.
Hi Jamie - as excavation only occurs for less than two months every year, there really isn't much opportunity for public engagement beyond the 'Friends' day; you may wish to contact the Bunurong Environment Centre at Inverloch, who occasionally run school holiday activities that might be of interest.
Hi Jenni & Jim - unfortunately we're not able to involve you in this year's dig; applications for becoming a volunteer usually open in August or September in the preceeding year, and involves a selection process followed by specialised training for selected applicants. If you wish to be involved in next years dig, we reccommend you contact the Discovery Centre (via "Contact Us" at the bottom of this page) in August 2012 for details on applying for the 2013 dig.
We love receiving comments, but can’t always respond.
Hi Donna - the Dinosaur Dreaming dig may be of interest, but participants in the actuall digging are all over 18 for safety reasons; one option worth considering might be to come to the annual "Friends of Dinosaur Dreaming Day", which is usally in late February onsite at Inverloch; you may wish to check back on this page around the Christmas Holidays to see when this is scheduled for 2013.
Hi Paula - as the dig is on a public beach, you are free to come and look at any time, digging will be occurring on the beach every day for the next few weeks at low tide.
However, there will be a special "Friends Day" on February 17 on site, where the diggers will be set up to show visitors examples of the fossils being found, and can answer questions from the public. If you were interested, you could also sign up to become a "Friend of Dinosaur Dreaming" on the day.
I know it's a long time since your request, but did you have any success with your search. I'm in the same position regarding August 1966 sailing and w...
To read the latest tweets from @museumvictoria
Follow Museum Victoria on

Simple stain- single human cheek cell with bacteria covering its surface (approx. X 100). Taken from the Wistreich Collection, appearing exclusively in MicrobeWorld. Read More
Photo of Hut Cave taken by mountaineer Nick Giguere during the 2008 expedition Exploring the Rock Bottom of the Food Chain in McMurdo's Extreme Environments led by Dr. Laurie Connell and Dr. Hubert Staudigel. For more pictures go to their website: http://earthref.org/ERESE/projects/GOLF439/... Read More
An electron photomicrograph of two spiral-shaped Treponema pallidum bacteria.
Here we see two Treponema pallidum bacteria scanned by an electron microscope, magnified 36,000X. T. pallidum is the causative agent of syphilis. It contains one of the smallest prokaryotic genomes consisting of abo... Read More
A press release via EurekAlert issued by Howard Hughes Medical Institute:
Howard Hughes Medical Institute researchers are reporting the first detailed molecular snapshots of a deadly gastrointestinal virus as it is caught in the grasp of an immune system molecule with the capacity to destroy ... Read More
The USA300 strain of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, colorized in gold, shown outside a white blood cell.
Staphylococcus aureus: USA:300 is a strain of gram-positive coccus bacteria responsible for Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), or Staph infection in humans. This strain ... Read More
This is a live image of the of Diatom Arachnoidiscus under 40x magnification. The picture shows the diatom's silicified cell wall, which forms a pillbox-like shell (frustule) composed of overlapping halves that contain intricate and delicate markings. The picture was obtained with new video enha... Read More
Application of the mycopathogen, Beauveria Bassina, that make spores to introduce a fungus on tarnished plant bugs as an alternative to chemical control. Research and develop microbial control strategies for tarnished plant bugs on alternate hosts using entomopathogenic fungi.
(http://www.ars... Read More
This image of laboratory-grown cells was taken with the help of a scanning electron microscope, which yields detailed images of cell surfaces.
Tina Carvalho, University of Hawaii at Manoa. - NIGMS Image Gallery Read More
Photomicrograph of Chlamydia grown in culture. The sample was taken from rhesus monkey kidney cells and stained with giemsa. The cell nuclei appear red and the infective 'elementary bodies' of the Chlamydia, which develop in 'blisters' in the cells, fluoresce green. Chlamydia is a very common se... Read More
Cultures of a destructive mold called Phomopsis strains that infect both crop and noncrop plants. One of the species of this genus, Phomopsis viticola, cause a plant disease called phomopsis or dead-arm. Usually, infections begin during early growth stages in spring. This affects leaves, fruit, ... Read More
Under a moderately-high magnification of 2500X, this digitally-colorized scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of an untreated water specimen extracted from a wild stream mainly used to control flooding during inclement weather, revealed the presence of unidentified organisms, which included bacter... Read More
Chlamydia psittaci. Infected baby hamster kidney cell cultures, direct FA stain Read More
Microscopic view of the green algae Spirogyra filament and a number of primitive worms known as rotifers. (approx. 100X). Taken from the Wistreich Collection, appearing exclusively on MicrobeWorld. Read More
fluorescent antibody staining of wall deficient mycobacterium tuberculosis var. hominis Read More
Stan Maloy of the American Society for Microbiology participates in the first episode of This Week in Microbiology live from the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Washington, D.C.
This Week in Microbiology will officially launch next week. Other guests for the fir... Read More
The cyanobacterial mat is on the shores of Lake Fryxell in Taylor Valley- the McMurdo Dry Valley region of Antarctica. These organisms actively grow only a few weeks a year during December and January. Photo taken by Scott Craig and contributed by Dr. Laurie Connell. Read More
Safranin stained rods. (approx. 1000 X). taken from the Wistreich Collection, appearing exclusively on MicrobeWorld. Read More
This is a great visual resource for learning and teaching microbiology lab techniques. You have to join Flickr.com and then sign up to access the groups contents. Read More
An Ebola-like hemorrhagic fever has killed three people in western India and dozens of doctors will screen a community of about 16,000 people in efforts to contain the disease, a state health minister said this past Wednesday.
India's National Institute of Virology later confirmed that the th... Read More

Subsequent Nuremberg Trials
The Subsequent Nuremberg Trials formally the Trials of War Criminals before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals were a series of twelve U.S. military tribunals for war crimes against surviving members of the leadership of Nazi Germany, held in the Palace of Justice, Nuremberg, after World War II from 1946 to 1949 following the Trial of the Major War Criminals before the International Military Tribunal.
Although it had been initially planned to hold more than just one international trial at the IMT, the growing differences between the victorious allies (the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Soviet Union) made this impossible. However, the Control Council Law No. 10, which the Allied Control Council had issued on December 20, 1945, empowered any of the occupying authorities to try suspected war criminals in their respective occupation zones. Based on this law, the U.S. authorities proceeded after the end of the initial Nuremberg Trial against the major war criminals to hold another twelve trials in Nuremberg. The judges in all these trials were American, and so were the prosecutors; the Chief of Counsel for the Prosecution was Brigadier General Telford Taylor. In the other occupation zones similar trials took place.
The twelve U.S. trials before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals (NMT) took place from December 9, 1946 to April 13, 1949. The trials were:
- The Doctors' Trial (9 December 1946 - 20 August 1947)
- The Milch Trial (2 January - 14 April 1947)
- The Judges' Trial (5 March - 4 December 1947)
- The Pohl Trial (8 April - 3 November 1947)
- The Flick Trial (19 April - 22 December 1947)
- The IG Farben Trial (27 August 1947 - 30 July 1948)
- The Hostages Trial (8 July 1947 – 19 February 1948)
- The RuSHA Trial (20 October 1947 - 10 March 1948)
- The Einsatzgruppen Trial (29 September 1947 - 10 April 1948)
- The Krupp Trial (8 December 1947 - 31 July 1948)
- The Ministries Trial (6 January 1948 - 13 April 1949)
- The High Command Trial (30 December 1947 - 28 October 1948)
In total, 142 of the 185 defendants were found guilty of at least one of the charges. 24 persons received death sentences, of which 11 were subsequently converted into life sentences; 20 were sentenced to life imprisonment, 98 were handed down sentences of varying lengths, and 35 were acquitted. Four defendants had to be removed from trials due to illness, and four more committed suicide during the trials.
Many of the longer prison sentences were reduced substantially by decree of high commissioner John J. McCloy in 1951, and 10 outstanding death sentences from the Einsatzgruppen Trial were converted to prison terms. The same year, an amnesty released many of those who had received prison sentences.
Some of the NMTs have been criticised for their misguided conclusion that "morale bombing" of civilians, including its nuclear variety, was legal, and for their judgement that, in certain situations, executing civilians in reprisal was permissible.
Conduct of the prosecution 
In a 2005 interview for the Washington Post, Benjamin B. Ferencz, Chief Prosecutor for the United States Army at the Einsatzgruppen Trial, revealed some of his activities during his period in Germany:
- "I once saw DPs beat an SS man and then strap him to the steel gurney of a crematorium. They slid him in the oven, turned on the heat and took him back out. Beat him again, and put him back in until he was burnt alive. I did nothing to stop it. I suppose I could have brandished my weapon or shot in the air, but I was not inclined to do so. Does that make me an accomplice to murder?"
In the interview, Ferencz also pointed out that the military legal norms at the time permitted actions that would not be possible today.
- "You know how I got witness statements? I'd go into a village where, say, an American pilot had parachuted and been beaten to death and line everyone one up against the wall. Then I'd say, 'Anyone who lies will be shot on the spot.' It never occurred to me that statements taken under duress would be invalid."
See also 
- Auschwitz Trial held in Kraków, Poland in 1947 against 40 SS-staff of the Auschwitz concentration camp death factory
- Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials, 1963–65
- Majdanek Trials, the longest Nazi war crimes trial in history, spanning over 30 years
- Chełmno Trials of the Chełmno extermination camp personel, held in Poland and in Germany. The cases were decided almost twenty years apart
- Sobibor Trial held in Hagen, Germany in 1965, concerning the Sobibor extermination camp
- Belzec Trial before the 1st Munich District Court in the mid-1960s, eight SS-men of the Belzec extermination camp
- Belsen Trial in Lüneburg, 1945
- Command responsibility doctrine of hierarchical accountability
- Dachau Trials held within the walls of the former Dachau concentration camp, 1945–1948
- Mauthausen-Gusen camp trials, 1946–47
- Ravensbrück Trial
- Research Materials: Max Planck Society Archive
Further reading

Anorexia may be a disorder more of the metabolism than the mind, according to a new paper that argues the disease is a sort of cousin of diabetes.
But this theory of anorexia as a fundamentally biological disorder, rather than a psychological one, is untested, psychiatrists warn, and patients with the disease should not stray from proven treatments.
The review of past research on the topic, published in the June issue of the journal Molecular Psychiatry, finds that certain genetic and cellular processes get activated during starvation in organisms ranging from yeast to fruit flies to mice to humans. The idea, said study researcher Donard Dwyer, is that in people with a broken starvation response, a few initial rounds of dieting could trigger a metabolism gone haywire.
In this theory, it’s not stubbornness or a mental disorder that keeps anorexics from eating, it’s their own bodies. The theory could explain why it can be so difficult to convince anorexic patients that anything is wrong with them, Dwyer told LiveScience.
“Unless we conceive of it as more of a metabolic function, I don’t think we’ll get past the first stage of treatment with a lot of the real hard-core patients,” he said.
The diabetes of starvation
In the current understanding of anorexia nervosa, an eating disorder in which patients don’t maintain at least 85 percent of their normal body weight for their height, overachieving personality types attempt to control stress and emotion by restricting food and/or extreme exercising.
Dwyer sees the disease, instead, as a condition similar to diabetes. Someone who becomes obese and is genetically susceptible will develop insulin resistance, which then becomes diabetes. An initial trigger — the obesity — is required, but once the patient has diabetes, you can’t talk him or her out of the disease.
For anorexia, Dwyer said, the potential trigger is chronic undereating or dieting, and the messed-up molecular process could be any number of biological changes that happen during starvation. In the current review, he and his colleagues focus on a cascade of genetic and cellular events called the IGF-1/Akt/FOXO pathway. Organisms from yeasts to humans activate this pathway in response to starvation, triggering all sorts of biological changes, including a desire to look for food. If this pathway doesn’t work as it should, it could theoretically cause the warped approach to eating seen in anorexia. (The so-called epigenome, the supporting actor to our genes, is what helps determine which genes, or pathways, get switched on and off.)
If Dwyer is right, difficult-to-treat anorexic patients may need drugs to get their metabolisms back on track, much as diabetic patients have to take insulin shots. But so far, the idea has not been tested in humans.
“This is, at the moment, speculative,” Timothy Walsh, a psychiatrist at Columbia University who was not involved in the research, told LiveScience. “There’s no human data to support it, and it’s only part of the answer. It’s not proposed as the complete solution.”
Starvation and metabolism
Dwyer is careful to say that much more research is needed. But he says there is good reason to continue the work. Research on obesity has shown that being too heavy is more complex than simply calories in, calories out, he said. There are genetic and metabolic factors involved that make it hard for some people to shed weight. And obesity-related changes to the epigenome (our genes’ on-off switches) can even be passed down from mother to child. The same could be true on the flip side, with starvation, Dwyer said.
The genes linked to anorexia could be the same ones that regulate the metabolism during starvation, he said.
Additionally, studies on starving people suggest that many of the supposed causes of anorexia, including food obsession and anxiety, may be symptoms of starvation. And starving people, like anorexics, often report that they’re doing much better than their physical condition would suggest.
“Here we have our anorexic patients who are not aware of how sick they are despite how thin they have gotten. … We’re not going to be able to convince them otherwise until we understand that better,” Dwyer said. “It’s probably not going to be something we can just talk them out of.”

As my 3 year old daughter, Emerson, has grown and excelled in her Montessori school, I’ve thought more and more about what my hopes are for her future education and what I believe an education should provide.
There’s a great deal of talk these days about standards in education. I believe that it’s time for a new type of standards. I’ve attempted to put together a set of 10 belief statements that highlight the positive perspective of Emerson’s education and my own learning experiences.
I didn’t set out to write statements that are exclusive to Montessori, but rather aspirational for the schools that I hope will help Emerson become the best possible version of herself.
I believe children deserve a PERSONALIZED and PURPOSEFUL education. They should be free to do INDEPENDENT, SELF-DIRECTED and FASCINATION-DRIVEN work. The classroom should be an ENVIRONMENT OF BEAUTY that allows for FREE MOVEMENT and COLLABORATION. A commitment to EXPERIMENTATION and DISCOVERY during childhood will create a foundation for lifelong learning.
1) PERSONALIZED – I believe that a child deserves an education that is responsive to his or her individual spirit and learning style, utilizes all of the senses, and focuses on his or her dynamic development as a whole person (i.e. emotional, physical, social, spiritual, aesthetic and intellectual.)
2) PURPOSEFUL – I believe that a child with a positive conception of purposeful and concentrated work is prepared to be present and satisfied with his or her life’s work.
3) INDEPENDENT – I believe that a child provided an environment for independent decision-making is also prepared for responsibility in an ever-changing world.
4) SELF-DIRECTED – I believe that a child who learns the value of self-direction and self-correction will develop a positive self-image in a world requiring self-motivation.
5) FASCINATION-DRIVEN – I believe that a child with freedom to concentrate on his or her fascinations develops a capacity for both self-discipline and self-initiative.
6) ENVIRONMENT OF BEAUTY – I believe that a child who is taught the value and responsibility of learning in an environment of beauty and harmony will appreciate the value of beauty and harmony in one’s life.
7) FREE MOVEMENT – I believe that a child requires purposeful movement and activity as an integral component of realizing his or her full intellectual potential.
8) COLLABORATION – I believe that a child engaged in a classroom collaboration of diverse ages and cultures gains an open, empathetic, and respectful perspective on participation in a community.
9) EXPERIMENTATION – I believe that a child who is free to exercise critical thinking, experimentation and creativity will have an appreciation for the world of entrepreneurship and innovation in science and art.
10) DISCOVERY – I believe that a child started and supported on a journey of self-discovery will also discover the possibility of self-fulfillment and a lifetime of learning both inside and outside the classroom.
Is there something missing? Is something not clear? Does something seem misplaced, overstated or uncomfortable? Don’t worry about formal remarks. I’d just love some kneejerk wisdom from others who care as much about education as I have grown to.
Thanks to Bobby George and many others for feedback on this draft.

(455) At Coalface of Heating
In February 2003, a small factory closed down in Seoul; the demand for its product had dropped below the level which made production economically viable. Stories like this are common in Korea and they are seldom seen as newsworthy.
But the closure of the Samchully factory attracted the attention of the major media. The reason was simple: the factory was the last in Seoul to produce coal briquettes, known as yeontan. For decades, these briquettes kept Korean houses warm in winter. They were seen as a valuable commodity and, at some point, an embodiment of technical progress.
Heating has always been a major problem in Korea. In the cold winters one had to keep the house warm. Since times immemorial Koreans used a very efficient system of heated floors, known as ondol, but the ondol hearth had to be fed with fuel. For centuries, it was firewood, but by the early 1900s the use of firewood was increasingly inconvenient.
This was due to two major problems. First of all, population growth meant that most mountains around towns were virtually stripped barren (this is still the case in North Korea). Firewood was in short supply, and expensive.
Second, the available low-quality firewood was a capricious fuel. It was very time-consuming to feed the hearth. Thus, Korean housewives welcomed the arrival of yeontan with great relief.
What does a yeontan look like? I am pretty sure that many readers have seen these briquettes somewhere on Seoul’s streets. They are cylindrical and about the size of a paint can, with a number of drilled holes _ the standard yeontan had 22 holes. The holes are necessary to make it burn steadily and efficiently.
The standard briquette weighs 3.5 kg. Yeontan were produced from a mixture of coal dust and a special gluing agent which kept the dust particles together.
It was the standard weight and size that made yeontan so hugely popular. Unlike ``natural’’ coal and firewood, yeontan came in a predictable shape.
One could easily stack a few briquettes on top of each other in a stove and leave them burning slowly for hours. In addition, the technology of their composition made it possible to utilize low-quality coal and coal dust.
When did the history of yeontan begin? Despite my labors, I could not find a definite answer. These briquettes are not unique to Korea and their close cousins are widely used in China and Japan as well. This makes me suspect that the yeontan was invented in the early 1900s, but where and by whom I know not.
The first yeontan were introduced to Korea by the Japanese in the late 1920s, but for a long time these briquettes remained an expensive luxury. The spread of yeontan began only after the 1950-53 Korean War when the price went down just as firewood became prohibitively expensive.
Korean households enthusiastically took up the new fuel which _ as they soon discovered _ was so much more convenient than firewood. In a poll conducted in 1970, Koreans even chose yeontan as ``the most important product of our time’’ (in a 2000 poll, the same significance was ascribed to the mobile phone).
The government also supported the switch to yeontan _ it helped to protect the then dwindling forests.
However, yeontan was not without its dangers. The most serious one was the ever-present danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
This odorless and colorless gas could filter through the cracks of a damaged ondol floor and suffocate the victims while they were sleeping. Strict precautions were always taken, but gas poisoning remained a major case of death in Korea until quite recently.
In 1988, 77.8 percent of all Korean households used yeontan briquettes for heating and/or cooking. By 1993, that percentage had dropped to 32.8 percent. The 1997-98 Asian financial crisis and high oil prices of the late 1990s briefly reversed the trend, but soon the retreat of the venerable coal briquettes continued.
In 2001 a mere 1.5 percent of families were still using yeontan. People were switching to oil and gas boilers, generally more expensive but also more convenient and safe (no danger of gas poisoning: the floor was heated not by fumes, but by hot water).
Thus, the good old yeontan is going to soon become extinct. New, automated and computerized heating systems are replacing the coal briquettes. The introduction of these systems has greatly changed the daily lives of Koreans.
Prof. Andrei Lankov was born in St. Petersburg, Russia, and now teaches at Kookmin University in Seoul.

January 10, 2012
Carlos Peres and Maurício Schneider review the environmental and socioeconomic costs of Brazil's agrarian resettlement schemes, which have run from the 1970s as part an effort to to encourage migration from densely settled areas to low population regions. The largest, run by the Institute for Rural Settlement and Agrarian Reform (INCRA), has moved nearly a million families to settlements encompassing 85.8 million hectares of mostly forest land. The impact on forests has been substantial — by 2004 15 percent of all deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon had occurred in INCRA areas. The proportion has since climbed, with some INCRA settlements reaching 70 percent forest loss.
Fragmentation due to colonization in the Brazilian Amazon. Image courtesy of Google Earth
But while the programs drive deforestation, the economic benefits for settlers are less than clear, according to the authors.
"The environmental and monetary costs associated with these resettlement schemes are rarely outweighed by the socioeconomic benefits accrued to translocated farmers," they write. "At an average start-up resettlement cost of at least US$12,000 per family, this is an expensive development program."
From a macroeconomic standpoint, this strategic investment policy is highly questionable. Brazil was the first tropical country to join the traditional 'big five' breadbaskets, but this 'agricultural revolution' was largely spearheaded by large rather than small properties. Only 8% of the country’s 5.2 million farms are relatively large landholdings (>100 ha) but they earn 52.5% of the overall farm income. This highlights the sociopolitical polarity between highly productive large corporate farms and myriads of relatively inefficient smallholdings.
Thus Peres and Schneider conclude with a call to limit new agricultural settlements to previously deforested areas that are presently used for low-yield cattle pasture; improved law enforcement and forest monitoring programs; and a "truly integrated policy framework" that reconciles conflicting policy goals between different government sectors.
"Above all," write Peres and Schneider, "both a reorganization of land-tenure law enforcement in settler destination regions and curbing the outflow of migrants from source regions will be central to improving the dismal environmental record of land redistribution policy in Brazil."
CITATION: Carlos Peres and Maurício Schneider. Subsidized agricultural resettlements as drivers of tropical deforestation. Biological Conservation (2011) doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.11.011

"Actually get to have hands on experience of harvesting and preparing their own food," Adrienne Shaunfield, Community Food Systems Coordinator for Feed Fayetteville said.
Head Start is a preschool program for children whose families fall under the poverty guidelines. Feed Fayetteville teamed up to build a garden for them last month to introduce them to a new way of getting food.
"When kids take ownership of their food choices, they're more likely to be excited about it and also to want to try new things," Shaunfield said.
Learning to grow their own food is not just cost effective, but studies have shown that the more time kids spend in a garden, the more vegetables kids will eat.
"It's not just mom or dad is making me eat it, but I want to eat it because I helped grow it. If a child pulls a carrot out of the dirt they're more likely to eat it than if you serve one to them on a plate."
Shaunfield said what kids learn in the garden they're likely to bring back home to their parents.
"I think that children really do influence their parents choices at the grocery store. I know mine do anyway."
Feed Fayetteville also has a farmer's market style program for families called SNAP Garden. It allows families to use food stamps to buy fresh, local produce. Shaunfield said a key element to the program however, is starting them young.
"I think it's really important to start healthy eating habits at an early age, and by building the garden here at Head Start we've created an environment that is a learning space for the kids."
Feed Fayetteville is having a food drive throughout October called Protein, Produce and Pennies to help support local families in need. For more information on the programs visit, www.feedfayetteville.org

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are an ancient group of molecules that are expressed in many species ranging from bacteria to humans. At least 1200 naturally-occurring AMPs have been identified which display considerable diversity in their primary sequences, lengths, structures, and biological activities (Wang et al., 2009). Generally speaking, these peptides have been studied due to their ability to directly kill medically important-microbes. Indeed, the increased demand for novel anti-infective therapies (due to the spread of drug-resistant bacteria) has likely contributed to the expansion of this field of research. However, there has been a definite change of focus in AMP research in light of the recent recognition of the regulatory functions of these molecules in the innate immune system. This has opened up the exciting possibility of developing novel antimicrobial therapies that centre on boosting host immunity rather than direct microbial killing (Zhang and Falla, 2010). In this volume, with emphasis on emerging technologies, mechanism of action studies and roles in disease, we aim to consolidate some of these developments and stimulate discussion on the therapeutic potential of these important molecules.
The first three articles demonstrate how knowledge of AMP structure and amino acid composition is guiding rational peptide design strategies aimed at improving the therapeutic potential of these molecules. Mishra and Wang describe the development of a comprehensive AMP database that is enabling us to link amino acid composition with specific peptide activities (e.g., antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antiparasital, insecticidal, spermicidal, anticancer, etc.). The article suggests how this information may be used to develop novel peptides with a desired activity. Next, Scorciapino and Rinaldi discuss how knowledge of the amino acid sequence of naturally-occurring AMPs can be used to dictate the design of antimicrobial peptidomimetics. The authors note that by retaining the biological activity of natural AMPs and improving their pharmacokinetic properties, these novel molecules may allow systemic use of AMPs to treat microbial infections. The third article by Devocelle describes how conjugation of AMPs to targeting moieties can improve delivery to their desired site of action and reduce potential off-target effects. It is clear that the complementary approaches described in these three articles will play an important part in making therapeutic AMPs a reality.
The next two articles describe different, but equally powerful, approaches that may be used to probe the biological functions of AMPs. The development of various “–omics” (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and others) technologies has truly revolutionised biological research. In this regard, Plichta et al. discuss how the integration of various—omics datasets can help us to understand the role of AMPs in varied contexts from resolution of infections, improvement of prognosis for cancer patients to early detection of transplant rejection. The fifth article by Munoz and Read highlights the use of live cell imaging to study AMP function. With emphasis on the various approaches that may be used to label AMPs, this article demonstrates the central role live cell imaging continues to play in the elucidation of AMP function.
The next six articles in this research topic cover recent advances in our understanding of the biological role of AMPs and their mechanism(s) of action. Brender et al. examine the role of cholesterol in dictating the selectivity of AMPs for microbial membranes. Defining the role of cholesterol in AMP-mediated cytotoxicity is important, especially if AMPs are to be used therapeutically. Melo and Castanho discuss the various experimental approaches that may be used to answer this very question. By comparing the use of bacterial membranes with model liposomal membranes, they illustrate the importance of physiological relevance in experimental design. The next two articles in this series illustrate how helminths express AMP homologues that are functionally adapted to either a free-living or parasitic lifestyle. For example, Pujol et al. describe the array of AMPs expressed by the model nematode Caenorhabditis elelgans and how they serve to protect the worm against attack by fungi in the free-living environment. Next, Cotton et al. probe the role of AMP homologues that are secreted by medically-important parasitic worms. This interesting family of molecules may hold the key to the evolution of immunomodulatory function in AMPs. In the following two articles, Ulm et al. and Choi and Mookherjee discuss advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which members of these major AMP families influence immune cell function.
The final two articles in the volume cover the role of AMPs in disease resolution and the outlook for their therapeutic use in humans. The article by David describes how AMPs may fill a gap in our existing therapeutic repertoire. David builds the case for the use of polymyxins to treat Gram-negative sepsis, a condition for which there is currently no single effective therapeutic approach. The article by Berditsch et al. concludes the volume and describes how, perhaps surprisingly, AMPs can stimulate bacterial survival mechanisms leading to persistent infections. This article highlights the importance of understanding how microbial populations respond to exposure to AMPs before they can be used in the clinic.
In summary, by inviting opinion articles from leading AMP researchers, the aim of this volume was to highlight recent advances in our understanding of the roles of these important molecules. We also hope that the articles compiled will stimulate discussion and further research in this area so that the therapeutic potential of AMPs may be realised.
Citation: Robinson MW, Hutchinson AT and Donnelly S (2012) Antimicrobial peptides: utility players in innate immunity. Front. Immun. 3:325. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00325
Received: 05 October 2012; Accepted: 08 October 2012;
Published online: 25 October 2012.
Copyright © 2012 Robinson, Hutchinson and Donnelly. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in other forums, provided the original authors and source are credited and subject to any copyright notices concerning any third-party graphics etc.

Life of St. King Stephen of Decani
King Stephen of Decani is one of the best known Saints of the
Serbian Orthodox Church. Through his holy and incorruptible relics
God has performed numerous miracles.
as the Serbian people suffer through another turbulent chapter in their
history, they would do well to bring to mind the exemplary character
of their martyred King Stephen Uros III (Decanski).
He was born the
eldest son of the saintly King Milutin (Stephen Uros II) and his wife
Elizabeth, a Hungarian princess. Living at the court of his parents,
the heir-apparent received a good education, his mind exercised by study
of the language and writings of his people, and his heart strengthened
by study of the Holy Scripture and the teachings of the Orthodox Faith.
The good fruit of his upbringing proved itself when King Milutin was
forced to send him as hostage to the Tartar chief Nogyi. In spite of
the potential dangers, Stephen was obedient to his father's will and
did not resist, trusting his life to the Lord. And his hope was not
in vain. He eventually made friends with one of the Tartar nobles, who
succeeded in assisting his safe return home.
When Stephen came of age, his parents arranged that he marry the daughter
of the Bulgarian King Smilatz, and the young couple were given the land
of Zeta, where they settled until such a time as Stephen would be called
to succeed his father to the throne. Meanwhile, King Milutin had remarried,
and his second wife, Simonide, plotted in order that their son Constantine
inherit the throne. She convinced Milutin that Stephen wanted to seize
the throne prematurely, and the deceived Milutin ordered that his son
be captured, that he be blinded to ensure that he never again entertain
such treachery, and that he be sent as a prisoner to Constantinople.
The coffin of St. King Stephan of Decani, 14th century
The prince was taken
together with his children, Dusan and Dusica, and when they were passing
through Ovcepole (Sheep's Field), the guards took red hot pokers and
blinded him. That night St. Nicholas appeared to Stephen in a dream:
"Be not afraid," he said, "your eyes are in my hands."
Comforted not a little by this vision, the sightless Stephen arrived
in Constantinople. The Emperor Andronicus pitied the young exile, and
received him graciously. He was soon settled in the monastery of Pantocrator,
where he impressed the monks by his meekness and his longsuffering acceptance
of the bitter trial that had come to him through his own father.
years passed. King Milutin was growing old. Hearing good reports about
his son, his heart softened, and he called Stephen home to Serbia. Before
leaving Constantinople, Stephen had a dream in which St. Nicholas appeared
to him a second time, holding in his hand a pair of eyes. When he awoke,
his sight was restored.
Three years later, his father died, and Stephen, always popular with
the people, was crowned King of Serbia by the holy Archbishop Nikodim
in the church at Pec. His halfbrother, Constantine, resented this turn
of events, and raised an army in order to wrest the throne away from
Stephen. Desiring to avoid bloodshed, King Stephen addressed a letter
"Put far from thee thy desire to come with a foreign people to
make war on shine own countrymen; but let us meet one another, and thou
shalt be second in my kingdom, for the land is great enough for me and
thee to live. I am not Cain who slew his brother, but Joseph who loved
him, and in his words I speak to thee. Fear not, for I am from the Lord.
You prepared evil for me, but the Lord has given me good, as you now
was unmoved and gave orders to attack. In the ensuing battle, his army
was defeated and he himself was slain. For the next ten years, King
Stephen ruled in relative peace, and the Serbian land prospered. His
son Dusan proved to be an able military leader and was successful in
battles with the Bulgarians and the Greeks, who were envious of the
now powerful Serbian state and rose up against it. Grateful to the Lord
for these victories, King Stephen set about with Archbishop Daniel,
Nikodim,s successor, to find a place to build a church. They settled
upon a place called Decani, and there, in 1327, King Stephen himself
laid the cornerstone for what was to become one of the most magnificent
and enduring specimens of Serbian church architecture. Inside it was
graced by splendid icons, to which more were added in the sixteenth
century by the hand of the celebrated Slav iconographer, Longinos.
St. King Stefan of Decani, fresco Decani Monastery, 14th
click for a larger size image
Saint Stephen gave generously to the needy.
He also made liberal donations to churches and monasteries on the Holy
Mountain, in Jerusalem, Alexandria, and to the monastery of Pantocrator
in Constantinople. Nor did he forget his debt to the wonderworker Nicholas:
he commissioned a silver altar and sent it together with some icons
to the church in Bari, Italy, where the Saint's holy relics are located.
St. King Stefan - a woodcarving (miniature)
Having in a true Christian manner endured the grievous trials and afflictions
which he met through the years, the good king deserved to live out the
rest of his life in peace. But it was only fitting that he who suffered
as a martyr in life should be granted an opportunity to receive in death
a martyr's crown. His final trial was the most agonizing. Dusan's successes
on the field of battle had given him an appetite for power and glory,
and, encouraged by his entourage of nobles, he decided to hasten his
father's death. In 1331, St. Stephen was taken prisoner to a fortress
in the town of Zvecan and cruelly murdered (by some accounts he was
hung, according to another he was strangled).
Almost immediately Dusan was struck by remorse. He earnestly and tearfully
repented of his treachery, and the next year, on the feast of the Holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, he had his father's remains transferred from
Zvecan to Decani, where they were placed in a marble tomb. In 1339 the
tomb was opened, and his body was found to be incorrupt. That same day
saw many miracles of healing. Especially did the holy king prove to
heal diseases of the eyes, and at his relics blind people received their
Fr. Kozma Vasilopoulos
The Orthodox Monastery of St Michael, Sidney
relics of St. King Stephen of Decani
Signature of St. King Stefan in his Decani Monastery
Foundation Charter, 14c.
TO DECANI MONASTERY PAGE

Bacterial vaginosis is a mild infection in the vagina caused by a type of bacteria (germ). The vagina normally contains a lot of "good" bacteria, called lactobacilli (say: "lack-toe bah-sil-li"), and a few other types of bacteria, called anaerobes (say: "ann-air-robes"). Too many anaerobes can cause bacterial vaginosis. It is not known why the anaerobe bacteria overgrow and cause this infection.
You may notice a discharge from your vagina. The discharge may be clear or colored. It may be very light or heavy. It may have a fishy smell, especially after you have sexual intercourse. Some women have bacterial vaginosis without any symptoms.
Bacterial vaginosis is an overgrowth of bacteria that are normally in the vagina. Researchers do not completely understand why it occurs. However, activities such as douching or having a new sexual partner or multiple sexual partners can put you at greater risk for bacterial vaginosis. While it's more common in women who are sexually active, it also occurs in women who are not sexually active. It's not usually necessary for your sex partner to be treated.
Your doctor will examine your vagina and use a cotton swab to get a sample of the discharge. This sample will be tested.
Yes. If the infection isn't treated, the bacteria may get up into the uterus or the fallopian tubes and cause more serious infections. Treating bacterial vaginosis lowers this risk. Treatment is especially important in pregnant women.
It can be treated in one of several ways. Your doctor may prescribe pills for you to take by mouth, or a cream or gel to put in your vagina. It's important to use your medicine exactly as your doctor tells you.
If your doctor prescribes metronidazole or other medicines, don't drink any alcohol while taking the medicine or for 24 hours afterward. Combining alcohol with these medicines can cause nausea and vomiting. Even the small amount of alcohol in many cough syrups can cause nausea and vomiting if you're taking metronidazole. Also, be sure to tell your doctor about any other medicines you are currently taking.
Written by familydoctor.org editorial staff

Coloring pages - Edupics.com
All videos (0)
Amusement park (15)
Children's rights (14)
Space exploration (103)
Fairy tales (286)
Youth organization (25)
Famous people (182)
Film and television (67)
airplane, anatomy, animals, army, baby, beach, bike, birds, boat, boy, butterfly, car, cars, cat, chicken, children, clothes, cow, doctor, dog, dragon, duck, easter bunny, easter eggs, eating, egypt, Elephant, fairy, family, fish, flag, flower, flowers, food, forest, frog, Fruit, garden, girl, graffiti, guitar, heart, hippie, horse, house, human body, ice cream, lion, love, mandala, mandalas, meat, Mexico, MICHAEL JACKSON, monkey, music, music notes, ocean, peace, PEOPLE, pig, princess, rabbit, ROSES, school, spain, sports, sun, teacher, tiger, train, tree, Vegetables, water, weather
Coloring pages, pictures and crafts at Edupics.comEducational pictures, photos and crafts
On our website, we offer you a wide selection of coloring pages, pictures, photographs and handicrafts.
Everything has been classified in themes which are commonly used in primary education.
The coloring pages are especially designed to be used throughout the year at school.
Coloring pages are widely used as an educational means in upbringing and education.
In a school environment these useful tools can be applied in many ways:
- to visually clarify concepts that are taught in the classroom.
- to remind the children of made agreements or certain class assignments.
- to help children express themselves, or to deal with certain issues.
- to have fun, relax or encourage creativity.
As their educational application is versatile, coloring pages can be a valuable tool in the general upbringing and education of children.
This site runs on 100% Green Power!
Powered by MDKMedia.

US 6543011 B1
A method for recording events in Java. According to a preferred embodiment, an automator is attached to a Java applet. Responsive to selection by a user, listeners are added for each event type produced in the Java applet. Each time a specified event occurs, that event is captured and saved to a data structure. The recording of events is performed until the user stops the process.
1. A data processor implemented method of recording events, the steps comprising:
loading an application;
adding listeners for each event type produced in the application;
capturing user generated events;
recording the user generated events to a data structure; and
replaying the user generated events.
2. The method as recited in
3. The method as recited in
4. The method as recited in
5. The method as recited in
6. The method as recited in
7. The method of
8. The method of
9. A computer program product in computer readable media for use in a data processing system for recording events, the computer program product comprising:
first instructions for loading an application;
second instructions for adding listeners for each event type produced in the application;
third instructions for capturing user generated events;
fourth instructions for recording the user generated events to a data structure; and
fifth instructions for replaying the user generated events.
10. The computer program product as recited in
11. The computer program product as recited in
12. The computer program product as recited in
13. The computer program product as recited in
14. The computer program product as recited in
15. The computer program product of
16. The computer program product of
17. A system for recording events, comprising:
means for loading an application;
means for adding listeners for each event type produced in the application; and
means for capturing user generated events;
means for recording the user generated events to a data structure; and
means for replaying the user generated events.
18. The system as recited in
19. The system as recited in
20. The system as recited in
21. The system as recited in
22. The system as recited in
23. The system of
24. The system of
25. A method of recording events, the steps comprising:
loading an application;
adding a listener for an event type;
capturing an event;
recording the event; and
replaying the event.
26. The method as recited in
27. The method as recited in
28. The method as recited in
29. The method of
30. The method of
31. A system for recording events generated by an application, comprising:
a listener; and
a file; wherein
the automator is attached to an application and adds the listener to a component of an application; and
the listener monitors events of the event type received from a system queue within the application and posts received events to the file.
1. Technical Field
The present invention relates generally to computer software and, more specifically, to methods of recording events in Java.
2. Description of Related Art
The evolution of programming languages has, to a great extent, been driven by changes in the hardware being programmed. As hardware has grown faster, cheaper, and more powerful, software has become larger and more complex. The migration from assembly languages to procedural languages, such as C, and to object-oriented languages, such as C++ and Java, was largely driven by a need to manage ever greater complexity—complexity made possible by increasingly powerful hardware.
Today, the progression toward cheaper, faster, and more powerful hardware continues, as does the need for managing increasing software complexity. Building on C and C++, Java helps programmers deal with complexity by rendering impossible certain kinds of bugs that frequently plague C and C++ programmers.
In addition to the increasing capabilities of hardware, there is another fundamental shift taking place that impacts upon software programming, that is the network. As networks interconnect more and more computers and devices, new demands are being placed on software. One of these demands is platform independence.
Java supports platform independence primarily through the creation of the Java Virtual Machine. The Java Virtual Machine is an abstract computer, and its specification defines certain features every Java Virtual Machine must have. However, the specification for the Java Virtual Machine is flexible, enabling it to be implemented on a wide variety of computers, devices, and operating systems. One of the main tasks performed by a Java Virtual Machine is to load class files and execute the bytecodes they contain.
One type of program executed by a Java Virtual Machine is an applet. An applet is a Java program that has a set of standard properties that are defined by the applet class. This class was developed by Sun Microsystems and is included in the standard Java Software Development Kit (Java SDK).
Although, theoretically, a program written in Java for one platform should perform on any Java enabled platform, given the allowable differences among Java platform implementations and other factors, a Java program or applet should be tested on all platforms on which it is anticipated to perform. Since user actions in Java are handled by events, and since it can sometimes take many hours or days for a problem to manifest itself, testing of the entire Java Virtual Machine on a platform can be very tedious. Therefore, it is desirable to provide methods of automating the functional testing of the Java platform on various systems.
However, current methods of automating testing of the Java platform on various systems requires a specialized execution environment, as well as compilation of a separate program. Furthermore, current methods require that the applet or application must be exited before any automation can take place, and they require a significant amount of system resources. Therefore, there is a need for a simpler method of testing the Java platform, that does not require recompilation of code, that does not require the applet or application to be exited before automation, and that uses fewer system resources.
The present invention provides a data processor implemented method for recording events in Java. According to a preferred embodiment, an automator is attached to a Java applet. Responsive to selection by a user, listeners are added for each event type produced in the Java applet. Each time a specified event occurs, that event is captured and saved to a data structure. The recording of events is performed until the user stops the process.
The novel features believed characteristic of the invention are set forth in the appended claims. The invention itself, however, as well as a preferred mode of use, further objectives and advantages thereof, will best be understood by reference to the following detailed description of an illustrative embodiment when read in conjunction with the accompanying drawings, wherein:
FIG. 1 is a pictorial representation of a distributed data processing system;
FIG. 2 is a block diagram of a data processing system that may be implemented as a server;
FIG. 3 is a block diagram of a data processing system;
FIG. 4 is a block diagram of a Java virtual machine (JVM);
FIG. 5 depicts a sample user interface to an applet recorder;
FIG. 6 is a block diagram illustrating how events are currently handled within Java applets;
FIG. 7 is a block diagram illustrating how events are handled when an automator is attached to a Java applet;
FIG. 8 is a flowchart illustrating how the applet recorder functions;
FIG. 9 is a flowchart illustrating the function performed by an automator listener; and
FIG. 10 is a block diagram illustrating the three main parts of an object created by an automator listener.
With reference now to the figures, and in particular with reference to FIG. 1, a pictorial representation of a distributed data processing system is depicted in which the present invention may be implemented.
Distributed data processing system 100 is a network of computers in which the present invention may be implemented. Distributed data processing system 100 contains network 102, which is the medium used to provide communications links between various devices and computers connected within distributed data processing system 100. Network 102 may include permanent connections, such as wire or fiber optic cables, or temporary connections made through telephone connections.
In the depicted example, server 104 is connected to network 102, along with storage unit 106. In addition, clients 108, 110 and 112 are also connected to network 102. These clients, 108, 110 and 112, may be, for example, personal computers or network computers. For purposes of this application, a network computer is any computer coupled to a network, which receives a program or other application from another computer coupled to the network. In the depicted example, server 104 provides data, such as boot files, operating system images and applications, to clients 108-112. Clients 108, 110 and 112 are clients to server 104. Distributed data processing system 100 may include additional servers, clients, and other devices not shown.
In the depicted example, distributed data processing system 100 is the Internet, with network 102 representing a worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use the TCP/IP suite of protocols to communicate with one another. At the heart of the Internet is a backbone of high-speed data communication lines between major nodes or host computers consisting of thousands of commercial, government, education, and other computer systems that route data and messages. Of course, distributed data processing system 100 also may be implemented as a number of different types of networks such as, for example, an intranet or a local area network.
FIG. 1 is intended as an example and not as an architectural limitation for the processes of the present invention.
Referring to FIG. 2, a block diagram of a data processing system which may be implemented as a server, such as server 104 in FIG. 1, is depicted in accordance with the present invention. Data processing system 200 may be a symmetric multiprocessor (SMP) system including a plurality of processors 202 and 204 connected to system bus 206. Alternatively, a single processor system may be employed. Also connected to system bus 206 is memory controller/cache 208, which provides an interface to local memory 209. I/O bus bridge 210 is connected to system bus 206 and provides an interface to I/O bus 212. Memory controller/cache 208 and I/O bus bridge 210 may be integrated as depicted.
Peripheral component interconnect (PCI) bus bridge 214 connected to I/O bus 212 provides an interface to PCI local bus 216. A number of modems 218-220 may be connected to PCI bus 216. Typical PCI bus implementations will support four PCI expansion slots or add-in connectors. Communications links to network computers 108-112 in FIG. 1 may be provided through modem 218 and network adapter 220 connected to PCI local bus 216 through add-in boards.
Additional PCI bus bridges 222 and 224 provide interfaces for additional PCI buses 226 and 228, from which additional modems or network adapters may be supported. In this manner, server 200 allows connections to multiple network computers. A memory mapped graphics adapter 230 and hard disk 232 may also be connected to I/O bus 212 as depicted, either directly or indirectly.
Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware depicted in FIG. 2 may vary. For example, other peripheral devices, such as optical disk drives and the like, also may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted. The depicted example is not meant to imply architectural limitations with respect to the present invention.
The data processing system depicted in FIG. 2 may be, for example, an IBM RISC/System 6000, a product of International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y., running the Advanced Interactive Executive (AIX) operating system.
With reference now to FIG. 3, a block diagram of a data processing system in which the present invention may be implemented is illustrated. Data processing system 300 is an example of a client computer. Data processing system 300 employs a peripheral component interconnect (PCI) local bus architecture. Although the depicted example employs a PCI bus, other bus architectures, such as Micro Channel and ISA, may be used. Processor 302 and main memory 304 are connected to PCI local bus 306 through PCI bridge 308. PCI bridge 308 may also include an integrated memory controller and cache memory for processor 302. Additional connections to PCI local bus 306 may be made through direct component interconnection or through add-in boards. In the depicted example, local area network (LAN) adapter 310, SCSI host bus adapter 312, and expansion bus interface 314 are connected to PCI local bus 306 by direct component connection. In contrast, audio adapter 316, graphics adapter 318, and audio/video adapter (A/V) 319 are connected to PCI local bus 306 by add-in boards inserted into expansion slots. Expansion bus interface 314 provides a connection for a keyboard and mouse adapter 320, modem 322, and additional memory 324. In the depicted example, SCSI host bus adapter 312 provides a connection for hard disk drive 326, tape drive 328, CD-ROM drive 330, and digital versatile disc read only memory drive (DVD-ROM) 332. Typical PCI local bus implementations will support three or four PCI expansion slots or add-in connectors.
An operating system runs on processor 302 and is used to coordinate and provide control of various components within data processing system 300 in FIG. 3. The operating system may be a commercially available operating system, such as OS/2, which is available from International Business Machines Corporation. “OS/2” is a trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. An object oriented programming system, such as Java, may run in conjunction with the operating system, providing calls to the operating system from Java programs or applications executing on data processing system 300. Instructions for the operating system, the object-oriented operating system, and applications or programs are located on a storage device, such as hard disk drive 326, and may be loaded into main memory 304 for execution by processor 302.
Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware in FIG. 3 may vary depending on the implementation. For example, other peripheral devices, If; such as optical disk drives and the like, may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted in FIG. 3. The depicted example is not meant to imply architectural limitations with respect to the present invention. For example, the processes of the present invention may be applied to multiprocessor data processing systems.
With reference now to FIG. 4, a block diagram of a Java virtual machine (JVM) is depicted in accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention. JVM 400 includes a class loader subsystem 402, which is a mechanism for loading types, such as classes and interfaces, given fully qualified names. JVM 400 also contains runtime data areas 404, execution engine 406, native method interface 408, and memory management 424. Execution engine 406 is a mechanism for executing instructions contained in the methods of classes loaded by class loader subsystem 402. Execution engine 406 may be, for example, Java interpreter 412 or just-in-time compiler 410. Native method interface 408 allows access to resources in the underlying operating system. Native method interface 408 may be, for example, a Java native interface.
Runtime data areas 404 contain native method stacks 414, Java stacks 416, PC registers 418, method area 420, and heap 422. These different data areas represent the organization of memory needed by JVM 400 to execute a program.
Java stacks 416 are used to store the state of Java method invocations. When a new thread is launched, the JVM creates a new Java stack for the thread. The JVM performs only two operations directly on Java stacks; it pushes and pops frames. A thread's Java stack stores the state of Java method invocations for the thread. The state of a Java method invocation includes its local variables, the parameters with which it was invoked, its return value, if any, and intermediate calculations.
Java stacks are composed of stack frames. A stack frame contains the state of a single Java method invocation. When a thread invokes a method, the JVM pushes a new frame onto the Java stack of the thread. When the method completes, the JVM pops the frame for that method and discards it. A JVM does not have any registers for holding intermediate values; any Java instruction that requires or produces an intermediate value uses the stack for holding the intermediate values. In this manner, the Java instruction set is well defined for a variety of platform architectures.
PC registers 418 are used to indicate the next instruction to be executed. Each instantiated thread gets its own PC register (program counter) and Java stack. If the thread is executing a JVM method, the value of the PC register indicates the next instruction to execute. If the thread is executing a native method, then the contents of the PC register are undefined.
Native method stacks 414 store the state of invocations of native methods. The state of native method invocations is stored in an implementation-dependent way in native method stacks, registers, or other implementation-dependent memory areas. In some JVM implementations, native method stacks 414 and Java stacks 416 are combined.
Method area 420 contains class data, while heap 422 contains all instantiated objects. The JVM specification strictly defines data types and operations. Most JVM implementations choose to have one method area and one heap, each of which is shared by all threads running inside the JVM. When the JVM loads a class file, it parses information about a type from the binary data contained in the class file. It places this type information into the method area. Each time a class instance or array is created, the memory for the new object is allocated from heap 422. JVM 400 includes an instruction that allocates memory space within the memory for heap 422 but includes no instruction for freeing that space within the memory. In the depicted example, memory management 424 manages memory space within the memory allocated to heap 422. Memory management 424 may include a garbage collector that automatically reclaims memory used by objects that are no longer referenced by an application. Additionally, a garbage collector also may move objects to reduce heap fragmentation.
Turning now to FIG. 5, there is depicted a screen image of user interface 500 for an applet recorder in accordance with the present invention, which may run on top of a JVM such as JVM 400. User interface 500 contains a start record button 510 to start recording events, and a stop record button 520 to stop recording events. User interface 500 also contains a close button 530 to close the applet recorder. The applet is viewed in area 550 on the left side of user interface 500.
The applet is loaded and started prior to receiving a request to record events. Thus, in the embodiment illustrated in FIG. 5, the applet has been loaded and started. Start record button 510 is enabled because recording has not commenced. Stop record button 520 is not enabled, for the same reason.
Turning now to FIG. 6, there is shown a block diagram illustrating normal Java applet operation that runs on top of a JVM such as JVM 400 and may be implemented in a data processing system such as data processing system 300. An applet 620 must be loaded into an applet viewer, such as the applet viewers within Netscape Navigator or Microsoft Internet Explorer. Applet 620 contains all of the user-accessible components. Once applet 620 is loaded, it creates a standard Java class of event listeners (shown in FIG. 6 as applet listeners 640) that are attached to these components and system queue 650. It should be noted that several applet listeners may be (and usually will be) used.
Applet listeners 640 are event listeners. An event listener is any object that implements one or more listener interfaces. There are different listeners for each category of event in Java. For instance, the MouseListener interface defines methods such as MouseClicked, MousePressed, and MouseReleased. In order to receive events from a component, an object adds itself as a listener for that component's events. If an object implements the MouseListener interface, it listens for a component's mouse events by calling addMouseListener on that component. This allows a component's events to be handled without having to create a subclass of the component, and without handling the events in the parent container.
In response to user input 610 on a component in applet 620, such as moving a mouse, a keystroke, or a drag operation, an event 630 is constructed and posted on system queue 650. System queue 650 then dispatches this event to any applet listeners 640 on that component. The component's applet listeners 640 execute tasks according to the properties of event 630. Examples of tasks performed by applet listeners 640 include loading or saving information to a file when a button is depressed, playing a sound or displaying an image when the mouse cursor is moved over a specific area, and closing a program when a specific combination of keys is pressed.
Turning now to FIG. 7, there is a block diagram illustrating an applet recorder 700 in accordance with the present invention. Applet recorder 700 runs on top of a JVM, such as JVM 400, and may be implemented in a data processing system, such as data processing system 600. Applet recorder 700 consists of automator 760, which loads an applet 620 from a database located either on the local data processing system or on a network computer, such as server 104, for viewing. Automator 760 references applet 620 and adds automator listeners 770 to each of the applet 620 components. In response to user input 610 to a component of applet 620, an event 630 is constructed and posted on system queue 650, as is done with normal applet operation as discussed above.
However, system queue 650 not only dispatches event 630 to applet listeners 640, but also it dispatches event 630 to automator listeners 770 on that component. Automator listeners 770 receive an event 630 and store event 630 information to automator queue 780. When the recording session is complete, automator queue 780 contains all of the events that have occurred on applet 620 components. These events can then be played back by being posted to system queue 650 in the same order in which they were recorded.
Automator listeners 770 are similar to applet listeners 640, and are created by the automator and attached to each component of the applet 620. However, rather than perform a specified task to implement applet 620 as applet listeners 640 are programmed to do, automator listeners 770 capture events 630 and record them to automator queue 780, thereby recording the events such that they may be played back at a later time. By having these events stored, testing of a Java Virtual Machine, such as JVM 400, on a particular platform may be automated by having applet recorder 700 replay the user-generated events, thus freeing a person from this tedious task. These events may be required to be played back several times over a period of hours or days.
Turning now to FIG. 8, there is shown a flowchart illustrating a preferred method for recording events with applet recorder 700. After the applet recorder is started, it waits in idle mode (step 805) until it receives an indication from a user to start recording events 630 from an applet 620 (step 810). Once the indication to start recording is received from the user, an applet 620 is loaded into applet recorder 700 (step 815). The applet recorder then adds automator listeners 770 to each component of the applet (step 820), and then waits for user input (step 825).
If user input is received (step 830), then an event is constructed and posted to system queue 650. The system queue dispatches event 630 to automator listeners 770, which capture event 630 (step 835) and record event 630 to automator queue 780 (step 840) for later playback. Applet recorder 700 then continues to wait for user input (step 825).
If no user input is received (step 830), then the applet recorder determines if a stop recording command has been received from the user (step 845). If no stop recording command has been received (step 845), then applet recorder 700 continues to wait for user input (step 825). The recording of events generated by the user through applet 620 thus continues until a stop recording command is received (step 845). When a stop recording command is received, automator listeners 770 are removed, and applet recorder 700 ceases to record events generated by applet 620 (step 850). Applet recorder 700 then idles (step 805), waiting for a command to start recording anew (step 810).
With reference now to FIG. 9, there is shown a flowchart illustrating the function performed by an automator listener 770. Automator listener 770 idles (step 910) until an event occurs (step 920). Once an event, such as MOUSE_CLICKED, occurs, the event information is saved to an object (step 930). The object is then added to the automator queue 780 (step 940) and the automator listener continues to idle (step 910), waiting for the occurrence of another event (step 920).
A block diagram illustrating the three main parts of an object created by an automator listener 770 is depicted in FIG. 10. The object consists of event ID 1010, component field 1020, and event information 1030. Event ID 1010 indicates the type of event that occurred, such as MOUSE_CLICKED, ITEM_STATE_CHANGED, etc. Component field 1020 references the component on which this event occurred, such as a button, list, text area, etc. Finally, each object contains specific event information 1030, which includes several event-specific things.
As an example of the functioning of an automator listener 770 and the creation of an object, suppose applet 620 button is clicked by a user. The automator listener 770 for that component would create an object with MOUSE_CLICKED as event ID 1010. A reference to the button component would be placed in component field 1020. Event information 1030 would contain all other information about the event, such as the x-y coordinate position, modifiers, click count (double or single click), etc.
It is important to note that, while the present invention has been described in terms of recording events generated by Java applets, it is also applicable to applications as well. Furthermore, while described principally with respect to Java, the present invention may be applied to other event-driven object oriented programming languages following a similar “listener interface” model.
It is also important to note that, while the present invention has been described in the context of a fully functioning data processing system, those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the processes of the present invention are capable of being distributed in the form of a computer readable medium of instructions and a variety of forms, and that the present invention applies equally regardless of the particular type of signal bearing media actually used to carry out the distribution. Examples of computer readable media include recordable-type media, such floppy discs, hard disk drives, RAM, and CD-ROMs and transmission-type media, such as digital and analog communications links.
The description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description but is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and the practical application, and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.
Citations de brevets
Citations hors brevets

The Olympics: The Basics
Published January 19th 2012 by Routledge – 192 pages
Series: The Basics
The Olympics: The Basics is an accessible, contemporary introduction to the Olympic movement and Games. Chapters explain how the Olympics transcend sports, engaging us with a range of contemporary philosophical, social, cultural and political matters, including:
This book explores the controversy and the legacy of the Olympics, drawing attention to the deeper values of Olympism, as the Olympic movement’s most valuable intellectual property. This engaging, lively, and often challenging book, is essential reading for newcomers to Olympic studies and offers new insights for Olympic scholars.
Preface 1. History and Philosophy 2. Society and Identity 3. Culture and Education 4. Politics and Diplomacy 5. Ethics and Values 6. Management and Economics 7. Media and Communication 8. Impact and Legacy Conclusion: The Future
Professor Andy Miah (@andymiah) is Director of the Creative Futures Research Centre at the University of the West of Scotland.
Dr Beatriz Garcia (@beatriz_garcia) is Head of Research at the Institute of Cultural Capital, University of Liverpool.

It is interesting to see how much we learn in our life time. Our learning process starts with very first day of our life; and ends with our life only. Even when we are not consciously learning anything; our subconscious mind keep grasping things. Scientists have proved that humans, as well as animals, learn many things before birth also; process may start as early as ‘Right after conception.’ It is also scientifically proved that leaning between conception and actual birth stays and sticks long. That includes preferences in food, color, general nature /behavior etc
What comes our way naturally; we learn faster. For example;’Mother Tongue / Language’, our own culture, our daily routine etc. We also learn faster; what we like or prefer. This is especially true; in case of education and sports. I have seen many students grow from mediocrity or misery to very top; once they have gone from ‘All subjects’ to ‘Choice subject’ only classes. As they have to focus only on subjects, they actually love; they start getting more interested in studies, excelling or doing much better than before, in process. Many governments and social organisations are now trying to change their education system to find out early; about different preferences of subjects in different students. Same is the case of sports; you learn faster and do better a sport you actually love. That includes playing that sport or have knowledge about that. We know stories of great sportsmen; who started their career or training, in a different sports altogether, changing in between to achieve greatness. Same is case of many movie stars. Some start their ‘Movie Life’ as a singer or dancer; but later excel as an Actor / Actress / Director, and Vice Versa. We have many cases to prove this theory.
Learning is not easy to everyone of us. It also differs from person to person or from thing to thing. One person may learn something faster than others; where as same person may not be able to learn other things, as fast as others. That explains; why some students excel in mathematics, some in science, some in languages, some in dramatics, some in art, some in sports etc. Learning also is a process; which we can improve, with certain set or unset rules. In our life; from a small student to a working person, learning has lot to do with quality of our performances on all levels. Besides, a natural learner; people who are open to learning / new experiences, also learn better than others. This is especially true about new languages and culture. Language learning is all about practice. More you practice; better you get.
In our careers also learning process has a special meaning; whatever we learn gets accumulated as experience. Now this experience can be both; good or bad. If you think; learning is difficult; you should try Unlearning , which is way more difficult. Whenever we start anew or we change our careers / companies / business / location / partner etc; this unlearning becomes necessary. No two companies, businesses, locations or persons are same; different may have different requirements, rules, laws, standards, needs, styles etc. As learning is important and constant part of our life; we must also learn to UNLEARN. A same set of rules or standard or behavior may not apply or recommended to different careers / companies / business / location / partner etc. Unlearning thus is much more difficult (But Important) than learning; you have to remove from your mind / system, which may be there for years or whole your life.
When I first went to learn ‘Horse Riding’; coach asked me if I already know any. I said ‘ I am afraid, not. I know nothing about this.’ I could see big relief on his face; he told me that he prefers to teach ‘Raw students’, to avoid any clash of new and old learning. ‘ It is always better and easier to write on a clean slate than wring on already occupied slate’ He said. Someone told me that new languages comes faster and easier to students from 8 Years old to 12 years old than to students older in age. As their minds are less occupied or corrupt with other things. In general saying their ‘Mind Slate’ is cleaner to write new things on.
We sometimes wonder why things are not working with your same routine; which were earlier working fine. With changing time / environment / location etc; we must change our self, and learn to unlearn our now not working experience.
Process of unlearning also help us adapt different situations; in a better, easier and faster way. People, who are too rigid to change or unlearn; may find it difficult to fit in to new environments. In case of relationships; it is very important to UNLEARN. No two persons are same; they may have different values, needs, moods, strengths or weaknesses. Actually; to achieve success and peace in life; we must keep a balance between ‘Learning’ and ‘Unlearning’.

On May 28, 1828, began the official life of Kaspar Hauser, a young man who appeared mysteriously in the streets of Nuremberg and died of knife wounds five years later under equally mysterious circumstances. "Europe's child," as pamphleteers referred to him, captured the imagination of salon society. Allegedly raised in a dark cellar and deprived of human contact until the age of sixteen, he became proof of concept for theories about natural man, original sin, and the civilizing mission of culture. Rightful heir to the throne of Baden or a fraud? Redeemer of man's sins or "ambulatory automatist"? The curious circumstances and significance of his life have been disputed ever since.
In Kaspar, Quebec cartoonist Obom draws on Hauser's own writings, and contemporary accounts, to tell the foundling's strange story. Minimalist grayscale panels and the simplest of line work register the wonder and bewilderment of a trusting and sensitive soul emerging into a fickle society. Gentle and poetic, naive and profound, Obom's first book to appear in English translation is a quiet and compelling charm.
"[Caspar] presented an opportunity for observation of the highest interest to the philosopher, the moralist, the religious teacher, the physiologist, and the physician -- an opportunity which must be as rare as the crime which has afforded it." -Francis Lieber, 1832, preface to Caspar Hauser: An Account of an Individual Kept in a Dungeon

Estimates of dinosaur speeds vary because several different methods are used to calculate them. One recent estimate suggests that an average person might have been able to to outrun an adult Tyrannosaurus (although you probably would not volunteer to try). The two basic approaches for estimating dinosaur speed are comparing to recorded speeds of modern animals of similar body size and build, and measuring distances between fossil footprints in a trackway and using these distances to calculate estimated speed. Walking-speed estimates for medium-sized bipedal (two-legged) dinosaurs vary from 4 kph to 6 kph, and peak running-speed estimates vary from 37 kph to 88 kph. The highest figure (88.6 kph) is the same as the peak speed of the currently fastest land animals, such as the North American pronghorn "antelope" (Antilocapra americana), and very probably is too high.
Speed comparison of some ancient and modern animals
Maintained by Publications Services.
Last modified 05-17-01 (krw)

[A rough transcript of my keynote at the Victorians Institute Conference, held at the University of Virginia on October 1-3, 2010. The conference had the theme "By the Numbers." Attended by "analog" Victorianists as well as some budding digital humanists, I was delighted by the incredibly energetic reaction to this talk—many terrific questions and ideas for doing scholarly text mining from those who may have never considered it before. The talk incorporates work on historical text mining under an NEH grant, as well as the first results of a grant that Fred Gibbs and I were awarded from Google to mine their vast collection of books.]
Why did the Victorians look to mathematics to achieve certainty, and how we might understand the Victorians better with the mathematical methods they bequeathed to us? I want to relate the Victorian debate about the foundations of our knowledge to a debate that we are likely to have in the coming decade, a debate about how we know the past and how we look at the written record that I suspect will be of interest to literary scholars and historians alike. It is a philosophical debate about idealism, empiricism, induction, and deduction, but also a practical discussion about the methodologies we have used for generations in the academy.
Victorians and the Search for Truth
Let me start, however, with the Heavens. This is Neptune. It was seen for the first time through a telescope in 1846.
At the time, the discovery was hailed as a feat of pure mathematics, since two mathematicians, one from France, Urbain Le Verrier, and one from England, John Couch Adams, had independently calculated Neptune’s position using mathematical formulas. There were dozens of poems written about the discovery, hailing the way these mathematicians had, like “magicians” or “prophets,” divined the Truth (often written with a capital T) about Neptune.
But in the less-triumphal aftermath of the discovery, it could also be seen as a case of the impact of cold calculation and the power of a good data set. Although pure mathematics, to be sure, were involved—the equations of geometry and gravity—the necessary inputs were countless observations of other heavenly bodies, especially precise observations of perturbations in the orbit of Uranus caused by Neptune. It was intellectual work, but intellectual work informed by a significant amount of data.
The Victorian era saw tremendous advances in both pure and applied mathematics. Both were involved in the discovery of Neptune: the pure mathematics of the ellipse and of gravitational pull; the computational modes of plugging observed coordinates into algebraic and geometrical formulas.
Although often grouped together under the banner of “mathematics,” the techniques and attitudes of pure and applied forms diverged significantly in the nineteenth century. By the end of the century, pure mathematics and its associated realm of symbolic logic had become so abstract and removed from what the general public saw as math—that is, numbers and geometric shapes—that Bertrand Russell could famously conclude in 1901 (in a Seinfeldian moment) that mathematics was a science about nothing. It was a set of signs and operations completely divorced from the real world.
Meanwhile, the early calculating machines that would lead to modern computers were proliferating, prodded by the rise of modern bureaucracy and capitalism. Modern statistics arrived, with its very unpure notions of good-enough averages and confidence levels.
The Victorians thus experienced the very modern tension between pure and applied knowledge, art and craft. They were incredibly self-reflective about the foundations of their knowledge. Victorian mathematicians were often philosophers of mathematics as much as practitioners of it. They repeatedly asked themselves: How could they know truth through mathematics? Similarly, as Meegan Kennedy has shown, in putting patient data into tabular form for the first time—thus enabling the discernment of patterns in treatment—Victorian doctors began wrestling with whether their discipline should be data-driven or should remain subject to the “genius” of the individual doctor.
Two mathematicians I studied for Equations from God used their work in mathematical logic to assail the human propensity to come to conclusions using faulty reasoning or a small number of examples, or by an appeal to interpretive genius. George Boole (1815-1864), the humble father of the logic that is at the heart of our computers, was the first professor of mathematics at Queen’s College, Cork. He had the misfortune of arriving in Cork (from Lincoln, England) on the eve of the famine and increasing sectarian conflict and nationalism.
Boole spend the rest of his life trying to find a way to rise above the conflict he saw all around him. He saw his revolutionary mathematical logic as a way to dispassionately analyze arguments and evidence. His seminal work, The Laws of Thought, is as much a work of literary criticism as it is of mathematics. In it, Boole deconstructs texts to find the truth using symbolical modes.
The stained-glass window in Lincoln Cathedral honoring Boole includes the biblical story of Samuel, which the mathematician enjoyed. It’s a telling expression of Boole’s worry about how we come to know Truth. Samuel hears the voice of God three times, but each time cannot definitively understand what he is hearing. In his humility, he wishes not to jump to divine conclusions.
Not jumping to conclusions based on limited experience was also a strong theme in the work of Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871). De Morgan, co-discoverer of symbolic logic and the first professor of mathematics at University College London, had a similar outlook to Boole’s, but a much more abrasive personality. He rather enjoyed proving people wrong, and also loved to talk about how quickly human beings leap to opinions.
De Morgan would give this hypothetical: “Put it to the first comer, what he thinks on the question whether there be volcanoes on the unseen side of the moon larger than those on our side. The odds are, that though he has never thought of the question, he has a pretty stiff opinion in three seconds.” Human nature, De Morgan thought, was too inclined to make mountains out of molehills, conclusions from scant or no evidence. He put everyone on notice that their deeply held opinions or interpretations were subject to verification by the power of logic and mathematics.
As Walter Houghton highlighted in his reading of the Victorian canon, The Victorian Frame of Mind, 1830-1870, the Victorians were truth-seekers and skeptics. They asked how they could know better, and challenged their own assumptions.
Foundations of Our Own Knowledge
This attitude seems healthy to me as we present-day scholars add digital methods of research to our purely analog ones. Many humanities scholars have been satisfied, perhaps unconsciously, with the use of a limited number of cases or examples to prove a thesis. Shouldn’t we ask, like the Victorians, what can we do to be most certain about a theory or interpretation? If we use intuition based on close reading, for instance, is that enough?
Should we be worrying that our scholarship might be anecdotally correct but comprehensively wrong? Is 1 or 10 or 100 or 1000 books an adequate sample to know the Victorians? What we might do with all of Victorian literature—not a sample, or a few canonical texts, as in Houghton’s work, but all of it.
These questions were foremost in my mind as Fred Gibbs and I began work on our Google digital humanities grant that is attempting to apply text mining to our understanding of the Victorian age. If Boole and De Morgan were here today, how acceptable would our normal modes of literary and historical interpretation be to them?
As Victorianists, we are rapidly approaching the time when we have access—including, perhaps, computational access—to the full texts not of thousands of Victorian books, or hundreds of thousands, but virtually all books published in the Victorian age. Projects like Google Books, the Internet Archive’s OpenLibrary, and HathiTrust will become increasingly important to our work.
If we were to look at all of these books using the computational methods that originated in the Victorian age, what would they tell us? And would that analysis be somehow more “true” than looking at a small subset of literature, the books we all have read that have often been used as representative of the Victorian whole, or, if not entirely representative, at least indicative of some deeper Truth?
Fred and I have received back from Google a first batch of data. This first run is limited just to words in the titles of books, but even so is rather suggestive of the work that can now be done. This data covers the 1,681,161 books that were published in English in the UK in the long nineteenth century, 1789-1914. We have normalized the data in many ways, and for the most part the charts I’m about to show you graph the data from zero to one percent of all books published in a year so that they are on the same scale and can be visually compared.
Multiple printings of a book in a single year have been collapsed into one “expression.” (For the library nerds in the audience, the data has been partially FRBRized. One could argue that we should have accepted the accentuation of popular titles that went through many printings in a single year, but editions and printings in subsequent years do count as separate expressions. We did not go up to the level of “work” in the FRBR scale, which would have collapsed all expressions of a book into one data point.)
We plan to do much more; in the pipeline are analyses of the use of words in the full texts (not just titles) of those 1.7 million books, a comprehensive exploration of the use of the Bible throughout the nineteenth century, and more. And more could be be done to further normalize the data, such as accounting for the changing meaning of words over time.
So what does the data look like even at this early stage? And does it seem valid? That is where we began our analysis, with graphs of the percent of all books published with certain words in the titles (y-axis) on a year by year basis (x-axis). Victorian intellectual life as it is portrayed in this data set is in many respects consistent with what we already know.
The frequency chart of books with the word in “revolution” in the title, for example, shows spikes where it should, around the French Revolution and the revolutions of 1848. (Keen-eyed observers will also note spikes for a minor, failed revolt in England in 1817 and the successful 1830 revolution in France.)
Books about science increase as they should, though with some interesting leveling off in the late Victorian period. (We are aware that the word “science” changes over this period, becoming more associated with natural science rather than generalized knowledge.)
The rise of factories…
and the concurrent Victorian nostalgia for the more sedate and communal Middle Ages…
…and the sense of modernity, a new phase beyond the medieval organization of society and knowledge that many Britons still felt in the eighteenth century.
The Victorian Crisis of Faith, and Secularization
Even more validation comes from some basic checks of key Victorian themes such as the crisis of faith. These charts are as striking as any portrayal of the secularization that took place in Great Britain in the nineteenth century.
Correlation Is (not) Truth
So it looks fairly good for this methodology. Except, of course, for some obvious pitfalls. Looking at the charts of a hundred words, Fred noticed a striking correlation between the publication of books on “belief,” “atheism,” and…”Aristotle”?
Obviously, we cannot simply take the data at face value. As I have called this on my blog, we have to be on guard for oversimplifications that are the equivalent of saying that War and Peace is about Russia. We have to marry these attempts at what Franco Moretti has called “distant reading” with more traditional close reading to find rigorous interpretations behind the overall trends.
In Search of New Interpretations
Nevertheless, even at this early stage of the Google grant, there are numerous charts that are suggestive of new research that can be done, or that expand on existing research. Correlation can, if we go from the macro level to the micro level, help us to illustrate some key features of the Victorian age better. For instance, the themes of Jeffrey von Arx’s Progress and Pessimism: Religion, Politics and History in Late Nineteenth Century Britain, in which he notes the undercurrent of depression in the second half of the century, are strongly supported and enhanced by the data.
And given the following charts, we can imagine writing much more about the decline of certainty in the Victorian age. “Universal” is probably the most striking graph of our first data set, but they all show telling slides toward relativism that begin before most interpretations in the secondary literature.
Rather than looking for what we expect to find, perhaps we can have the computer show us tens, hundreds, or even thousands of these graphs. Many will confirm what we already know, but some will be strikingly new and unexpected. Many of those may show false correlations or have other problems (such as the changing or multiple meaning of words), but some significant minority of them will reveal to us new patterns, and perhaps be the basis of new interpretations of the Victorian age.
What if I were to give you Victorianists hundreds of these charts?
I believe it is important to keep our eyes open about the power of this technique. At the very least, it can tell us—as Augustus De Morgan would—when we have made mountains out of a molehills. If we do explore this new methodology, we might be able to find some charts that pique our curiosity as knowledgeable readers of the Victorians. We’re the ones that can accurately interpret the computational results.
We can see the rise of the modern work lifestyle…
…or explore the interaction between love and marriage, an important theme in the recent literature.
We can look back at the classics of secondary literature, such as Houghton’s Victorian Frame of Mind, and ask whether those works hold up to the larger scrutiny of virtually all Victorian books, rather than just the limited set of books those authors used. For instance, while in general our initial study supports Houghton’s interpretations, it also shows relatively few books on heroism, a theme Houghton adopts from Thomas Carlyle.
And where is the supposed Victorian obsession with theodicy in this chart on books about “evil”?
Even more suggestive are the contrasts and anomalies. For instance, publications on “Jesus” are relatively static compared to those on “Christ,” which drop from nearly 1 in 60 books in 1843 to less than 1 in 300 books 70 years later.
The impact of the ancient world on the Victorians can be contrasted (albeit with a problematic dual modern/ancient meaning for Rome)…
…as can the Victorians’ varying interest in the afterlife.
I hope that these charts have prodded you to consider the anecdotal versus the comprehensive, and the strengths and weaknesses of each. It is time we had a more serious debate—not just in the digital humanities but in the humanities more generally—about measurement and interpretation that the Victorians had. Can we be so confident in our methods of extrapolating from some literary examples to the universal whole?
This is a debate that we should have in the present, aided by our knowledge of what the Victorians struggled with in the past.
[Image credits (other than graphs): Wikimedia Commons]

QUASAR’S BELCH SOLVES LONGSTANDING MYSTERY
February 23, 2011
Artist’s conceptualization of the environment around the supermassive black hole at the center of Mrk 231. The broad outflow seen in the Gemini data is shown as the fan-shaped wedge at the top of the accretion disk around the black hole. This side-view is not what is seen from the Earth where we see it ‘looking down the throat’ of the outflow. A similar outflow is probably present under the disk as well and is hinted at in this illustration. The total amount of material entrained in the broad flow is at least 400 times the mass of the Sun per year. Note that a more localized, narrower jet is shown, this jet was known prior to the Gemini discovery of the broader outflow featured here.
Gemini Observatory Press Release
For Immediate Release – February 23, 2011
When two galaxies merge to form a giant, the central supermassive black hole in the new galaxy develops an insatiable appetite. However, this ferocious appetite is unsustainable.
The growth of supermassive black holes, which are found in the centers of all normal galaxies (including our Milky Way), is fundamentally linked to the stars in galaxies. Black holes grow and stars form over time, resulting in a tight connection between the mass of the central black hole and the mass in stars of the host galaxy. Since most galaxies in the local universe do not currently have actively growing black holes at their centers, some process must eventually emerge to shut down this growth and development. Theoretical modeling specifically points to quasar outflows as the culprit. In this negative feedback loop, while the black hole is actively acquiring mass as a quasar, the outflows carry away energy and material, suppressing further growth. Small-scale outflows had been observed before, but none sufficiently powerful to account for this predicted and fundamental aspect of galaxy evolution. The Gemini observations provide the first clear evidence for outflows powerful enough to support the process necessary to starve the galactic black hole and quench star formation.
This extraction from the data cube shows the large-scale, fast outflow of neutral sodium at the center of the quasar Markarian 231. We are looking down onto the material that moves toward us relative to the galaxy, so the measured velocities are negative. The large black circle marks the location of the black hole, and red lines show the location of a radio jet. In addition to the quasar outflow, the jet pushes the material at the top right, resulting in even greater speeds. Part of the starburst is located at the position of the box at the lower left, and it is likely responsible for the gas motion in this region.
For the first time, observations with the Gemini Observatory clearly reveal an extreme, large-scale galactic outflow that brings the cosmic dinner to a halt. The outflow is effectively blowing the galaxy apart in a negative feedback loop, depriving the galaxy’s monstrous black hole of the gas and dust it needs to sustain its frenetic growth. It also limits the material available for the galaxy to make new generations of stars.
The groundbreaking work is a collaboration between David Rupke of Rhodes College in Tennessee and the University of Maryland’s Sylvain Veilleux. The results are to be published in the March 10 issue of The Astrophysical Journal Letters and were completed with support from the U.S. National Science Foundation.
According to Veilleux, Markarian 231 (Mrk 231), the galaxy observed with Gemini, is an ideal laboratory for studying outflows caused by feedback from supermassive black holes. “This object is arguably the closest and best example that we know of a big galaxy in the final stages of a violent merger and in the process of shedding its cocoon and revealing a very energetic central quasar. This is really a last gasp of this galaxy; the black hole is belching its next meals into oblivion!” As extreme as Mrk 231’s eating habits appear, Veilleux adds that they are probably not unique, “When we look deep into space and back in time, quasars like this one are seen in large numbers and all of them may have gone through shedding events like the one we are witnessing in Mrk 231.”
Although Mrk 231 is extremely well studied, and known for its collimated jets, the Gemini observations exposed a broad outflow extending in all directions for at least 8,000 light years around the galaxy’s core. The resulting data reveal gas (characterized by sodium, which absorbs yellow light) streaming away from the galaxy center at speeds of over 1,000 kilometers per second. At this speed, the gas could go from New York to Los Angeles in about 4 seconds. This outflow is removing gas from the nucleus at a prodigious rate – more than 2.5 times the star formation rate. The speeds observed eliminate stars as the possible “engine” fueling the outflow. This leaves the black hole itself as the most likely culprit, and it can easily account for the tremendous energy required.
The energy involved is sufficient to sweep away matter from the galaxy. However, "when we say the galaxy is being blown apart, we are only referring to the gas and dust in the galaxy,” notes Rupke. “The galaxy is mostly stars at this stage in its life, and the outflow has no effect on them. The crucial thing is that the fireworks of new star formation and black hole feeding are coming to an end, most likely as a result of this outflow.”
The environment around such a black hole is commonly known as an active galactic nucleus (AGN), and the extreme influx of material into these black holes is the power source for quasi-stellar objects or quasars. Merging galaxies help to feed the central black hole and also shroud it in gas. Mrk 231 is in transition, now clearing its surroundings. Eventually, running out of fuel, the AGN will become extinct. Without gas to form new stars, the host galaxy also starves to death, turning into a collection of old aging stars with few young stars to regenerate the stellar population. Ultimately, these old stars will make the galaxy appear redder giving these galaxies the moniker “red and dead.”
Numerical astrophysicist Philip Hopkins, a Miller Fellow at the University of California at Berkeley, explains that many physical processes unique to rapidly growing black holes are likely to play a role in propelling the winds observed by Gemini. “At its peak, the quasar shines with such intensity that the light itself is ‘trapped’ by a cocoon of gas and dust pushing on material with a force that can easily overcome the gravitational pull of the black hole.” Hopkins adds that the bath of X-rays and gamma rays known to be generated by quasars could also heat up the gas in the galaxy’s center until it reaches a temperature where it "boils over" and causes a bomb-like explosion. “But until now, we haven’t been able to catch a system ‘in the act.’” Part of the problem, according to Hopkins, has been that the most visible outflows are those ‘collimated jets’ already known in Mrk 231. These jets are trapped (probably by magnetic fields) in an extremely narrow beam, whereas material is falling into the black hole from all directions. The previously known jets therefore only cause very localized damage – drilling a tiny hole in the cocoon, rather than sweeping it away more broadly as seen in these new, more all-encompassing, outflows.
The observations for this study were obtained with the Gemini Multi-Object Spectrograph (GMOS) on Gemini North, on Mauna Kea, Hawai‘i. The study used a powerful technique known as integral field spectroscopy. The integral field unit (IFU) in GMOS obtains a spectrum at several hundred points around the galaxy’s core. Each spectrum is then, in turn, used to determine the velocity of the gas at that point and represents the third dimension in what is called a data cube.
Markarian 231 is located about 600 million light years away in the direction of the constellation of Ursa Major. Although its mass is uncertain, some estimates indicate that Mrk 231 has a mass in stars about three times that of our Milky Way galaxy and its central black hole is estimated to have a mass of at least ten million solar masses or also about three times that of the supermassive black hole in the Milky Way.
Movie showing the gas in a galaxy merger with a quasar-driven “blowout”: https://www.cfa.harvard.edu/~phopkins/Site/Movies_files/collision_BH_run4.avi

The Hundred Years' War began in the reign of Edward III, who was the King of England from 1327 to 1377. Edward, who loved knightly pursuits such as war, jousting, tournaments and hunting, surrounded himself with warriors, magnates, and chivalrous knights. The Hundred Years' War broke out as a result of a dispute between Edward and Philip, the French King, over French royal succession.
Edward was the nearest surviving male relative to the French king after the three French Capetian kings, Louis X, Philip V, and Charles IV, all failed to produce male heirs. In order to prevent Edward from claiming the throne, the French parliament and supreme court declared that claims to the French throne could not be passed through women. The French Estates chose Philip of Valois, a first cousin of the preceding kings, to become king and Edward did not initially dispute this decision.
However, there were other points of contention between the British and French. There was a clash of interests in the county of Flanders, whose cloth-making industry relied on England for wool. Early in the 14th century, Flemish artisans rose up in a series of bloody revolts against the aristocratic cloth dealers who had long monopolized power. The Count of Flanders and the French king supported the merchants, while the English sided with the artisans.
This tension culminated in 1337, over the status of the feudal territories of Pontheau and Aquitaine. When Philip became the king of France, Edward paid homage for these territories, but Philip then insisted on liege homage, which would have obligated Edward to support Philip against all enemies. Edward refused and Philip attempted to confiscate the region of Gascony from his English "vassal" by declaring Edward's feudal territories forfeit. Edward declared war on France and his goal was to claim the crown of his maternal grandfather as well as to reclaim Gascony.
The Hundred Years' War accelerated changes in technology and government institutions in both France and Britain. It stimulated the growth of parliamentary privileges, but it also drained the English economy and population. Since all the battles of the war were fought on French soil, English mercenaries continually pillaged the French lands. France suffered far more from the Hundred Years' War than England did. During the war, France was ravaged by civil strife as its population, economy and resources depleted.
- ^ Swyrich, Archive materials
This page was last modified on 5 January 2011 at 14:49.
houseofnames.com is an internet property owned by Swyrich Corporation.
Anderson Surname History
Over 20 years of research into the family history from the earliest records, showing spelling variations, early origins, notables, settlers and much more. Suitable for framing.
The Vikings: A History
"A fascinating history of the Viking age and its complex culture and influence

"Geneticists know that strength
of a species comes from its diversity from the fact that
the population as a whole can respond in mnay different
ways to many different situations"
- Eric S. Lander, MIT
more genes two animals have in common, the closer they
are "related" (not by blood, but by evolution) to one
another. Therefore, different levels of classification
exist to illustrate this relationship. There are seven
levels of classification, the highest group being a kingdom,
and the lowest group a species (the others between the
two extremes are, in order, phylum, class, order, family,
and genus). Many thousands of different organisms may
belong to a kingdom, but only one to a species. For example:
humans, dogs, porcupines, rats, eagles, and salmon all
belong to the same kingdom (Kingdom Anamalia), but only
humans belong to the species sapiens and only dogs
to Canis domesticus. Two organism are more closely "related"
as they approach the level of species. This also means
they have more genes in common. Taxonomists (scientists
who classify living organisms into the seven groups) define
a species as any group of closely related organisms that
can produce fertile offspring. Sometimes, members of the
same species will look alike (all brown bears look alike
and all humpbacked whales look alike) and other times
they won't (such as German Shepherds and Chihuahuas, which
are both members of the same species).
level of species can be further divided into smaller
segments. A population is the smallest unit of a species
and is made up of organisms of the same species. All
the hemlock trees in a forest make up a population
of hemlock trees, and all the rattlesnakes on an island
make up a population of rattlesnakes, and so forth.
Sometimes, a population will physically alter over
time to suit the needs of its environment. This is
called a cline, and can make members of the same species
subspecies is a distinct population of a species.
A good example of a subspecies is the western flicker
which has red wings and looks different than the eastern
flicker which has yellow wings. The two types of birds
belong to the same species, though, because they can
produce fertile offspring (sometimes with orange wings!).

Conflict and Solidarity in Mudejar Society
The activity of the industrious Mudejar at practically all levels of the economy, and the quotidian mingling of Muslim and Christian in field, workshop, and marketplace provided the foundation of—and the most effective adhesive reinforcing—the structure of Valencia's plural society. A common preoccupation with cultivation and harvest, manufacture and profit fostered among Muslims and Christians a certain homogeneity in outlook and understanding and opened the door to more meaningful social interaction, however hesitant and limited. It is, nevertheless, clear that Valencia's plural social structure was imperfectly articulated and fragile, and that the cement of economic relations was ultimately an unequal match to the solvent of overt religious antagonism. Thus, in 1502 when the Mudejars were faced with the threat of forced conversion in Valencia, many chose flight to the Maghrib with its detrimental material consequences, and a century later, after the abject failure of a policy meant to persuade the Moriscos to become true Christians, the Crown decided that the economic repercussions of the Moriscos' expulsion could be more easily endured than the risks of Morisco dissidence. Both episodes are indicative of the tenacious adherence of Valencia's Muslims to Islam, and this adherence reflects a religious and social reality far more compelling than the material life they shared with Christians. The aim of this chapter will be to provide some understanding of that reality and to explain how the Mudejars maintained both their identity as Muslims and a group cohesiveness while living in a Christian world. It will be suggested that Mudejar self-perception and group-perception were founded not only on religious belief per se, but also on
the perpetuation of a social world the organization and mores of which were distinct from those of Valencian Christians. Indeed, it is perhaps more accurate to view the Mudejars as forming a distinct subsociety separated from the larger Christian society by patterns of intragroup social and cultural behavior, but intersecting with that Christian society in a number of ways not without telling acculturative impact.
The Acculturative Challenge
However durable Mudejar society might have been, it had nevertheless experienced considerable acculturative change. Prior to analyzing late-fifteenth-century Mudejar society, it will be useful to outline briefly some of the more significant of these changes, brought about both subtly by the Muslims' informal interaction with the Christian populace, and forcefully by the formal imposition of Christian authority on an Islamic society.
Valencia's Muslims underwent their most radical cultural adjustment in the half-century immediately following the Christian conquest. During that time the Islamic society was essentially decapitated, losing its political and cultural elites to emigration and in failed rebellions. Islamic government and the public application of the Shariah were rudely shunted aside by a Christian colonial administration with its own body of law, the Furs . Even the autonomous and corporate aljama, vouchsafed to the Muslims by their Christian overlord, had no Islamic antecedent, compelling the Muslim adelantats to administer their communities in a foreign manner analogous to that of the Christian jurates in their corporate universitas . As has been indicated, the Christian bureaucracy, particularly when functioning as a tax-collecting mechanism, intruded on most areas of Mudejar life, so that in even so intimate a family affair as inheritance strict observance of the Shariah had to be modified in compliance with the king's demands. Furthermore, the Muslim by necessity had to learn to function in a Christian as well as Islamic legal system. Although this was to be expected for cases involving both Christian and Muslim parties, the fact that some Muslim litigants pursued civil suits with coreligionists in Christian courts is indicative of an acculturative process potentially damaging to the internal harmony of Mudejar communities.
Also important were the more gradual processes of Christian urbanization and seigneurialization, which, coupled with the decreasing size of the Muslim population (from an overwhelming majority in the thirteenth century to 30 percent of the kingdom's total by the midfifteenth century), altered the very appearance of the kingdom, as churches re-
placed mosques and Muslims retreated from the urban centers to the countryside. Although the rhythms of agricultural and pastoral life remained largely unchanged, Christian control of the economy, especially of the larger domestic and international markets, meant that Muslim farmers, artisans, and retail merchants were dependent on Christians for marketing their produce, selling their manufactured goods, and purchasing raw materials and bulk goods. Mudejar dependence was further manifested in their vassalage to Christian lords and their loss of ultimate control over their land. Outside of the walls of his own home or mosque, the Mudejar could hardly avoid coming to grips with the Christian presence, and having to do so on Christian terms.
The greatest threat to the integrity of the Mudejars' Islamic culture and Muslim identity lay in the cities and towns, where the populations were overwhelmingly Christian. There the expressions of Christian religiosity were most pervasive and most aggressive, while conversely the public observance of Islam was all the more restricted. The best example of this tendency is the anti-Muslim and anti-Jewish preaching of the Inquisitors from the pulpits of Valencia and Cartagena. Another urban danger, particularly in the capital, was the volatility of the Christian mob. Although the evocation of despair fed on fear might have been an efficacious proselytizing tool with some Muslims, it is arguable that the demagoguery of Inquisitors and like-minded clerics and Christian mob violence would have been more likely to repel Muslims from Christianity and to inspire among them a reactionary zeal in their commitment to Islam. The cities posed another threat perhaps more serious than Christian aggression, namely, the possibility of friendly and leisurely contact with Christians and their religion. Adherents of both faiths congregated in city taverns and fonduks, passing their leisure time gambling together, drinking together, and sleeping together. For the Muslim such activities meant a violation of the precepts of his own faith, and signaled his entry into a gray area of cultural amorphousness, where, if his Muslim identity was not overtly challenged, there nevertheless resulted a weakening of his own sense of distinctiveness. That Mudejars flocked to Valencia to enjoy with their Christian friends the spectacle of the Corpus Christi Day processions has a similar significance: it does not mean that these Muslims were on the road to baptism; rather, it indicates that they had acquired non-Islamic cultural accoutrements and forms of behavior born of a long-term exposure to Christian society.
A useful index of acculturation is the extent of Mudejar bilingualism. Burns, in unison with Fuster and Barceló Torres, concludes that in the thirteenth century the Muslim masses were unilingual Arabic-speakers. For midfourteenth-century Valencia Boswell points to only a minimal change in this pattern: "the vast majority of the Mudéjares did not
speak the language of the dominant culture." This was in contrast to the kingdom of Aragon, where the Mudejars spoke Romance but had for the most part lost the ability to function in Arabic. It is thought that throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries this state of affairs remained more or less unchanged. In support of this view historians note the Moriscos' obdurate use of Arabic as their language of daily parlance and the systematic effort of the Christian authorities (from 1565) to discourage the teaching and use of Arabic. Of particular significance is the agreement reached between the Moriscos and Carlos I in 1526, in which the Moriscos maintained that "the greater part of the Moorish men and almost all of the women do not know how to speak aljamia (Romance)." Moreover, the Moriscos stated that they would need forty years in which to learn Romance (Carlos I allowed them only ten). The evidence is impressive, and that both the Mudejars and the Moriscos spoke and read Arabic seems indisputable (see below); however, their avowed unilingualism is open to debate. I would argue for a more extensive Mudejar bilingualism, although with Romance spoken with an imperfect accent and syntax. Given the Moriscos' insincere conversion and their anxiety to forestall thorough catechization in the Catholic faith and Inquisitorial inquiries, their presentation of their linguistic status in the negotiations with Carlos I might have been somewhat disingenuous, a device meant to discourage zealous Romance-speaking clergymen. Clearly, in asking for a forty-year period of grace the Moriscos were playing for time. In the years between 1526 and 1609 there very well might have ensued a decreasing bilingualism. As the Moriscos further withdrew from the cities, their contact with the Christian world would have decreased, while, in a reactionary manner, their desire to avoid Christian culture and to cultivate their own cultural distinctiveness—in effect, to freeze the acculturative process—would have intensified. Just as the Christian authorities realized that the Arabic language had to be removed as an impediment to the effective "Christianization" of the Moriscos, it is equally possible the Moriscos understood that by inculcating their children in the Arabic language, the sacred language of the Qur'an[*] , and by forbidding them any education in Romance they were strengthening their fidelity to Islam. In sum, the Moriscos' linguistic status is not necessarily an accurate indicator of that of their Mudejar predecessors.
The records of cases tried in the court of the bailiff general, in which Muslims appear as litigants and witnesses, are suggestive of a significant Mudejar bilingualism. Normally, if a Muslim witness was in need of an interpreter, a role usually fulfilled by the royal qadi[*] , the latter's participation in the case was explicitly indicated. For instance, Nuzeya, a Muslim prostitute from Oliva, confessed with "Ali Bellvis, qadi ,
intervening." More explicitly, one defendant, Ubaydal Allepus of Bétera, is described as "mal algemiat (i.e., he speaks Romance poorly) ... he does not understand algemia," but his interpreter, the amin[*] Açen Amet, was a "Moor molt algemiat and a person who understands la algemia very well." Yet it is striking that the large majority of the Mudejars appearing in these trial records did not require an interpreter. While it is not surprising that the Muslims of urban morerías spoke Romance, given their constant mixing with the Christian populace, or that the amin of a rural aljama had mastered enough Romance to act as intermediary between the aljama and its lord, it is impressive that many Mudejars from rural areas could testify in Romance. Some examples are Açen Muça of Serra, Homar b. Perellos of Benaguacil, Ubaydal Suleymen of Mirambell, Maymo ben Çabit of Manises, and Abdulcarim of Oliva, among others. Equally significant are the testimonies of Christians about their seemingly routine verbal exchanges with Muslims. Ursula, the daughter of the innkeeper Joan Jeroni, testified how Alasdrach and Abdalla Sinube of Buñol, and Ali Alcayet of Chiva, "were speaking Arabic (alguaravia ) with the said captive Moor," whom they had allegedly helped to escape, and how later, after returning from a meeting with the lord of Carlet, "they requested [from her] a good room for sleeping." Miguel de la Serra, a tailor of Valencia, remembered that on Corpus Christi Day Muslim youths from Chiva had come to his house, eaten there, and then invited him and others to accompany them to the festivities. The odyssey of Angela de Vanya, a prostitute from Cuenca plying her trade in Onda, is revealing. She was first approached by Hadal, a Muslim from Benigazlo (Vall de Uxó), but did not know he was a Muslim, because he spoke "in the Valencian tongue and very suavely and not showing any sign of knowing the Moorish tongue." Hadal compelled Angela to go with him to Tales, a Muslim village (loch de moros ), and brought her to the house of Mahomat Cotalla. There, as the frightened Angela sat weeping in the Cotallas' kitchen, Mahomat and his wife assured her that she would not be harmed. Although these trial records afford only a glimpse at a small cross section of Mudejar life, they do show an erosion of linguistic barriers since the fourteenth century. The increasing size of the Christian population and the variety and frequency of its economic dealings with the Mudejars must have necessitated the latter's acquisition of at least enough Romance to carry on day-to-day affairs. It is unrealistic to assume that Muslim and Christian artisans, farmers, and merchants all had interpreters at their disposal for conducting their mundane but essential business. The documentation does not indicate that this was so. If the Mudejars assiduously cultivated an Arabic culture, there is still no reason to assume that at this point in time, before the mass
conversions, they had any reason for a self-conscious refusal to communicate in Romance. Demography and economy advised otherwise, and linguistic adaptation proceeded apace.
It should not be thought that such acculturation of the Mudejars to Romance-Christian culture as did take place was necessarily a negative or a degenerative process, or a process the flow of which was only unidirectional, although it is likely that the recessive but resilient culture of the Mudejar minority had experienced greater modification from its continual contact with a dynamic and expanding Christian majority. Rather, such acculturation was inevitable, an evolutionary process of adaptation necessary for the social and economic viability of a society that juxtaposed the proponents of mutually hostile ideologies. Even if the behavior of some Mudejars seemed almost to flout Islamic convention, this did not signal a reorientation of their fundamental religious beliefs. (If anything, it attests to a kind of secularization, in which beliefs were not so much altered as ignored.) In a medieval plural society, where identity was finally defined by religious affiliation, cultural erosion and unorthodox conduct were not evidence of Mudejar assimilation into Christian society. Such assimilation—the lessening of social distance, as opposed to acculturation, the lessening of cultural distance —could be achieved only through religious conversion, that is, through a fundamental change of identity. Therefore, in order to grasp the degree to which Mudejar society was truly threatened by absorption into the Christian body, one must broach the question of the extent of Mudejar conversion to Christianity.
Unlike the thirteenth century, with its mendicant preachers, schools of Arabic, and refined techniques of polemic, the result of which had been the conversion of a considerable number of Muslims, the Valencia of the Catholic Monarchs saw no organized ecclesiastical campaign of proselytizing. After recovering from the trauma of the conquest, a factor that probably accounted for much of the Dominicans' early success, the Mudejars had regrouped, and so effectively that the Valencian Church seems to have made little or no further headway in the fourteenth century. This caused the Dominican preacher Vicent Ferrer to lament the inactivity of the clergy in missionary work (1413). The stimulus of Ferrer's zeal led to the establishment of an Arabic school in Valencia during the reign of Alfonso V (ca. 1424), but it seems to have quickly faded into oblivion. As we have seen in chapters 1 and 2, although King Fernando cautiously welcomed the baptism of individual Mudejars, he did not promote conversion on a mass scale. The lords of the kingdom, both ecclesiastical and secular, staunchly opposed any attempts to proselytize their vassals, since they could not wring as much rent out of Christian vassals.
There were compelling social reasons for not converting. The convert, it seems, entered a sort of "no-man's land," being a full member of neither Christian nor Muslim society. If anything, owing to the strong ties of blood uniting Mudejar families (see below), converts tended to associate more with their Muslim relatives than with Christians. The convert Miguel Crestia was implicated along with his Muslim brother Ubaydal Allepus in the murder of another Muslim. A tornadizo of Cocentaina came to the aid of a Muslim relative, a runaway slave from Córdoba. Of course, Mudejars did not regard the conversion of their fellows favorably. Thus, the Inquisition arrested two Muslims who boldly and vociferously attempted to dissuade some Muslims from receiving baptism. Moreover, the convert put in jeopardy whatever inheritances he hoped to receive from Muslim relations. However, it seems that the Crown was no longer confiscating the estates of deceased converts, as had once been the case. Therefore, the potential convert was not burdened by the fear of depriving his descendants of their inheritances.
Even so, Christian society did not welcome the convert with open arms. In previous centuries Christians had insulted converts by calling them "dogs," "renegades," and the like. Given the lukewarm reception of the judeo-conversos by Old Christians and the beginning of an obsession with the purity of Christian blood, it is highly unlikely that the situation would have improved. The murder of Mudejar converts by Old Christians supports this supposition.
Nevertheless, a small number of Muslims chose to convert. The large majority of the proselytes were slaves who had the most to gain from conversion. Slaves with Jewish or Muslim masters had to be manumitted after their baptism, for infidels could not own Christian slaves. One Muslim woman preferred conversion to four years of servitude to a Jew. For slaves with Christian masters, the situation was less clear-cut. The law provided that the slave should be freed only if he converted with the consent of his master. Therefore, the decision to manumit the baptized slave was solely the master's. Some masters granted their Christian slaves freedom, but most did not. Business sense usually prevailed over religious scruples. Runaway slaves sometimes converted so as to conceal their fugitive status. When the Muslim slave Fatima fled from Valencia into Aragon, she became Elinor de Vellasquo. From there she journeyed to Barcelona and to Mallorca, where she was apprehended.
There were some sincere free converts. The best known of these was the son of a faqih[*] of Játiva, who received baptism in 1487, became a priest, and preached to the Muslims of Granada and Aragon. Under the name of "Juan Andres" he translated into Aragonese the Qur'an[*] and the "seven books of the Sunnah ." Of the few other Valencian converts
who appear in the documentation, we know nothing more than their name or place of residence, or sometimes both. Conversion among the Aragonese and Catalan Mudejars seems to have been equally infrequent. In an extremely bizarre incident, a Muslim woman of Albarracín converted just fifteen days after her wedding and then endeavored to retrieve her bridewealth from her Muslim husband. Perhaps conversion was a way of escaping an unhappy arranged marriage, although divorce might have been easier.
Mudejar conversion, then, was not unknown, but it amounted to, at best, a few drops in the font. The large majority had no intention of abandoning Islam.
Mudejar Feuding and Social Structure
A discussion of Mudejar acculturation and religious conversion has served to clarify certain aspects of Muslim-Christian interaction and its impact on the minority culture. It has, however, revealed little about the Mudejar subsociety itself when it did not somehow mesh with the public life of the Christian kingdom. Posing a dichotomy between Valencia's Muslim and Christian societies may appear somewhat artificial, since both groups, after all, lived and labored together in the same kingdom. But occupying the same physical space does not necessitate the rigid conformity of all inhabitants to one all-encompassing social system with its prescribed modes of behavior. Even when dwelling in urban morerías amid large concentrations of Christian population, the Mudejars were enmeshed in distinct networks of social relations articulated in accordance with the moral and material demands of their families.
As to the precise nature of Mudejar social structure, the documentation affords us only precious glimpses. Of course, the Christian bureaucrats had little intrinsic interest in the internal life of the king's Muslim communities. What they have left are details that for them were incidental to their fiscal and administrative concerns, bits and pieces that in the aggregate form a coherent, albeit by no means complete, picture.
An exploration of the royal records for patterns of Mudejar behavior and the social structures underlying them reveals a high incidence of intracommunal violence, greatly exceeding the occurrence of violent conflict between Muslims and Christians (although probably not that between Christians). The discovery of 120 Crown-sponsored truces between antagonistic Mudejar families, not to mention the large number of assaults and murders, suggests that the family feud occupied a central place in Mudejar social life. The Mudejars' internecine violence indi-
cates that their subsociety was still vital, and represents their channeling of energy inward into prescribed forms of behavior and association that had social meaning for them alone. In order to comprehend the origins of such feuding and the historical significance of this phenomenon, it will be necessary first to discuss the Berber and Arab settlement of the Valencian region and its structural implications, and then to describe the structure of the Arabo-Berber family, particularly its Mudejar variant.
Historians differ as to the precise chronology and nature of the Muslim settlement of the Valencian region (Sharq al-Andalus ). Guichard argues in favor of an early (eighth through ninth century) Berberization of the area, but noting that from the eleventh century onward the Berbers were so Arabized that they pretended an affiliation to prestigious Arab tribes, conveniently forgetting their Berber origins. Barceló Torres disputes Guichard's use of toponyms as evidence for early Berber settlement, suggesting that these Berber place names originated in later waves of Berber immigration under al-Hakam[*] II (961–976) and al-Mansur[*] (978–1002), or perhaps during the conquests of the Almoravids and the Almohads. Míkel de Epalza has made important contributions regarding the religious status of Valencia's indigenous population following the Muslim conquest. Taking account of new evidence showing only a limited Christianization of pre-Islamic Valencia, he proposes a rapid mass conversion to Islam (in contrast to Bulliet's model of a more gradual conversion), a trend that was intensified in the tenth and eleventh centuries with a Cordoban-controlled campaign of politicoreligious indoctrination intended to stave off a Fatimid Shic i[*] threat to Sunni[*] al-Andalus. The result was that the Sharq al-Andalus became perhaps the most highly Islamized and Arabized region in the peninsula. From the above it may be said that on the eve of the Christian conquest the Valencian region was Islamized and Arabized with a greater or lesser portion of the population being possessed of Berber roots. Moreover, it is likely that the region was settled on a tribal pattern, in which individual villages were peopled by particular clans. For our purposes, whether these clans were Berber, Arab, or Arabized Berber is not important, inasmuch as Arabs and Berbers had and, indeed, still have, very similar forms of social organization.
The social and political consequences of Arab and Berber settlement, and of Islamization and Arabization have been set forth by Guichard. He convincingly repudiates the views of Sánchez Albornoz and like-minded historians who argue in favor of the assimilation of the Muslim conquerors to the social norms of the indigenous population. According to Guichard, not only did the religion and literate culture of the conquerors become predominant in al-Andalus, but Arabo-Berber tribal
structures prevailed as well. In terms of social organization, this meant that the Arabs and Berbers were members of agnatic, patrilineal groups in which endogamous marriage was preferred so as to maintain the cohesion, wealth, and power of the lineage. These agnatic groups were embedded in a segmentary social system characterized by the balanced opposition between the increasingly inclusive segments of elementary family, lineage, clan, and tribe. This system allowed for both atomization, when segments of equal size competed within the tribe or clan, and amalgamation, when the various segments of a tribe formed a unified front in opposition to an enemy tribe. Thus, tribal in-fighting, most notably between the confederations of Mudari[*] and Yemeni[*] Arabs, marked the political history of al-Andalus well into the tenth century. The intermarriage of Arabs and Berbers with women of the native population—the offspring would have been Muslims and full members of their father's lineage—and the clientage of muwalladun[*] , the descendants of converts to Islam, to particular tribes allowed for the retention of tribal structures.
By the eleventh century tribalism had played itself out as the dominant factor in the political life of al-Andalus. In addition to the political centralization and pacification achieved by c Abd al-Rahman[*] III, Guichard emphasizes the processes of sedentarization and urbanization, which hindered segmentation, the dynamic of tribal organization. David Wasserstein argues that an "Andalusian identity" had supplanted tribalism, any politically significant elements of which were destroyed by the military reforms of al-Mansur[*] , which had dissolved the tribally based jund units. Glick suggests an additional factor—the explosion of conversion to Islam in the midtenth century (according to the Bulliet model) saw the Arabs and Berbers being numerically swamped by neo-Muslims for whom tribal issues were not a major concern. However, if Epalza's thesis of an earlier and more intense Islamization of the Valencian region is correct, it may be that Arabo-Berber structures had taken deeper roots there. This may explain the particular vitality of Arabo-Berber social structures among Valencia's Mudejars.
In any case, the decline of tribalism as a political force, or the dissolution of the tribal unit as a form of social organization, need not have resulted in the lapse of the more elementary segments of agnatic family and lineage as significant structures. In fact, among the Muslims of Nasrid Granada, and even among the Moriscos of postconquest Granada, agnatic solidarity (c asabiyah[*] ) continued to be a potent social force.
It is one thing to remark on the survival of agnatic solidarity in an Islamic polity, or in a recently conquered one like Granada; it is quite another matter to assert that Arabo-Berber social attitudes and structures, at the level of family and lineage, remained largely intact in
Valencia some 250 years after the submission of that region to western Christian domination. The defeat and emigration of Muslim military elites in the thirteenth century had eliminated whatever political significance still remained to either the tribe or clan. Since the government was Christian and denied Muslims access to political power, it is difficult to see what sociopolitical role and aims even the smaller solidarities of family and lineage would have had. Furthermore, progressive Mudejar emigration to Granada or the Maghrib, coupled with the internal migration and fragmentation brought about by seigneurial alteration of rural settlement patterns, must have severely strained or severed the ties binding some Muslim lineages together, in effect, fostering a more radical segmentation.
Still, at the same time, the conquerors' granting of communal and legal autonomy to the Mudejars was probably conducive to the retention of preconquest structures, or at least to the alleviation of the pressures for fragmentation. As will be seen below, the various official posts of the corporate aljama, however much they were distortions of their Islamic antecedents, became sources of prestige and power within the Mudejar community, prizes over which rival families deemed it worthwhile to feud. Also, Maliki[*] law, according to which the Mudejars regulated their daily lives, seemed to justify the perpetuation of feuding relations by its provision for either retaliation or the payment of blood money (diyah ) in cases of homicide and assault.
Aside from the persisting legal and institutional supports for traditional patterns of social relations, it is important to emphasize the peculiar resilience and structural coherence of medieval Islamic society at its lower levels, despite the frequent and sometimes traumatic political upheavals in its upper reaches. In the Valencian case, this resilience derived from the ability of the larger solidarities of an Arabo-Berber society to segment without disturbing the primary social structures. Thus, if a family were broken up—say, through the emigration of one of two brothers to the Maghrib—the sons of the remaining brother could create a new agnatic solidarity composed of themselves, their father, and their own male children, even though their position would be weakened through the loss of their paternal uncle's support. In other words, so long as traditional attitudes were not eroded, preconquest structures could be perpetuated merely through biological reproduction. If 250 years seems an incredibly long time for such structures to have endured, it was also more than enough time for them to have reemerged and solidified. Since Mudejar political life was reduced to the confines of the local morería or village there was no impetus for the amalgamation of clans or tribes; family and lineage, however, remained important.
That lineage long continued to be a special concern of Valencian Muslims is evinced in the claims of a Morisco family in 1567 to have descended from al-Mansur[*] and Valencia's Muslim rulers.c Asabiyah[*] in Valencia was buttressed through the practice of endogamy, that is, through parallel cousin marriage with the daughter of the paternal uncle (bint al-c amm). The negotiations of the newly converted Moriscos with Carlos I in 1526 leave little doubt that this type of marriage had been the preferred one among the Mudejars:
inasmuch as among the Moors today there are many marriages concluded between close relations in a degree prohibited by the Christian law and permitted by the Moorish law, which law permits marriage to the degree of that between cousins-germane—the children of two brothers inclusive—should the said marriages begin to be disturbed, and to prohibit those marriages which could be made from today henceforth, would result in the greatest damage and disturbance among the said Moors.
The Moriscos then requested that Carlos intercede with the papal legate and persuade him to grant a dispensation for the endogamous marriages consummated before the mass conversions.
Our documentation is less useful on this matter. Normally, only the name (ism ) of the wife is given—as Fatima, wife of so and so—without ascription to her lineage (nisbah ). This was in keeping with the far greater importance given to patrilineal descent, whereby the offspring of the marriage pertained to the lineage of the father. Of course, in the instance of marriage with the bint al- c amm, the husband and wife would have the same nisbah . In a few rare cases the documentation shows unequivocally the marriage of parallel cousins. In Alcira, Fotoix bint (daughter of) Mahomat Xativi was the betrothed of Ali ibn (son of) Abrahim Xativi. Two cases from Aragon (where the practice of endogamy is all the more impressive, given the greater acculturation of Aragonese Mudejars) suggest that although the right of the male cousin to the hand of the bint al-c amm was recognized, the prospective brides were sometimes less than enthusiastic about their fate. For five years there was pending in the courts of the kingdom a decision on the litigation between a reluctant bride, Fatima bint Mahomat Margnan of Huesca, and her cousin, Ybraym ibn Mofferiz Margnan, concerning the marriage that Ybraym and his father "were claiming" to contract with her. Fatima bint Jayel de Gali of Zaragoza asked for a divorce from her cousin, Faraig ibn Juçe de Gali, on the grounds that he had maltreated her. Faraig maintained that his mother-in-law had put Fatima up to it and pleaded before the king that his wife be restored to him.
Questions of marital harmony aside, there were compelling reasons for the practice of endogamy. The marriage of paternal cousins en-
hanced the solidarity of the lineage by linking the interests of brothers and their children, and giving the bride's kin more control over the bridegroom. They could then present a more powerful front to rival lineages. Moreover, the reproductive power of the daughter was retained within the lineage; more children, particularly more sons, increased prestige, power, and economic potential. The economic angle was crucial. Since among the Mudejars daughters were able to inherit from their fathers, the exogamous marriage of a daughter implied the loss of property by her lineage. True, the groom had to render a specified bridewealth (sadaq[ *] , Catalan accidach ) to his intended, but, because that was paid to and retained by the bride, her family did not profit from it. In some instances wives left their husbands and took their bridewealth home with them, or when couples separated the wives demanded their bridewealth, but it is highly unlikely that families planned for such eventualities.
While endogamy was preferred, exogamous marriage was not at all unusual. Demography militated against every person being able to wed his or her cousin. More important, exogamy served to define relationships between various lineages. Marriage ties created a community of interest, mitigated conflict between families, and stabilized community life. That Mudejars regarded such affinal connections as determinants of conduct is demonstrated in the judicial appeal of Çaat Siquuti. The lieutenant bailiff of Játiva, with the counsel of the local qadi[*], Yuçeff Alçamba, had passed sentence against Çaat, which sentence was then upheld by the bailiff general, with the counsel of Mahomat Bellvis, the qadi general. Çaat complained that the final ruling had gone against him because the two qadi s "are joined by a certain affinity, that the son of the said qadi Bellvis had married the niece of the aforesaid Yuçeff Alçamba, daughter of Yahye Alçamba his brother." In another case, Mahomat Perpir, when he fled to the Maghrib in 1501, was recorded as having Abdalla Murçi and Yuçeff Zignell as brothers-in-law. In 1499 he had reached a truce with Azmet Murçi, a relation of Abdalla, and in 1500 had done the same with Yuçeff Zignell. It may be that affinal ties had helped to close the rift separating the Perpirs from the Murçis and the Zignells, or perhaps in the end they proved insufficient and Mahomat had reasons other than the fear of forced baptism for taking refuge in the Maghrib.
Since endogamous marriage was practiced, and the bonds between agnates thereby strengthened, it should follow that agnates acted jointly in the conduct of feuding relations. This is precisely the state of affairs encountered in the documentation. In a number of cases the perpetrators of violence were two or more agnates. Homaymat and Çuleymen Montani of Alacuás, with accomplices, shot and killed with a crossbow
another Muslim vassal of the seigneury. Ali Orfayçi and his brother Mahomat Çaffahi of Alcira burst into the house of Pedro Delgado and wounded Juçeff Bolaix with two lacerations. On different occasions Muslims of Valldigna were wounded by Mahomat and Abdalla Giber, and by Çat and Ali Bolarif. Mahomat Malich had the misfortune somehow to incur the wrath of Ali and Mahomat Guayna of Artesa. Clearly casabiyah[*] was crucial for providing the strength in numbers that allowed for such aggression.
At the same time, the readiness to resort to violence, combined with the support of sons, brothers, uncles, and cousins, tended to discourage the violent initiatives or retaliation of rivals. The threat posed by the enemy's group solidarity determined the very nature of much of the violence that occurred. Assault and murder were often committed under the cover of night; ambushes were laid and enemies attacked at unexpected moments; and victims were often alone and outnumbered by their assailants who struck in tandem with agnates or other—perhaps affinal—accomplices. We have mentioned elsewhere Juçeff Cabot of Játiva who returned to Valldigna, where, one evening, with henchmen, he did away with an enemy in his own home. Abdalla Çentido and Fuçey Ylel dispatched Azmet Gradano with a dagger-thrust to the throat as he was leaving his father's house in Mirambell. Mahomat Flori of Játiva was fined 110s, in lieu of eighty lashes, "because he had hidden in his house certain Moors [relatives] from Gandía and from the Vall d'Alfandech [Valldigna] for the purpose of killing Gabix, Moor of the said morería ." Mahomat Chiquet of Alcira even resorted to arson, attempting to burn down the house of the Arrayço family. Only rarely were attempts made on the lives of more than one member of a family at the same time, and in such cases the elements of surprise, darkness of night, and superiority in arms are apparent. The brothers Çahat and Amet Pachando were the victims of a ferocious nocturnal assault in Liria by Caet Natjar and Abraym Rabaça of Bétera. Natjar practically cut off Çahat's head with his sword, while Rabaça seriously wounded Amet with a poisoned crossbow dart.
As casabiyah[*] was predicated on the responsibility of each agnate to uphold the honor of his family, an attack on one member of the group demanded of the others reprisal against the offender or his agnates. Failure to fulfill this responsibility resulted in the family's loss of honor and in a decrease in its prestige and power in the community. Thus violence elicited a violent response, setting in motion a potentially endless sequence of aggressive acts characteristic of the feud.
The understanding of family members involved in feuds that violence would inevitably ensue and vengeance be exacted prompted Muslims of Oliva, Carlet, Játiva, the Vall de Uxó, and Valencia to apply for licenses
to bear arms for the purpose of self-defense against their "enemies." Yuçeff Albanne's application hinged on the presumption that because Abrahim Corumbell had already wounded his brother he was next in line.
A consideration of the feud between the Murçi and the Torralbi families of the morería of Valencia demonstrates the centrality of agnatic solidarity in the prosecution of a feud. We first encounter the brothers Azmet and Çahat Torralbi receiving from the bailiff general arms-bearing licenses (20 March 1503). Because Çahat had denounced Azmet Murçi before the bailiff's court (for a reason unknown to us), he believed he needed to be armed so that he would not be "damaged by the said Azmet Murçi or by another relative of his " (italics mine). Azmet Torralbi, sharing responsibility for his brother's legal actions, whether he liked it or not, felt equally threatened. Such was the expectation of Murçi vengeance that the Torralbis were licensed to bear arms not only for self-defense but also for the defense of "one other companion who will go in your company." Clearly, it was inadvisable for a man embroiled in a Mudejar feud to walk alone.
Less than three months later the Torralbis took the offensive and, putting his licensed arms to good use, Azmet Torralbi severely wounded Abrahim Murçi. The precise relation of Abrahim to Azmet Murçi is unknown, although it seems most likely that they were brothers. In any case, they had the same enemies. Both Abrahim and Azmet had concluded truces with Mahomat Perpir and Ali Perpir, and both had fallen out with even the same agnate, Ubaydal Murçi, perhaps their cousin. Abrahim had also made Azmet's dispute with the Torralbis his own. Nusa, Abrahim's wife, maintained that Azmet and Çahat Torralbi, and their father Abdalla, all bore a grudge against her husband for no reason, and that Çahat and Abdalla prompted Azmet and planned with him the attack on Abrahim. She also asserted that as early as the previous January (1503) Çahat Torralbi had shown much bravado toward her husband and an intention to kill him.
The testimonies of other witnesses contradicted some of Nusa's charges. First, it seems that Abrahim Murçi was not entirely blameless. Abrahim was said to have a "foul mouth," and many thought that "because of his tongue the said Azmet Torralbi has wounded him." Abrahim had indeed gone about stating that Azmet was a fool and deserved to be treated as such. Second, it seems that Çahat and Abdalla Torralbi had not urged on Azmet or planned the crime with him; rather, the attack was more of a spontaneous act on Azmet's part. In fact, Abdalla Torralbi had attempted to mollify his son's animosity toward Abrahim, urging Azmet to make peace with him. On the very day of the assault, Abdalla confronted Abrahim, demanding to know why he was
deliberately antagonizing his son. Abrahim retorted that he did not have to answer to Abdalla, then wheeled and strode off.
Abrahim's inability to hold his tongue proved calamitous, for when Azmet vented his wrath against him, he showed little mercy. Azmet slashed Abrahim about the head and arms with his sword, and, when Abrahim fled into the home of Gil Sanchiz, he followed him there and cut off his right foot. According to the painter Gabriel Gosalbo, it was his own intervention that prevented the affair from escalating into a bloodbath. With a lance he barred the way into Abdalla Torralbi's house against those (Abrahim's relatives, perhaps) who spoke of entering to slit the throats of Abdalla's daughters. Later, he met Çahat Torralbi and advised him to avoid the area of his father's house, lest he fall victim to Murçi revenge.
In another case, the brothers Ali and Azmet Thorruc of Millena killed Azmet Araye of Benilloba on account of some disagreement. Consequently, Azmet's brothers, Mahomat and Çahat Araye—their father was an eighty-year-old invalid—recruited some neighbors in Benilloba and proceeded to Millena, where they took their revenge, slaying Azmet Thorruc.
Açen Muça of Serra was similarly motivated by a desire to vindicate the murder of his half-brother Azmet Gradano ("jermans de mare," a blood tie not as strong as that between sons of the same father) by Abdalla Çentido. For four years he had restrained himself, but on Corpus Christi Day, 1491, he stabbed Abdalla to death as he sat watching the processions in Valencia. Earlier that day, Yuçeff Ada had asked Abdalla about the state of his relations with Açen Muça, and, upon learning that the two were still feuding, admonished Abdalla to be careful. The feud, then, seems to have been a matter of (Mudejar) public knowledge. This makes perfect sense, for the honor and status of a family rested on public evaluation and approval. This approval could best be attained through the display of solidarity and the willingness of the agnates to fulfill their responsibilities to the group, that is, through the family conducting itself properly in a feud.
A number of victimized Mudejar families, either too weak in numbers or too law-abiding to retaliate against their enemies in kind, or perhaps exceedingly confident in the efficacy of royal and seigneurial justice, beseeched their Christian overlords to mete out the punishment due for assault or homicide. The parents of the murdered Azmet Zichnel of Valldigna, "although they have the ability and it would be permitted to them to kill with impunity Juçef Cuyta, the killer," turned first to the criminal justice of Valldigna, a seigneury, and then, once Juçef had fled the valley, to the Crown "to have him fittingly punished and chastized through the measures and means of that [justice]."
It is due to this type of legal recourse to the Christian authorities that much of the information concerning Mudejar violence turns up in the documentation.
The records of the kingdom's fiscal auditor (Maestre Racional ) indicate that royal officials, and probably their seigneurial counterparts as well, acted as mediators between feuding Mudejar families. The result of a bailiff's intervention in a dispute appears in the records as the payment of a monetary settlement (composicio ) by the offending Muslim or his family to the bailiff. Of course, payment to the Christian official provided little compensation for the victim and his family. It is probably safe to assert, therefore, that either the bailiff and the victim divided the settlement or the victim received a separate settlement equal to that received by the bailiff, who, in either case, would have presided over the entire transaction. This conjecture is substantiated in some cases by scribal notations that state that the victim "admitted" or agreed to the settlement. In the eyes of the victim and his family, the settlement would have appeared a form of blood money releasing them from the obligation, although not necessarily from the desire, to retaliate violently.
A more effective means of maintaining the public peace was in the hands of the bailiff general, namely, the official "peace and truce," supposed to last for 101 years, or its permanent variant, the "final peace." Although many of these officially sponsored truces involved Muslims of the morería of Valencia, for keeping order was most difficult in the capital, many others bound Muslims from all over the kingdom. The truces highlight the importance of agnatic solidarity by emphasizing that each party swearing to abide by the truce was representing himself and his "relatives, friends, and defenders." In some cases entire families were present at the conclusion of the truce. Unfortunately, only in rare instances do the documents state the causes for the mutual hostility necessitating a formal truce. When given, the causes usually are acts of violence. The texts of the truces are written according to standard format, in which steep monetary fines are emphasized as the deterrent to any resumption of the feud.
For example, in a truce dated 31 March 1489 we find various members of the Capo family of Alcira, standing "for themselves, friends, relations, and defenders," and Abdalla Pollet, his son Mahomat, Azmet Biari, Çahat Biari and his son Caleth, and Çapdon Eça, all of the same morería, pledging "a good peace and truce between them, to last for 101 years, concerning whatever debates, quarrels, rumors, ill-will, and wounds that might have existed between them until the present day." By virtue of an oath sworn "with hands and with mouth" in the presence of Joan Aduart, royal constable and vicar of the bailiff general, "'to our
Lord God and to the qiblah of Muhammad' the face turned toward midday, according to the Sunnah and the Shariah of the Sarracens," both parties promised that "there will not be done nor caused to be done nor arranged nor attempted, neither openly nor secretly, neither directly nor indirectly, any evil or damage on the persons or goods of them [the other party]." For any violation of the truce, the Crown would penalize the offending family with a fine of 500 florins—100 florins to the injured party and 400 florins to the royal treasury.
It is not difficult to understand why the royal authorities expended such effort to curb the Mudejars' feuding propensities. The death of vassals, the destruction of property, and the disruption of economic activity, all of which resulted from feuding, had the most negative implications for the state of the royal treasury. Moreover, the control of social violence and the efficient administration of justice were essential components of the effective exercise of royal authority. Stated more simply, public order had to be maintained. Feuds not only affected individual families but also at times threatened to engulf entire morerías in tumultuous and bloody disorder. Three royal aljamas were seen to be tottering on the edge of such calamity. In Valencia, the feud between the Roget and the Bizquey families had become so serious that they and "their fathers and mothers" had to be banished from the morería . In Alcira, the bailiff believed the aforementioned truce between the Capo and Biari families to be necessary in order to "pacify the said morería and to put the [morería ] in repose." The bailiff general urged the bailiff of Castellón de la Plana to do something to resolve the conflict between the Bocayos and their rivals "for the benefit and repose of that morería, which today ... is on the road to destruction."
While official intervention prevented the growth of widespread violence within morerías, it is less certain that the truces between families always had their intended durability. Social anthropologies have observed in Mediterranean and Middle Eastern societies where the feud is a central element in social relations the ultimate inefficacy of truces and various forms of compensation as means of permanently extinguishing a feud. Rather, despite the fact that hostilities cease for varying lengths of time, feuds tend to be perpetual in nature. The Valencian evidence does not contradict these conclusions. Azmet Coxet of Paterna was to be apprehended "for breaking the peace and truce." Although Azmet Aixbir and Çaat Borrabe had concluded a truce, Azmet later seized the opportunity to attack Çaat. One also encounters the repetition of truces between the same families, such as the Murçis and the Perpirs, or the Bizqueys and the Rogets. Even if different members or combinations of members of the families appear in successive truces,
this hardly masks the fact of the continuing and potentially explosive state of animosity existing between them.
It should not be thought, however, that without the intervention of royal and seigneurial officials Mudejar society would have destroyed itself through unabated internecine violence. The Mudejars had their own mechanisms for achieving a cessation of hostilities, a state of affairs necessary if routine social and economic life were to continue.
A settlement arrived at through the efforts of Muslim jurists preceded some of the truces established through the office of the bailiff general. When the powerful Paziar family of Alcira and the Getdi family of Picasent concluded an official "peace and truce" after the killing of Abdalla Getdi, the Paziars came with a "carta morischa (Arabic letter) received from Ali Bellvis, son of Mahomat Bellvis, qadi[ *] of the lord king," while the Getdis had an Arabic letter from their local faqih[*] . In other cases Muslims abandoned legal initiatives against enemies, having come to an understanding with them by their own methods and for their own reasons.
In the feud between the Araye and Thorruc families, rather than pursuing the prosecution of Mahomat and Çahat Araye in the governor's court, the Thorrucs dropped the charges against them, after having "established peace with all [their] adversaries." It may be inferred that the Thorrucs realized that the capital punishment of the Araye brothers, even if executed through proper legal procedure, would have served only to provoke the perpetration of retaliatory violence by the Araye and their friends in Benilloba. Each family had already lost a son; with the score even, an uneasy truce seemed wiser than more killing and the disruption of the activities of those still alive. When the wife of the murdered Ali Dabbau, his sister, and the guardian of his children, Azmet Pulpul (apparently not an agnate of Ali), dropped charges against the killer, Çaat Melich, the reasons for their doing so were even more pressing than those motivating the Thorrucs. Here, the surviving members of the victim's family, two women and young children, were incapable of either exacting revenge themselves or defending themselves against later retaliation should they press prosecution through the bailiff's court. This evidence suggests that what moved Mudejars to accept compensation or blood money instead of physical retribution, or to make peace with the enemy, however temporary that peace might be, was not so much the threat of censure by the Christian authorities as the fear of triggering further violence, of reactivating the feud in its most destructive form. In other words, the most effective deterrent to feuding was the feud itself. Rival families eyed each other warily and exercised restraint, committing violent acts sporadically in an
often calculated manner. It was to no one's interest to give violence free rein.
The plethora of official truces between rival Mudejar families, the numerous acts of violence in which agnates were implicated, and the importance of vengeance as a motive for such violence all indicate that the feud was so pervasive as to constitute a primary determinant of Mudejar social relations. Jacob Black-Michaud, whose conclusions are based on the studies of various Mediterranean and Middle Eastern feuding societies, goes so far as to state that "feud can be regarded as a social system per se." While it is not our intention to discuss the validity of this conclusion, nor, for that matter, to attempt to fit Mudejar feuding within the framework of an anthropological model, it is crucial to emphasize a viewpoint on which most observers of feuding societies would seem to agree, namely, that feuding is better viewed as a social process than as a social aberration. If this is the case, then there must have been something other than the necessity to respond to a previous act of violence behind much of the Mudejar violence we have observed, a stake, or stakes, worth the risk of initiating a feud. These stakes were wealth and power. Among Mudejar farmers and artisans wealth was attained through the acquisition of land and through the control of a limited market for manufactured goods. Power, or local influence, rested on the prestige and status afforded by the possession of wealth and by the defeat of rivals in the competition for it. The agnates who constituted the feuding group also functioned as an economic unit, holding land jointly and practicing the same crafts, so that mutual material concerns strengthened agnatic solidarity. Mudejar feuding, then, may be interpreted as a consequence of the competition for material wealth and local status, and as a process determining the allocation of these scarce commodities, thereby stratifying individual communities.
The official truces, which sometimes indicate the professions of the subscribing parties, strongly suggest that economic competition was at the root of much Mudejar discord. In a number of cases both of the feuding parties were practitioners of the same craft, producing for the same limited market. Conflict occurred between Muslim blacksmiths, shieldmakers, and shoemakers in Valencia, between Muslim fishermen in Oliva, and between hemp sandalmakers in the Vall de Uxó. The competition seems to have been most intense among Valencia's Mudejar shoemakers. The feuding Bizquey and Roget families, whom the authorities had to expel from the morería, both practiced shoemaking. The Bizqueys also concluded truces with other enemy shoemakers, namely, Çatdon Caeli, the brothers Abrahim and Çalema Cabero, Çilim Maymo, and Çahat Perpir with his nephews Ali and Mahomat Perpir. The Perpirs themselves clashed with shoemakers other than
the Bizqueys: Çahat Carcaix, Azmet Murçi, Ali Maguarell, and Çaat Abducarim. In the feud which resulted in the wounding of Abrahim Murci, a shieldmaker, by Azmet Torralbi, a shoemaker, it is interesting that the Torralbis seem to have first come into conflict, not with Abrahim, but with Azmet Murçi, a shoemaker (see above).
However, in many other feuds the parties were not of the same profession, in which cases one cannot delineate so precisely the clash of competing economic interests. The ties and common interests created through exogamous marriage or simple friendship complicated intracommunal relations considerably, so that families came into conflict who, had they been guided by economic concerns alone, otherwise might not have. Thus, one encounters truces like the one concluded between the shoemakers Ali Perpir of Valencia and Azmet Naixe of Mislata, on one side, and Ali Maguarell and Çaat Abducarim, shoemakers, and Azmet Claret, a linen salesman, all of Valencia, on the other side. The documentation does not reveal what, other than shoemaking, brought together Perpir and Naixe, Muslims from different families and locales, or why a linen salesman was involved in the feud at all.
The frequent and varied business transactions between Mudejars of all walks of life, and matters associated with the complex pattern of land tenure, in which Muslim artisans also were concerned, provided ample opportunity for the sparking of controversy and mutual hostility. For instance, Çale Magarell had Çaat Feçi imprisoned for money Çaat owed him for the purchase of a donkey. In Játiva, Yuçeff Redona complained that Azmet Beniale had planted mulberry trees on his land and demanded that they be uprooted. Muslims of Valldigna went to court over the alleged sale of cloth, while Muslims of Alcira disputed the ownership of goats.
Material interests fueled the fires of dissension even within families. For instance, Ali Gehini, a wealthy amin[*] of la Foyeta, was so afraid of being robbed by his own sons, disreputable characters who frequented taverns, that he hid his money in the walls of his house. Mahomat Negral had the justice of Valldigna sell his brother Abducalem's mule for debts Abducalem owed him on account of the justice's earlier sale of Mahomat's field for debts that had really been Abducalem's. Unfortunately, because most Mudejar civil litigation was handled in Islamic courts, the records of which do not survive, our information on Mudejar disputes over land or other commodities is extremely limited. Consequently, direct correlations cannot be made between such disputes and the occurrence of violence and feuding. Considering the extent of feuding between Muslims of the same profession reflected in the truces and the few instances of Mudejar property litigation encountered, it can be
cautiously postulated that much of Mudejar feuding had its roots in conflicting economic interests.
The feuding that threatened to destroy the morería of Castellón de la Plana was the violent manifestation of a struggle for political power. The struggle centered on the control of the two posts of adelantat and pitted Abdulazis and his son Yuçeff Bocayo against a faction headed by Çale Arroçen and Ubequer Faraig, which also included Caet Fando, Yuçeff Salio, Ali Gordo, and Ali Gerret. Shortly before 19 April 1487 the Bocayos informed the bailiff general of a fight that had broken out between Yuçeff Bocayo and Ali Gerret. Within weeks matters took a more serious turn: two Christians and some unidentified Muslims entered the Bocayos' home and wounded Yuçeff in the arm and hand, cutting off his finger. Investigation revealed that this was not random violence, but that the two Christian assailants had been hired by Çale Arroçen and Ubequer Faraig to do the dirty work. At this point the bailiff general had Ali Bellvis, the qadi[*] general, intervene. Bellvis managed to persuade the Bocayos and their rivals to agree to a power-sharing arrangement. According to this arrangement, the ten councillors of the aljama, among whom were members of both feuding factions, and the adelantats from the previous year would elect the amin[*] and the two adelantats . Most important, it was stipulated that "in any year either Ubequer Faraig or Çale Arroçen is elected as jurate [adelantat ] that in such case let there be elected as jurate one of the said Bocayos, either the father or the son." That the two posts of adelantat were so hotly contested was probably due to the adelantats ' function as advisors to the amin in the apportionment and collection of taxes. This is suggested by the fact that Ali Bellvis also inspected the aljama's account books to ensure that the amin had justly confiscated certain goods of the Bocayos and Yuçeff Pollina, presumably for reason of unpaid taxes. The Bocayos, then, had a clear material interest in being elected as one of the adelantats . Eventually (August 1488), the authorities established a formal truce between the two factions; however, by 1492 Yuçeff Bocayo was again complaining about wounds inflicted by his former antagonists (it is not clear that these were new wounds). There is no further evidence indicating that the feuds in other Mudejar communities were similarly motivated, and the aljama of Castellón, in which the office of amin changed hands annually, may well have been more politically unstable. Still, given that all the communities had more or less the same political structure with officials executing the same functions, it may not be too far-fetched to infer a more general phenomenon of feuding as being in part a contest for local political power, the exercise of which could influence individual rates of taxation. Even families secure in their possession of official posts, like the Paziars, the amin s of
Alcira, were involved in feuding, which suggests that the holding of office was not the sole basis of power among the Mudejars.
Intimately linked to the competition for economic and political power as a source of feuding was a punctilious concern for honor. The Mudejar conception of honor differed somewhat from that of western Christians. For the latter, honor was attached to social rank and varied according to the possession of wealth and title. For the Mudejars, honor had the same significance at all socioeconomic levels and was the possession of the family, to be augmented or lost. This may help to explain the apparently unusual phenomenon of Mudejar shoemakers and the like fighting over points of honor.
As suggested above, family honor could be maintained and increased only through the agnates' fulfillment of their responsibilities to each other. Inasmuch as the family constituted an economic unit jockeying for its share of wealth and influence in the community, its performance in that contest reflected on its honor. However, a family without honor was by virtue of its loss of face excluded from participation in that same contest. Honor, then, was a prerequisite for the attainment of status and power in the community. Because in economic terms Mudejar society was relatively homogenous, being composed largely of small farmers and artisans and lacking an established aristocracy, the possession of honor, achieved through a family's action in accordance with the dictates of agnatic solidarity, was probably as great a determinant of local status as real wealth.
This helps to explain why so much of the violence committed by Mudejars seems to have been in defense of family or personal honor. Although economic competition might have inspired the incidents leading families or individuals to believe that their honor had been somehow sullied, it was not considered to have been in itself a sufficient cause for violence. Questions of purely economic concern were settled licitly in court; questions of honor were settled extralegally in the forum of the community. Of course, the settlement of a question of honor through violence to some extent also resolved the economic question, inasmuch as the competition was then either temporarily or permanently eliminated. Thus, in the feud between the Torralbis and the Murçis, which seems to have originated in the clash between shoemakers—Azmet Murçi against Azmet and Çahat Torralbi—Azmet Torralbi inflicted violence on Abrahim Murqi, a shieldmaker, because Abrahim had ridiculed him and thereby stained his honor. It is worth recalling that many in the morería recognized that Abrahim had incurred Azmet's wrath because of his loose tongue.
Another incident involving Muslims of Bétera shows the Mudejars' extreme sensitivity where their honor was concerned. Ubaydal Allepus
and his convert brother Miguel Crestia went to a hamlet near Bétera where they intended to mow grass with a sickle that a Christian hosteler had given them. There, a Muslim named Raboça accused the two brothers of having stolen the sickle from him. Apparently, Ubaydal and Miguel felt they had been defamed and their honor challenged, for they immediately tried to strike Raboça. Raboça then called for his brother-in-law, Amet Biari, at which point a brawl ensued that resulted in Amet's death. Although Ubaydal denied any previous acquaintance with Amet Biari, the latter's widow claimed that Ubaydal had harbored ill will against her husband. Perhaps Ubaydal's spontaneous violence in defense of his honor was the culmination of a long-standing controversy with Biari's family.
Because honor was essentially a social value, the possession of which depended on the community's evaluation of the conduct of an individual and his family, acts that entailed a challenge to or a defense of honor had a meaning recognized and understood by the entire community. Violence begot violence because social norms demanded that vengeance be exacted if honor was to be maintained. Thus, in the aforementioned stabbing of Abdalla Çentido by Açen Muça, Abdalla's friends expected that Açen would be seeking revenge. Açen, it seems, was a somewhat reluctant avenger, but he felt compelled to act when Abdalla passed by him in the street three times making insulting gestures and faces calculated to shame him publicly.
If the childrearing methods of Axa, the wife of Abdalla Murçi, are any indication of a widespread phenomenon, then Mudejar children were from an early age socialized in the ways of violent initiative and riposte in the pursuit of honor. When her nine-year-old son came home weeping after having been hit by the son of Alfona, Axa deemed that he had been shamed. She upbraided the boy for not striking back, and she demanded retaliation: "Look, when he [the son of Alfona] passes, hit him with a rock." If this were not enough, she even nagged at her husband and servant: "If you do not strike either the husband or the wife [the Alfonas] I will not consider you men. If you do not do it, go to the devil!"
A consideration of the position of women in Mudejar society confirms the continued importance of Arabo-Berber attitudes and social structures. To some extent women were pawns manipulated by their male relatives in the politics of marital alliance. Ideally, a woman was kept within the lineage through endogamous marriage, so that her lineage benefited from her reproductive power. However, if exogamous marriage were unavoidable, it was better and more honorable to receive than to give a woman in marriage. Families that had to give away their daughters in marriage did so to those families with whom alliance would
prove most useful in the local scheme of feuding relations. Although the woman in an exogamous marriage lived with her husband's lineage, she still maintained important connections with her father's family. In fact, her behavior, particularly her sexual conduct, affected the honor of her father's family, not that of her husband. This ambivalent position of the woman, bearing children for her husband's family while being responsible for the honor of her father's family, is reflected in a number of ways in the documentation.
First, because the children of a marriage belonged to the husband's family, Mudejar widows lost custody of their children, who were given into the hands of male guardians, presumably the agnates of the deceased husbands. The strategy here was to ensure that the children, along with the inheritances their fathers had bequeathed to them, continued to adhere to the father's family when their mother remarried. This explains why Fotayma resided in Sot with her new husband, Amet Albaytar, while her daughter Axa lived with two guardians in Cuart, the home of her deceased husband. Apparently, the only way a widow could continue to play a significant role in the lives of her children was either not to remarry, or to do so only to a man of the same town.
The wife's continued close ties with her father's family divided her allegiance and seem to have contributed to the instability of some exogamous marriages. This is indicated by the fact that when a Mudejar wife separated from her husband she usually returned to the home of her father. When Suçey, the wife of Abrahim Çuleymen of the morería of Valencia, went to her father's home in Petrés to attend her brother's wedding, she never returned, "her father, mother, and brother detaining her and not allowing her to come in the power of her husband." Çoltana departed with her father from the seigneury of Castell de Castells without license of the lord, even though her husband was still living there. When Ali Mançor changed vassalage from Benimuslem to Castellón de Játiva, his wife refused to accompany him and demanded the payment of her bridewealth. The bailiff of Játiva did not quite comprehend what was happening and asserted, as a Christian might, "the wife has to follow the husband wherever he would wish to go ... and to live." Probably her confidence in and attachment to her agnates allowed this woman such freedom of choice.
Although the father's household offered a haven to a woman in case of an unhappy marriage, it also harbored the harshest judges of her sexual misbehavior. An adulterous woman's shameful behavior affected mainly the honor of her father's lineage; that of the husband's remained largely unstained. Therefore, it was the responsibility of the woman's agnates to punish her. In some traditional Arabo-Berber societies the agnates were expected to kill her, and Islamic law required that adul-
terers be stoned to death. The Valencian documentation records a surprisingly large number of cases of Mudejar adultery, in which the Islamic death penalty was normally commuted by the Christian authorities to enslavement to the king. This indicates not that Muslims involved themselves in adulterous affairs any more than did Christians, but that because the honor of the father's lineage was involved in the case of an adulterous wife—and those prosecuted were almost all women—her agnates were themselves especially eager to prosecute her so as to erase their own shame. Since royal law would not permit the agnates to dispose of the woman themselves, they had to go through the proper legal channels. Unfortunately, the documents do not reveal who brought the adulteresses before the qadi 's[*] court (the criminal penalty itself had to be executed by the local Christian authority), but, all else being consistent, the agnates, not the husbands, seem the most likely candidates.
The social origins of Mudejar prostitutes further substantiate the importance of the woman's relation to her agnatic group, for the position of such women seems to have derived precisely from their having lacked the support of their agnates. Fotayma was an orphaned maidservant maltreated by her Muslim master. She ran off with a male servant who subsequently became her procurer. Mariem had left her husband, but, because her mother was forcing her to return to him, she departed from Alacuás for the brothel of Valencia. Nuzeya of Oliva had also separated from her husband, and since her parents were dead she, too, was compelled to earn a living in the brothel. Xuxa left her husband in Villamarchante for a lover who later became her procurer. Having committed adultery, she could not hope for forgiveness from her father's family. Adulterous women and prostitutes were the outcasts of Mudejar society.
If fathers were preoccupied with the sexual conduct of their married daughters, so much more were they anxious to defend the chastity of their unmarried ones. The violation of a daughter's chastity, committed with the consent of the daughter or not, constituted an assault on the family's honor. Daughters could not bring honor to a family; they could only bring shame through sexual impropriety. Thus, Aragonese Mudejars conducting business in Zaragoza brought their daughters with them and kept them secluded in the fonduk so that they would not be "maltreated" or spoiled for marriage. The Mudejars' concern to guard their daughters' chastity in defense of family honor may be explained as a reaction to an unusual phenomenon encountered in the documentation, namely, the abduction of women. In pre-Islamic Arab society, and also to some extent among Arabs in Islamic times, women were
abducted in order to shame the victimized family. The honor of the abductor's family was at the same time increased. Mudejars in royal and seigneurial morerías also seem to have employed abduction as a tactic to disgrace their enemies. Although in some cases abduction might have been, in fact, only an elopement, which still would have shamed the father who could not control his daughter, in other cases the participation of more than one man in the abduction indicates a deliberate intention to dishonor the woman's family. Mahomat and Omeymet Maixquarn of Valldigna paid a 340s settlement to the bailiff of Játiva "for having kidnapped Çayma, Mooress, daughter of the amin[ *] of the place of Manuel." The knight Miguel Çetina was sent to the Vall de Villalonga to search for the daughter ("mora donzella") of a Muslim of Millena who had been abducted by Muslims of Cocentaina. The fate of the abducted women is unknown, but it is likely that abduction lessened their prospects for a good marriage.
The passive role of women (outside of the home at least) in the maintenance or loss of family honor was linked to the economic and local political considerations underlying much of Mudejar feuding. The primary factor at stake was the woman's reproductive power. Children, particularly sons, increased a family's economic potential, and the family with many sons and strong casabiyah[*] was a force to be reckoned with in the community. Thus endogamous marriage was preferred to keep offspring within the lineage, while if exogamous marriage was necessary, it was preferable to receive the woman of another family. The widow lost control of her own children to her late husband's family for the same reasons. Adulterous unions were frowned upon because the bastard offspring did not belong to any lineage and were of no help to anyone. Prostitutes, bereft of honor and family ties, existed on the margin of Mudejar feuding society.
Above the level of family or lineage the most important solidarity among the Mudejars was that formed by the rural village or urban morería . During the era of Islamic rule such solidarity had greater force owing to the settlement of particular localities by individual clans (thus the prevalence of "Beni" in Valencian toponyms). The dissipation of larger tribe or clan solidarities and the post-Christian conquest seigneurialization of the countryside significantly modified the basis of local identity. The Mudejar no longer identified himself as the member of a particular clan, but as the vassal of a particular lord. Seigneurial control of a rural community meant that the lord's interests largely determined those of his vassals. So long as Muslim vassals stayed put, their lords tended to defend them, but not without a large degree of self-interest (see chaps. 1 and 2). The vassals themselves acted as a unit, and appear
in the documentation as the aljama of a particular place of which a particular nobleman is lord. The community of interest between vassals, and between vassals and their lords, was necessitated by economic pragmatism and a scarcity of resources. Labor, water, arable land, and livestock were all in short supply. Efficient exploitation of available resources demanded communal cooperation, and retention of these resources required collective action for purposes of communal defense. Endogamous marriage, creating large extended families, and exogamous marriage, binding different families together, both would have served to reinforce the community's unity of purpose.
One manifestation of the ability of Mudejar communities to overcome their internal differences and present a united front to their antagonists was their aggressive and joint defiance of the authorities, particularly of those sent to their villages to make arrests or to confiscate goods. When a royal constable and other officials arrived in Callosa, where they were to collect 19,666s 8d from the Muslims for pensions owed, they discovered that the Muslims had hidden their goods in places nearby. As they were returning with the goods from one of these places, the Muslims ambushed them with a barrage of stones. Officials sent to Matet to arrest two Muslims, fugitive vassals from Gaibiel, had even less luck: "there was made a great resistance by the Moors of the said place, not only breaking open the prisons where the said constable had put one arrested Moor and carrying him away, moreover, they inflicted on the said constable many blows with swords on the staff and one on the arm by which they wounded him." Three years later the amin[*] and adelantats of Matet were still refusing to cooperate in the matter. Muslim vassals of Alcocer possessing lands in the huerta of Castellón de Játiva together cleverly constructed hidden threshing floors near the river, so that they could quickly send threshed wheat downstream without paying their agricultural taxes. When the tax collector later confiscated a horse as a pledge for the unpaid taxes, two Muslims with a lance convinced him to let the horse go.
More numerous than the instances of resistance to royal officials were the clashes between vassals of various seigneuries. Neighboring villages were frequently at odds over boundaries, possession of land, distribution of irrigation water, and other such matters that affected the livelihood of their residents. Conflict of interests issued in the courts as litigation, but not infrequently took on the more sinister aspects of theft and violence. Animosity between lords also soured relations between their vassals. It is often unclear whether the actions of vassals against communities nearby were perpetrated with the consent and direction of their lord or whether the vassals took action of their own accord. For the most part one can probably presume a concurrence between lords and
vassals in such affairs, inasmuch as any gains or losses sustained by the vassals were also felt by the lord.
A brief description of the difficulties and hostility faced by the vassals of some seigneuries should provide some sense of the necessity for communal cooperation and a minimal degree of cohesion. The Muslims of Llombay's marketing of their wheat in Alcira seems to have threatened the interests of some Muslims of the town's morería . Litigation ensued between them, and the bailiff of Alcira confiscated the wheat and pack animals of Yuçeff Carroff of Llombay. A decade later eight Muslims of Llombay murdered a rival of Alcira just outside the walls of the town, which suggests a long-term dispute. Llombay's bailiff and Muslims also rustled livestock from the pastures of neighboring Carlet, for which crime the residents of Carlet planned to enter Llombay and take action. The vassals of Carlet had already been involved in a more serious dispute with Alcudia, which had resulted from the feud between their respective lords, Gaspar de Castellvi and Pere de Montagut. The latter and two henchmen killed Silim Bono of Carlet and wounded his son. Muslims and Christians of Carlet retaliated by wounding a Christian miller and killing a farmer in Alcudia. The feud was finally resolved when Montagut married Castellvi's daughter. Some conflicts were more one-sided. The attack of the brothers Ferrer with their squires and Muslim vassals so terrorized the Muslim residents of Faldeta that they deserted the place.
Perhaps the most frequent cause of strife was a community's misappropriation of irrigation water, which placed in jeopardy the crops of other communities in the vicinity. The lord of Alginet complained that his village was "perishing" because the officials, including the amin s[*] , of the Foya de Llombay were not allowing the water to flow as accustomed. The consequences of such disputes could prove dire, such as the one between Antella and Sumacárcel over "a bridge or a duct of an irrigation canal," which provoked Muslim and Christian vassals of Antella to kill Çahat Torraboni of the rival village.
At the local level Mudejar society displays two conflicting tendencies: on one hand, fragmentation, as manifested in the feuding relations between rival family or lineage groups; and, on the other hand, a reflexive solidarity necessitated by the struggle between communities over the possession of scarce natural resources. The former tendency was rooted in traditional Arabo-Berber modes of social organization. The sources of the latter tendency are more complex, for the importance of seigneurial rivalry and the role of Christian vassals in the strife between communities disallows a description of local solidarity as a purely Mudejar phenomenon. Nevertheless, it is evident that the Muslims inhabiting individual villages were able to unite when the livelihood of the entire
community was threatened, even if at the behest of their lord and in conjunction with their Christian neighbors. That such was the case perhaps can be explained in part by the ability of Arabo-Berber segmentary societies to amalgamate when necessary, as well as to atomize.
Considerable space has been devoted to a discussion of Mudejar social structure and to an analysis of Mudejar feuding relations not only to provide some insight into life within the morería below the surface of the Muslim-Christian interface but also to make a point crucial to the understanding of the remarkable tenacity with which the Mudejars and, later, the Moriscos adhered to Islam despite considerable pressures, both informal and formal, to the contrary. The point is that for the Mudejars religious conversion involved much more than a change in their religious beliefs, a change radical enough in itself; it demanded a fundamental alteration of their social attitudes and social organization. The Mudejars were shielded from the allure of Christianity not only by their profession of a faith as exclusive as Christianity but also by the vitality and structure of their subsociety, which was founded on social practices and assumptions distinct from those of their Christian neighbors. While Mudejar feuding in its outward bloody manifestations did not differ from Christian feuding, the social significance Muslims ascribed to it and the family structures and system of values on which it was based were distinct. The feud as a process of status determination was group-specific, functioning in its very intensity to reinforce traditional attitudes and structures. Moreover, religious belief and social practice were largely coterminous, so that the Mudejars' distinct social customs were as much a sign of their "Moorishness" as was their belief in the oneness of God and the prophethood of Muhammad. For instance, conversion to Christianity would have meant a prohibition of the practice of endogamous marriage (between first cousins), a custom sanctioned by the Prophet and essential for the maintenance of their Arabo-Berber social structures. The frequent and often friendly meeting of Muslim and Christian on the neutral ground of marketplace or tavern no more resulted in a merging of their different forms of social organization than it did in religious syncretism. Indeed, Mudejar social behavior, particularly the marked propensity for feuding—or at least the style and dynamic of that feuding—was sufficiently different so as to evoke comment from among the Christians. Francesch Centelles, a shoemaker well acquainted with the Muslims of Valencia's morería , when asked to testify in court about the character of Abrahim Murçi, responded in a manner that suggests that the feuding Mudejar had become a stereotype: "he is a man who seeks fights and quarrels, like any other Moor."
It seems clear that the Mudejars' distinctively Arabo-Berber mode of social organization helped to shore up their cultural boundaries against the acculturative attrition of an overwhelming Christian presence. These boundaries preserved the essential element of their ethnic identity, the profession of Islam. Although social mores and behavior were intimately bound up with and were to a large extent the product of religious belief, nevertheless, they in themselves were insufficient to perpetuate the religious faith of the social group. The decision of Mudejars to flee the kingdom in 1502–1503 instead of abandoning Islam was the expression of an intensity of faith that transcended the more amorphous "Moorish" cultural identity engendered by repetitive social practice. It is necessary, therefore, to comprehend how the Mudejars actively instilled and fostered their Islamic faith and identity.
An essential element buttressing the faith of individual Muslims was the sense of belonging to a larger community of believers, the ummah . Whatever the situation of the ummah 's individual component polities, even those long since subjugated to Christian powers, membership in the ummah served to distinguish them from all non-Muslims. Unfortunately, the Muslims' adherence to a common faith did not preclude divisiveness within the ummah . Since the fall of the Umayyads in the eighth century the Islamic world had been rent by factionalism, and, as has been seen, this was no less true of the Mudejars. However, making allowances for human imperfection and the not unusual inconsistency between religious precept and social practice, that the Mudejars frequently embroiled themselves in feuds, despite the fact that Muhammad had inveighed against such fratricidal strife among Muslims, does not mean that they had lost their sense of Muslim identity, particularly their collective identity vis-à-vis the Christian world. On the contrary, there were a number of instances in which the Mudejars appear to have acted as a collectivity or were perceived by the Christian authorities to have been such. Let us recall how the nobility advised Fernando against the forced conversion of Valencia's Muslims (1502), noting that "they have their communications with each other," and that any untoward royal initiatives would provoke a violent mass Mudejar reaction. The Mudejars also seem to have been united in a common concern for the embattled sultan of Granada, as was manifested in their taking up collections on his behalf, praying in their mosques for his victory, and negotiating with the Ottoman Turks to come to his rescue. Likewise, the aid provided to runaway slaves by the Mudejars—not just by one community but by any number of morerías in which the fugitives hid on
their way to freedom—demonstrates their ability to act together as Muslims for the benefit of other Muslims.
Mudejar group-consciousness may be seen as the sum of each Muslim's perception of the fundamental difference between himself and his Christian neighbor, and of each Muslim's participation in the life of an autonomous community juridically framed by the Shariah, a corpus of law at once religious and secular. This aggregate awareness of individual Mudejars, however, seems in itself insufficient to have counterbalanced the animosity between feuding families and competing communities, or to have allowed for the Mudejars' alleged network of "communications" and their ability to act as almost a single political entity. One must seek a more concrete pattern of relations transversing the cleavages between agnatic lineages and rival neighboring communities.
The role of exogamous marriage in binding families together and the factor of intercommunal strife in promoting solidarity among the inhabitants of any one village has been discussed. The apparent impediment of intercommunal conflict to a larger, kingdom-wide Muslim solidarity presents a greater problem. Mudejar economic activity, establishing contacts between Muslims of all walks of life from a variety of localities, would have been a key factor in circumventing, or at least lessening, the rivalry between communities. It must be emphasized that while the Mudejars were vassals of particular royal or seigneurial morerías , their economic activities were not circumscribed by the boundaries of any one place. This was especially true of itinerant retail merchants, whose vending took them from the northern to the southern reaches of the kingdom. Since by the nature of their work they were more or less unattached to any particular local interest, these merchants would have served as an appropriate medium for relaying information from one community to another, tying together the separate worlds of distinct aljamas.
Another group whose activities were equally unhampered by specifically local concerns were the licensed mendicants, who traveled throughout the kingdom begging alms from their Muslim brethren. Since charity was one of the Five Pillars of Islam, these itinerant mendicants provided an opportunity for pious Muslims to express their religiosity in a manner unrelated to the secular aims of the family and community. Both the giver and the receiver of alms participated in a transaction that emphasized exclusively their obligations as members of an Islamic community, not those stemming from kinship or from residence in a particular place.
The economic interplay between town and countryside made the kingdom's urban centers sites for the meeting and mingling of Muslims from various rural villages. Mudejars traveled to town to market pro-
duce, to purchase the manufactures of local artisans, or to pass their leisure time in the taverns or fonduk. The large Christian populations of the towns would have induced Muslims from out-of-town to congregate with their coreligionists before turning to Christians for comradeship. If towns like Játiva, Alcira, Castellón de la Plana, and Villarreal attracted Muslims from surrounding hamlets, the capital city gathered in Muslims from all over the kingdom—indeed, from all over the peninsula. Valencia, a veritable teeming metropolis, served as a "melting-pot" for the kingdom's Mudejars. This is indicated in the documentation by the frequent appearance of non-local Muslims working, purchasing, and pursuing litigation in the capital. Furthermore, new vassals in Valencia's morería originated from seigneuries of a wide geographic range, whereas those swearing vassalage to the king in towns such as Játiva or Alcira came from seigneuries nearby. Change of vassalage in itself accentuated two other trends that created links between Muslims of different communities. First, many Muslims who changed vassalage still continued to hold and cultivate land in their former seigneuries, either themselves or through local sharecroppers. This further complicated the already complex Valencian pattern of land tenure, which saw farmers and artisans renting small parcels of land in a variety of places, not just in their place of residence. Mudejars with economic interests in diverse localities likely would have had friends and contacts of equally diverse origins. Thus land tenure itself sometimes cut across the lines of economic competition contingent upon strictly local affiliations. Second, change of vassalage caused the fragmentation of local lineage groups as nuclear families left their agnates behind when they settled elsewhere. Given the importance of c asabiyah[*] in Mudejar society, agnates living in different places were probably still bound by kinship. In addition to these intercommunal agnatic links, there also occurred exogamous marriages between families of different towns, such as the one uniting the niece of Játiva's qadi[*] to the son of Valencia's qadi . Therefore, kinship, both agnatic and affinal, created a network of interests that would have mitigated the intensity of the rivalry between communities for economic reasons alone.
The individual Mudejar's sense of belonging to a kingdom-wide Muslim community and the ritual expression of his commitment to Islam coalesced in the act of pilgrimage to the mosque of Atzeneta in the Vail de Guadalest. This mosque housed the sepulcher of the Sufi mystic Abu[*] Ahmad[*] Jac far b. Sid-bono[*] al-Khuzac i[*] (d. 1227). From the thirteenth century until 1570, when King Felipe II had the mosque of Atzeneta destroyed, the tomb of this saint attracted Muslim pilgrims from all over the kingdom of Valencia, and sometimes from Aragon, Catalonia, Granada, and the Maghrib as well. Ecclesiastical views, expressed at the
Council of Vienne in 1311, that such Muslim pilgrimages were an affront to the Christian community, combined with royal misgivings about large numbers of Muslims of diverse origins gathering each year at the shrine of Atzeneta by 1379 resulted in Crown attempts to prohibit this pilgrimage. The royal authorities, however, were unsuccessful, for throughout the fifteenth century and much of the sixteenth century Valencian Muslims continued in "semiclandestine" fashion to journey to the tomb of Sid-bono[*] . This annual act of Islamic devotion thus became for the individual Mudejar a statement of resistance to Christian authority, a politically dangerous affirmation of identity with the other participants in the pilgrimage.
As evinced by the Mudejars' awareness of the events occurring in the wider Islamic world, especially in Granada and the Maghrib, and by their political activities in conjunction with Granadan, Maghriban, and Ottoman Turkish Muslims, their understanding of what constituted the community of believers extended far beyond the borders of the kingdom. Recognition of this much larger community alleviated their sense of isolation and hopelessness, and strengthened their own Muslim identity, particularly when the large majority of that community was governed by Muslim rulers, some of whom, like the Ottoman sultan, were extremely powerful. As was pointed out in chapter 2, concrete family and commercial connections underlay the Mudejars' politicoreligious identification with the dar[*] al-Islam[*] . As a consequence of previous Mudejar emigration to Granada and the Maghrib, Valencian Muslims had family branches in Islamic lands. On account of these kinship ties, Mudejars traveled to Almería, Tunis, and Oran for the purpose of collecting the inheritances left them by deceased relatives, or, like Ali Fotoffa of Bétera, in order to visit those still alive. A Muslim family of Cocentaina journeyed to Granada to attend a family wedding, while a widow of the morería of Valencia married a Granadan Muslim and then departed with him to North Africa. Like this marriage, there were other instances of recent emigration that forged new links of kinship between Valencia and the Maghrib. The sub-qadi[*] of Játiva decided to spend his retirement in the Maghrib, while his son stayed behind in Játiva and succeeded him in office. Yahye Bellvis, the brother of the qadi general, moved to Tunis and continued to benefit from his commercial connections in Valencia. It was precisely such ties of kinship that facilitated Fernando's settlement of Granadan Muslims in Valencia after the conquest. Thus, Mahomat Fuçey of Bellreguart was licensed to travel to Almería "in order to fetch some relations that he has in the city." Reciprocal commercial interests strengthened Mudejar affinity for Granada and the Maghrib. Mudejars journeyed to Almería and Tunis to sell their merchandise, while Maghriban mer-
chants came to Valencia on business. The royal licenses that permitted these merchants to reside in the kingdom for a year or more created ample opportunity for contact with Mudejars. Religion, kinship, and commerce all bound the Mudejar inextricably to the dar[*]al-Islam[*] . It is doubtful that the Mudejars' Muslim identity and group consciousness would have fared as well had they been isolated.
Relative isolation of a different sort actually abetted the Mudejars in their preservation of an Islamic culture. Historians have puzzled over the fact that despite royal efforts to attract Muslims to urban royal morerías , where the tax burden was lighter, the large majority nevertheless preferred to remain on seigneurial lands. The Mudejars' choice of residence is best interpreted as having had a religiocultural foundation, rather than an economic one. Life in the largely Christian cities posed obvious threats to the integrity of Mudejar Islamic culture. Either militant Catholics were endeavoring to eradicate all signs of Islam—calling for the destruction of minarets, prohibiting the call to prayer, and the like—or the pleasantries of city life were insidiously weakening the Muslims' resolve to live in accordance with the Shariah. That pious Muslims were sensitive to the latter threat is evinced in the complaint of the aljama of Játiva regarding the nocturnal activities of Christian youths in the morería and the deleterious effect that the "dishonest dress" of the alfondeguer 's wife might be having on Muslim youths.
In contrast, life in seigneurial villages afforded the Mudejars a refuge from an aggressive and expanding Christian presence. In these villages Muslims sometimes composed the majority of the population, and their freedom and comfort in religious observance were correspondingly greater. The lords seem to have had few qualms about the public manifestations of Islamic worship. For instance, they allowed their Muslim vassals to make the call to prayer with a horn and perhaps vocally, whereas it was prohibited in the cities. During the time of the Moriscos, the seigneurs were infamous for permitting their ostensibly Christian vassals to practice Islam and for protecting them from the Inquisition. The Mudejars also seem to have benefited from their lords' religious tolerance, even if at a price. For most Mudejars the religious freedom thus secured was sufficient compensation for the heavier burden of seigneurial dues.
Not surprisingly, the centers of Islamic learning in Valencia, such as they existed, were for the most part located in rural villages, not in urban morerías . Of the twenty-five Mudejars who journeyed to Almería, Tunis, Oran, and Granada for the purpose of studying the Arabic language and Islamic law (see table 19), only five came from urban morerías —four from Játiva and one from Castellón. The others all came from seigneurial lands—Ondara, Cuartell, Artana, Mascarell, Valldig-
na, Benilloba, the Vall de Uxó, and so on. Barceló Torres, intimating the cultural inferiority of the urban morerías , notes that of the 270 Mudejar and Morisco Arabic documents she has found, only nine were drawn up in the morería of Valencia. It is indicative of this state of affairs that Çahat Coret of the Foya de Buñol, who "applied himself diligently to Agarene letters," was appointed faqih[*] of Valencia, after the aljama had failed to find anyone in the morería sufficiently learned to fill the post.
It appears, then, that the Mudejars' Muslim identity was nurtured both through the unobstructed public worship of Islam, a freedom they
secured by their choice of residence, and through the maintenance of and participation in a literate Arabic culture. Clearly, the latter was needed to sustain the former. Even a minimal level of popular religious awareness necessitated the mediation of learned men (c ulama[*] ') who could read and interpret the Qur'an[*] for the faithful (the Arabic dialect spoken by Mudejars was different from the classical language of the Qur'an). Beyond that, men conversant in jurisprudence (fiqh ) and all that entailed—a knowledge of the Qur'an and of the customs of Muhammad and his companions (Sunnah ) as set down in the traditions (hadith[*] )—were needed to administer justice in the Islamic courts, either as qadi[*] or as faqih[*] , and to see to it that the community lived as much as possible within the framework of the Shariah. Taking into account the Mudejars' situation as a minority enclave composed primarily of farmers and artisans, the grooming of even a small group of culama[*] ' required a determined and sustained effort. Mudejar acquisition of the necessary cultic and legal knowledge was in itself a considerable achievement. The social and intellectual environment was unpropitious for the creation of original scholarly works.
Arabic instruction given to Mudejar children in local schools perpetuated this rudimentary but essential Arabic culture. The thirteenth-century capitulations had granted the basic privilege of maintaining schools to the Mudejars. The Muslims inhabiting the new morería of Orihuela (formed in 1446, but lasting only until 1451) were allowed "to have a schoolmaster." The morería of Valencia also had a school, at least until 1455. Documentation from Fernando's reign contains references to schools operating in Ondara, Oliva, and Valldigna. Perhaps Çahat Coret of the Foya de Buñol began his studies of "Agarene letters" in his hometown. Since the Mudejars were able to give at least an elementary Arabic education to their children in Valencia, one may infer that the Mudejars who took the trouble to travel to Granada or North Africa for study did so not merely "to learn to read and write Moorish," as the travel licenses state, but to pursue more advanced studies, particularly in jurisprudence. Tunis and Almeria were both well equipped to meet the academic needs of the aspiring Mudejar faqih[*] .
It is difficult to know whether there were schools for more advanced studies in Valencia, although it seems that the Mudejars possessed a sufficient amount of learned Arabic works to have allowed for at least the informal meeting of erudite culama[*] ' with students eager to learn. Juan Andres, the convert from Játiva, recounted that his father, a faqih[*] , had taught him jurisprudence. Barceló Torres's search for the bits of Arabic literature surviving in Valencia reveals that fifteenth-century Mudejars had access to Qur'ans, hadith literature, devotional works,
and legal works. Also, in 1450 a faqih[*] of Paterna brought back from Cairo a treatise on trigonometry, in which the use of an astronomical instrument is explained. The most impressive information on Mudejar higher learning comes, surprisingly, from the kingdom of Aragon. The letter of a student to a faqih in Belchite reveals the existence of a madrasah (school) in Zaragoza as late as 1494. There the student in question studied theology, and medicine from the Qanun[*] of Ibn Sina[*] (Avicenna). Considering that such a school still functioned in Aragon, where the Muslims' fluency in Arabic was much less than that of their brethren in Valencia—although perhaps not as minimal as was once thought —it would seem that similar centers of advanced study must have existed in Valencia as well. It is doubtful that every Valencian faqih had the opportunity to travel to Islamic lands for study; some were probably purely local products. Moreover, there were Mudejar physicians and surgeons in Valencia, and these professions required a certain amount of learning, perhaps in the classical Arabic medical texts. Juçeff Alatar, a surgeon of Valencia, was granted a royal license to practice after administering to a Christian knight and passing the examination given by a Christian "master in medicine."
The Mudejars frequently utilized their Arabic literacy in a far more mundane fashion in the writing of letters and contracts for official and private business. The extant Arabic documentation contains records of tax payment, and letters to and from local amin s[*] concerning the collection of taxes and debts from Muslim vassals or judicial procedure against them. Much of this correspondence was between amin s and royal bailiffs, which indicates the functioning and interpenetration of two levels of bureaucracy: the all-encompassing royal Romance-Latin administration and the local Mudejar Arabic administration manned by amin s, qadi s[*] , and faqih s. It has already been demonstrated how the two bureaucracies interrelated in the matter of the Crown's taxation of Mudejar inheritances (chap. 4). The Christian authorities' recognition of Arabic documents as valid evidence in litigation and as contractually binding in business transactions, even those between Muslims and Christians, gave Arabic an "official" status in the kingdom of Valencia. For instance, when passing sentence in favor of Fatima Bisquey, who claimed that she owned half of a house given to her as bridewealth (sadaq[*] ) by her husband, against the opposing claimant, the merchant Berthomeu Pinos, the bailiff general pointed out that the decisive evidence was "an act of acidach (sadaq[*] ) and/or marriage contract—exhibited in the trial on behalf of the said Fatima—received by the qadi[*] and/or faqih[*] Mahomat ben Abdulaziz Alcari on the date of 11 March 892 of the Moorish calendar." Muslims bound themselves to pay debts to Christian creditors by acknowledging their debts in Arabic
documents. In an Arabic document written in his own hand, Ubaydal Donzell confessed, "I, Ubaydal Donzell, recognize that I owe to you, Manuel Bou, eighteen and one-half pounds, which are for spices and alum."
The cultivation of Arabic for higher intellectual pursuits—Qur'anic[*] study, fiqh , medicine, and so on—for the drawing up of legal instruments of various sorts—marriage contracts, letters of debt, and tax records—and for daily parlance lent the Mudejars a common ethnic identity and group consciousness on the basis of language alone. Their knowledge of Arabic allowed them to participate in the intellectual life of the wider Islamic world, just as their understanding of Romance enabled them to function more efficiently in Valencia's Christian society. The Mudejars' use of Romance, however, was far more occasional, employed only when they desired or needed to communicate with Christians. Otherwise, Arabic was an effective social and intellectual barrier between Valencia's Muslim and Christian communities. Indeed, the Mudejars' use of Arabic sometimes aroused Christian suspicions. When Muslim slaves escaped from their masters, any Mudejar who had been seen speaking with the slave in Arabic was considered a prime suspect as an accessory to the crime. The Christians assumed that the Mudejars' choice of language defined their sympathies and guided their actions as persuasively as did their religious faith. There was much truth in this assumption. Since Arabic was the language of the Qur'an[*] , literally the word of God dictated to Muhammad, its use by the Mudejars had a special spiritual significance, and therefore contributed to their perception of themselves as Muslims. The veneration of the Arabic language itself explains the Aragonese and Castilian Mudejars' and Moriscos' writing of aljamiado literature (Romance written in Arabic script) as a means of strengthening their Muslim identity. It also explains why the Christian authorities decided to prohibit the Valencian Moriscos' teaching of Arabic to their children as a means of effecting their true conversion to Christianity.
Social structure, language, communal and judicial autonomy, ties of kinship and commerce within Valencia and with their coreligionists in the dar[*]al-Islam[*] —all contributed to the Mudejars' distinct religioethnic identity and to their perception of themselves as a single body united in stark cultural opposition to Christian society. Still, the body required animation and direction, a sense of purpose particularly Islamic. This was provided by the faqih s[*] . They functioned in the Mudejar social body as spiritual cadres, infusing its individual communal cells with a commitment to Islam and, by virtue of their grounding in a common intellectual tradition and world view, binding those cells together in a unity of religious purpose. As the local fonts of religious and legal knowledge, the
jurists were eminently suited for this task. By offering their legal opinions and resolving disputes on the basis of the Shariah, they ensured that it remained the lofty standard against which Mudejars evaluated their own conduct and by which they endeavored to regulate their lives.
The plea of the newly converted Moriscos in their negotiations with Carlos I in 1526 reflects the great esteem in which the faqih s[*] were held by the kingdom's Muslim populace. The Moriscos informed the king that in the days before the conversions, "when the call to prayer was made in the mosques," the Muslims of the kingdom used the rents from those properties bequeathed by the pious to the mosques to pay the salary of the faqih s, "who have consumed their whole life in studying and knowing the Moorish law and have not been concerned with other offices." The Moriscos went on to request that a portion of the rents pertaining to the new Morisco churches, formerly mosques, continue to be reserved for the support of the baptized jurists. The Morisco faqihs —and they are still referred to as alfaqins in the sixteenth-century documentation—continued throughout the sixteenth century to form the core of Morisco resistance to the official Christian program of religious and social assimilation.
The aforementioned Morisco request reveals important information about the Mudejar jurists. It is clear that they devoted their entire lives to the study of Islamic law and, presumably, of its foundations, the Qur'an[*] and the Sunnah . Because the study of the jurists ensured the continuity of Islam as a living religious and intellectual tradition, the Mudejars deemed it an essential activity, so essential that they used the pious endowments (waqf ) bequeathed by the faithful to the mosques to support the jurists. Furthermore, the jurists were supported in such a way that they would not need to bother themselves with any labor other than that properly religious and legal. It is important to note that in Islam there were neither priests nor an ecclesiastical hierarchy for whom financial support was institutionalized, as was the case with the Catholic Church. The Mudejars' support of the faqih s was made possible by the will of the community, a local adaptation to a situation in which Islam had long been deprived of public primacy.
Despite the faqih 's key role in the life of the Mudejar community, the documentation provides, unfortunately, very little information about him. The reason for this is that the faqih 's sphere of activity—the mosque, the madrasah , the Islamic court—was very rarely impinged on by the Christian world. Matters concerning Muslims alone and not affecting the public life of the kingdom had no importance for the king and his officials. As a result, it is the amin[*] , the fiscal and juridical intermediary between Muslim and Christian worlds, who appears most often in the
documentation. The activities of the faqih[*] held as little interest for the Christians as did the Muslims' theological views.
The primary role of the faqih was that of jurisconsult, acting either as counsellor or as arbitrator in litigations between Muslims. Ageg b. Çaat Ageg of Alcira paid 10s to the faqih of Villalonga for having counseled him in his dispute with Abraym Xativi. A faqih of Ondara traveled to Ribarroja in order to "treat with and reconcile a Moor and a Mooress, husband and wife, who wanted to separate." The faqih also taught in the local school, a task for which his years of study had well prepared him.
Also, as the Moriscos stated in 1526, the faqih s "were serving in the mosques," undoubtedly as preachers. Regarding the content of their sermons, the only information comes indirectly from the allusions made by the nobility when, in 1502, they beseeched Fernando not to convert their Muslim vassals. It seems reasonable to assert that the sermons of the jurists comprised primarily instruction in the basic tenets and precepts of Islam and positive exhortation to conduct oneself accordingly. As a consequence of their teaching, the lords stated, "among them [the Mudejars] each one defends the said sect [of Islam] and has worked and works [to the end] that the Moor may be a good Moor." More interesting is a type of sermon more negative in tone, which constituted a defense of Islam through a disparagement of Christianity. The nobles offered an illuminating explanation of why the Mudejars were "beside themselves" with fear that the Inquisition would proceed against them all:
they [the Mudejars] say that ... none of them could be excused [from prosecution by the Inquisition] because publicly they have had and have in the present kingdom their mosques and their faqih s, who publicly admonish them that the sect of Mahomat is better than the law of the Christians and that all [Christians] end in this damnation.
By emphasizing the threat of eternal damnation, the jurists hoped to discourage potential Muslim apostates who might be toying with the idea of baptism for worldly reasons. This kind of preaching may be interpreted as a reaction to the pressures exerted by an increasingly militant Spanish Church and to the threatening pervasiveness of Christian culture. The tragic end of the Spanish Jews and Conversos, and the incipient movements of the Inquisition against Islam, could hardly have failed to impress upon the faqih s the necessity of a defensive anti-Christian posture.
The contemporary struggle between Christian and Islamic states did
not fail to influence the direction of the faqih s[*] ' activism. The jurists understood what implications the conquest of Granada might have for the future of Islam in the Iberian peninsula, in terms of both the morale of the Mudejar populace and the Mudejars' treatment by the Catholic Monarchs. Consequently, the jurists' activity, particularly their preaching, took on a markedly political tone. It was they who collected in the morerías funds for the aid of the beleaguered Nasrid sultan. Moreover, the king was informed:
the said Moors and the faqih s of the said morerías since the time of this enterprise [the war against Granada] have ordered a certain prayer and they make that [prayer] continually in their hours [of prayer], [the prayer] containing, in effect, that God should exalt the said king of Granada and that He should destroy us [King Fernando] and all our people.
While the efforts of Mudejar jurists could hardly have altered the course of political events, they nevertheless succeeded admirably in strengthening the commitment of their congregations to Islam. This commitment is evinced in the very low rate of Mudejar apostasy. One document offers a rare glimpse of Mudejar sensitivity in matters of faith, an area of life where Christian interference was not easily endured. When royal officials made the mistake of entering a mosque in Ondara in order to apprehend a condemned Muslim criminal, the reaction of the congregation was one of violent indignation. "The Moors, amin s[*] , jurates [adelantats ], and all the people" hurled "stones and ... the tiles from the roofing, and with lances and crossbows wishing and working to damage you [the lieutenant governor] and your ministers, made a great resistance against you, perturbing you and preventing the capture of the one convicted."
The success of the faqih s in overcoming intracommunal and intercommunal factionalism and imparting to each community a sense of commitment to the common cause of Islam was furthered by two factors: the communication between those possessed of religious and legal knowledge, and the foundation of the jurists' status on terms different from those which determined the prestige of other community members. Even though each faqih belonged to a particular community, the faqih s did not exist in a state of intellectual isolation, instructing their congregations and offering legal opinions without consideration of the opinions and perhaps greater knowledge of their learned fellows in other places. On the contrary, their role as the transmitters of a common tradition and their very similar intellectual formation—all having been educated in Granada, the Maghrib, and Valencia—facilitated consultation among the learned and, indeed, advised it, if they were to
maintain a consistent orthodox standard. The activities of the faqih[*] Abdalla, originally a captive from Tripoli, suggest a network of communication and consultation among the Muslim judges and jurists of the kingdom. While in Valencia, Abdalla met the faqih of Manises, and they discussed Islamic law. The latter then invited him to dinner in Manises. He was also a friend of the qadi[*] of Benaguacil and lodged in his home. In Ribarroja Abdalla acted as marriage counselor to an unhappy couple. He taught school in Ondara, Oliva, and other places, and while in Oliva he conferred with the faqih and "read in the said morería ." More interesting still, he and the faqih of Paterna exchanged Arabic books. Abdalla's career was probably somewhat more peripatetic than that of most jurists, since he had to wander about collecting alms to repay the aljama of Ondara for having ransomed him. Nevertheless, Abdalla was able to "go among the faqih s of the present kingdom begging for the love of God," because there were established channels of communication among the learned, and because he himself was "a man of knowledge."
The career of Abdalla also demonstrates that the Mudejars on the whole respected and heeded the opinions of learned and holy men. Abdalla was known by Muslims throughout the kingdom and was reputed to lead the life of a saint. The qadi of Játiva, the kingdom's largest morería , related why he and the aljama wished to make Abdalla their jurist. Abdalla, the qadi pointed out, "is a very good Moor and ... leader of prayers [oracioner ]," so much so that after the death of the former faqih of Játiva, Abdalla, owing to his "good fame, life, and knowledge," was the unanimous choice to succeed him.
Clearly, the prestige of Abdalla, a foreigner and technically a slave, and of men like him in the eyes of the Mudejar community, rested neither on wealth nor on family backing; rather, their status and influence, both local and, in the case of Abdalla, kingdom-wide, derived from their knowledge of religious and legal tradition and from the holiness of their lives. This is suggested in two other cases mentioned above: the intervention of a faqih from Villalonga as legal counselor in a litigation between Muslims in distant Alcira, and the appointment of a Muslim of the Foya de Buñol as faqih of Valencia on the basis of his diligent studies alone. Put in another way, the jurists were able to rise above the petty feuding between Mudejar families and villages because their way of life, financially supported by the community, removed them from the competition for honor, wealth, and political power. Their opinion was heeded because they were nonpartisan and had no stakes in that competition. It is probable that the jurists were able to attenuate the intensity of local feuding by acting as legal counselors and arbitrators between disputants. Their preaching was persuasive because it was an expression
of the knowledge and piety that so few possessed. The jurists were able to appeal to the Mudejars as Muslims on a level of consciousness unrelated to mundane local concerns. Because the jurists themselves had a scholarly network of sorts and a certain consensus of opinion regarding the Mudejar community's needs, they preached a similar message. Their message, that of Muslim resistance to Christian assimilative pressure, had efficacy and resonance because, on one hand, they themselves were dispersed throughout the kingdom's Muslim population, local products closely tied to their people, while on the other hand, they possessed vital knowledge that raised them above the mass of Mudejars in an overarching network of religious leadership.
For reasons beyond the control of Valencia's faqih s[*] , the Muslims of the kingdom were to spend their final years in the peninsula as unwilling Christians. As has been seen, the chain of events that led to the Mudejars' conversion began with the fall of Granada. This signal and seemingly conclusive event in the long and bloody peninsular struggle between Islam and Christianity had an unforeseen and somewhat ironic consequence. For the Mudejars of Valencia it resulted in a cultural windfall that would help them in the difficult days ahead.
When Fernando settled conquered Granadan Muslims in Valencia and promoted the sale of Maghriban and Granadan prisoners of war within the kingdom, he was not only helping himself by increasing royal revenues but also unconsciously contributing to the Mudejars' Muslim identity and group solidarity. The influx of numerous Muslim captives—hundreds from Málaga alone—elicited from the Mudejars considerable cooperative effort on behalf of their Muslim fellows. Mudejar communities collectively ransomed Muslims and, in a seemingly organized fashion, provided assistance to runaway slaves. More important still was the type of Muslim brought into the kingdom through Christian conquest and piracy. These Muslim captives and settlers, unaccustomed to Christian rule and little affected by the acculturative impact of long-term coexistence with Christians, were in all likelihood more steadfast in their commitment to their ancestral faith. Among the new arrivals were men of learning. There were physicians from Granada, jurists and readers of the Qur'an[*] from both Granada and the Maghrib, and a Sufi mystic from the Maghrib. True, it is not known what became of these men, although the career of the faqih Abdalla of Tripoli, a captive known throughout the kingdom for his learning and piety, is, if not typical, suggestive. In this regard, a puzzling but interesting comment was made by some Christians about Abdalla. When the Christian hostess of a hostel and some Muslims lodging there introduced Abdalla to some Christian guests as a faqih , the Christians remarked,
apparently in jest, "he is black and he could be a faqih[*] ." Given the similarity between Iberian Muslims and Christians in terms of skin color, the reference to Abdalla's darker coloration as if it were part of a widespread stereotype of Valencia's faqih s hints at a perhaps more general phenomenon of Mudejar religious leaders with Maghriban origins. In any case, the social organization of Mudejar society would have facilitated the integration of Granadan and Maghriban Muslims, both erudite men and less extraordinary folk. Thus, Mudejar society was strangely reinvigorated as a result of the Monarchs' war against Islam. While the conquest of Granada ushered in the tragedy of the Moriscos, it also ensured that the Christian authorities of Valencia would have more formidable opponents in their struggle to eradicate Islam from the kingdom. Islam survived in Valencia not as a fossilized remnant of thirteenth-century Almohad glory, but as a resilient and adaptive society, steeled by its social structure and inspired by its faqih s.

Humans aren't the only ones who like fatty foods - bearded vultures do, too. A study by Antoni Margalida from the Bearded Vulture Study and Protection Group in El Pont de Suert, Spain, has found that the bearded vulture will discard less energy-dense bones and choose only the bones containing the highest fat content both for its consumption and delivery to its young. His findings will be published this week in the Springer journal Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology.
The bearded vulture is the only vertebrate with a bone-dominated diet and can ingest bones up to 28 cm (11 inches) long and up to 4 cm (1 inches) wide. This makes sound ecological sense because due to their high fat content, mammal bones actually have a higher energy content than muscle tissue. To aid ingestion or transportation, the bearded vulture breaks up large bones on rocky surfaces, known as 'ossuaries', throwing the bones down from the air until they break up into small enough pieces to be swallowed or carried. Bearded vultures are one of the few species of vulture who do not feed their young by regurgitation but transport prey remains to the nest in their feet and bills.
Margalida chose to study bearded vultures living in the mountains of the Pyrenees in Spain. It is a harsh environment and the author believes this contributes to the bearded vultures' high energy requirement leading them to choose smaller, more energy dense bones. This way they ensure that the energy consumed is greater than the energy expended in obtaining the food. As well as energy density, he also wanted to study whether larger bones were discounted as being too difficult to transport and swallow.
As he had expected, bones left in the feeding stations and ossuaries, which had not been selected by the bearded vultures, had a lower content of oleic acid than those bones which had been selected. This would imply that nutritive content had a greater impact on choice than bone size.
|Contact: Joan Robinson|

A spectacular night launch from Cape Canaveral marked the beginning of the almost seven-year journey of the Cassini-Huygens mission to the ringed planet Saturn and its icy moons.
After a decade of preparations, a Titan IVb, NASA’s most powerful launch vehicle, first brought the spacecraft into an orbit around Earth, and then boosted it with a Centaur upper stage in order to bring it into its complicated trajectory through the inner Solar System. Two close flybys of Venus and one each of Earth and, around the turn of the year 2001, of Jupiter, accelerated Cassini-Huygens to its ultimate cruising speed.
On 1 July 2004, the mission entered into orbit around Saturn. On 25 December 2004, Cassini released the European probe Huygens, which landed on Saturn’s moon Titan on 14 January 2005. The Cassini orbiter will be circling Saturn until at least 2010.

Easy Magic Tricks for Scouts
> > > Triple Prizes < < <
piece of paper
- Write 1089 on the paper without showing anyone, fold it, and place it on the table in plain view.
- Give someone a piece of paper and pencil.
- Tell them to write down any 3 digit number that uses 3 different numerals in the middle of the paper. Not 111 or 202 or 330 where the same numeral is used more than once.
- Tell him to reverse the number. If the number is larger, write it above the first one. If smaller, write it below.
- Subtract the smaller from the larger.
- If the resulting number has 2 digits, fill in ahead of it with a zero.
- Reverse the number and write it below the bottom number.
- Add the bottom two numbers.
- Unfold your paper and ask if it matches their result - 1089!
Guessing the Coins
- Give the penny and nickel to a friend.
- Turn your back and tell him to hold one coin in each hand.
- Say that you want him to focus on the coins and mathematics is the best way to get his mind in gear.
- Ask him to multiply the coin in the right hand by 2 and to say 'OK' when he has the answer.
- Ask him to multiply the coin in the left hand by 17 and to say 'OK' when he has the answer. If it took about the same amount of time for each, then the nickel is in the right hand since 1x17 is easy to compute. If the 2nd one was much slower, then the nickel is in the left hand.
The next time you do the trick, use different numbers like 13 or 19.
- Give your friend these instructions:
- Think of any number from one to 10.
- Multiply it by 9. [Pause while they do this]
- If it's a two-digit number, add them together.
- Now, subtract 5 from the number in your head. [Pause again]
- Now, think of the letter in the alphabet that corresponds with the number you are thinking about. For instance, if you are thinking of the number 1, it would be "A". Number 2 would be "B". 3 is "C", and so on.
- Now, think of a country that starts with the letter you're thinking of.
- Spell the country in your head. [Pause here]
- Think about the second letter in that country's name. Now, quickly think of an animal who's name begins with that letter.[Pause here]
- Now, think of the animal's color.
- [Pause and concentrate] That's funny... this can't be right... there ARE no gray elephants in Denmark!
Add to 15
paper and pencil
- Write your answer (15) on a slip of paper, fold it, and lay it on the table.
- Give your fiend the paper and pencil.
- Ask him to draw a Tic-Tac-Toe board.
- Ask him to write down the numerals 1 to 9 in order in the diagram. 1,2,3 on top. 4,5,6 middle. 7,8,9 on bottom.
- Have him circle any numeral in the first row.
- Have him circle any numberal in the second row that is not in the same column as the first one circled.
- Have him circle the numeral in the bottom row that is in the column with no circled numerals.
- Have him add up the circled numbers.
- Have him unfold your answer - 15!
Jump the Coin
- Bet your friend that he will not be able to jump over this coin when you set it down.
- Have him stand with his arms stright down at his sides and then place the coin on top of his head.
- If he complains that you tricked him, then give him another chance - put the coin in the very corner of the room.
Guess the Color
4 pieces of paper - 3 inch square
red, blue, and green markers
- Put a red spot on one piece of paper, blue on another, green the third.
- On the back of the red paper, write in small neat printing - "YOU CHOSE RED"
- On the envelope where the stamp would go, write "YOU CHOSE BLUE" - not too big so you can cover it with your thumb.
- On the 4th piece of paper, write "YOU CHOSE GREEN", fold it, and put it in the envelope.
- Put the 3 colored papers in the envelope and now the trick is ready.
- Pull the envelope out of your bag covering the writing with your fingers and lay it front down on the table.
- Slide the 3 colored papers out and lay them in a line on the table with the colors facing up.
- Ask a friend to think of one of the colors. Really concentrate on it.
- Say Kalamazoo and then ask him to tell you the color he chose.
- If he says "BLUE", put the papers back into the envelope, fold the flap over to close it and then hold up the front and have your friend read what is written there.
- If he says "RED", turn over the Green, then Blue, then Red papers and have him read what is written.
- If he says "GREEN", pick up the envelop, and spread it open so he can see the paper inside. Ask him to take it and read what is on it as you pick up the papers and put them away.
- Immediately retrieve the materials and put them away before they can be inspected. Do not do the same trick twice.
Find the Card
deck of cards
- Separate the deck so all reds are together and all blacks are together. Place the reds on top of the blacks.
- Fan out the deck face down on the table making just the bottom half of it spread out and the top half still piled. This will encourage the person to take a black card.
- Tell him to look at his card and show it to his buddies.
- While he is checking out his card, stack the deck back together.
- When he is ready, fan the deck again, this time trying to keep the bottom half stacked and fanning the top half.
- Have him slip his card into the deck wherever he wants.
- Stack the deck and ask him to cut the deck once.
- Stack the deck after the cut and ask someone else to cut it also.
- You can have it cut quite a few times without much chance of it going wrong.
- When ready, pick up the deck and look through it for a single card that is a different color from those around it. This is the card.
The Best Card Trick Ever
This is the card trick I learned in 6th grade and have used it ever since. It's easy but very entertaining for those that have never seen it before. And, it takes awhile to figure out.
deck of cards
- Count 21 cards off the top of the deck and give them to your friend.
- Ask him to shuffle and cut them as much as he wants. Tell him this is his only chance to touch the cards so he needs to do a good job.
- Have him give you the stack of cards face-down when he is finished.
- Deal the cards face-up into 3 columns of 7 cards each with each card in a column overlapping the one under it so they are easy to scoop into a stack keeping the cards in order. Put the rest of the deck aside.
- Point to each column telling everyone this is column 1, column 2, and column 3 from left to right.
- Ask your friend to select in his mind one card. Have him tell a friend if he wants.
- Have him tell you if the card is in column 1, 2, or 3.
- Whichever column he chooses, stack up each column and put his chosen column between the other two to create one large stack. At this point, you know his card is between the 7th and 15th cards.
- Now, lay the cards out in 3 columns again just like the start. The important thing to remember is to lay the cards out by row from left to right! This arranges them correctly.
- Ask which column the card is in now and repeat the stacking and column creation.
- Ask which column the card is in. At this point, you know the card is the middle card in the chosen column! Believe me. :-)
- When you recreate the stack putting his column in the center, his card is now the 11th card. The next part is the fun part of the trick.
- Deal out the cards into 4 card stars facedown. You will make 5 stars with 4 cards and the last one will have a 5th card in the center on top. As you deal out the cards, count them in your head so when you lay down card number 11, you know right where his card lays.
- Ask him to point (do NOT touch or the magic will evaporate) to 2 piles of cards. If he points to the pile his card is in, then swipe away the other piles. Otherwise, swipe away the piles he pointed to.
- Repeat asking him to point to 1 pile. Take away the pile or piles that do not contain his card.
- You may have to do it a 3rd time until there is just one pile left.
- Spread the cards apart a bit and have him point to 2 cards. Remove either the ones he pointed to or the others, leaving his chosen card behind.
- Repeat until only his card is left.
- Just sit there and wait for him to ask, or take all the other cards and shuffle them back into the deck and get up and go get a drink, or think of some other dramatic way to flip the card over.
How Many Cards Moved?
deck of cards
- Retrieve these cards of any mixture of suits - A, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Jack or Joker
- Arrange the 11 cards on the top of the deck as 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, A, J, 10, 9, 8, 7 with the 6 on the very top.
- Deal the top 11 cards from the prepared deck face-down into a row on the table going from left to right so the 6 is on the far left and the 7 is on the far right.
- Explain that you want your friend to move as many cards as he wants from his left to right, one at a time, while you turn your back.
- After he has moved the cards, turn back around and turn over the 7th card from your left. That number is the number of cards he moved! If it is the Jack, he tried to fool you by not moving any cards or by moving all of them.
deck of cards
- Separate a deck into two piles, those whose printed numeral has a ROUND top ( 2 6 8 9 10 Q ) and those whose printed numeral has a FLAT top ( 3 4 5 7 J K A )
- Put these two piles back together into one deck. It looks mixed up, but isn't really. It helps if you have the Ace of Spades as the bottom card for the Flat top group so it is easy to find in the middle of the deck.
- Divide the deck in half, giving each half to a friend. (this is where having the Ace of Spades as the center card helps.)
- Turn your back and ask them to each shuffle and cut their own decks as much as they like and let you know when they are finished.
- When they are ready, tell them to fan out their decks and pull one card from the other person's deck.
- Tell them to look at the card and then insert it anywhere into their own deck.
- If they would like, shuffle and cut their own decks as much as they'd like and tell you when they are done.
- When they are ready, turn around and have them give you their decks. Put the two decks together into one.
- Fan out the cards in your hand looking for the ROUND top number in among the flat tops and the FLAT top number among the round tops.
- Pull out the two cards and toss them on the table.
deck of cards
- Pull out all the Kings, Queens, and Jacks from the deck.
- Arrange them into 2 piles - the KH, JC, KS, QD, QC, JD in one pile, the QH, KC, JH, QS, KD in the other, The JS is not needed.
- Put the 5-card deck on your lap under the table and the 6-card deck on the table.
- Deal the 6 cards face-up into a row on the table.
- Have someone choose in their mind one of the cards and have him tell a friend.
- Ask them to really concentrate on that card as you collect all the cards into a deck and bring it under the table.
- While the cards are under the table, concentrate very hard, making mental contact with the two friends.
- Switch decks with the 5-card deck and deal out all the cards, stating that their card has disappeared!
- (of course ALL the cards have disappeared so it doesn't matter which card they chose. Don't do it twice!)
deck of cards
- Pull out all the Aces into a pile, all the Kings into another, and the Queens, and Jacks. Tell the audience that these are the King, Queen, Jack, and Ace patrols getting ready for a campout.
- Flip the piles over and stack them one on top of the other into one deck.
- Say that the patrols decided to mix it up and have one member of each patrol in a tent. Lay down (face-up) each Ace in a row. Then, on top of the Aces, flip the Kings, then the Queens, then the Jacks. Now, there are 4 piles with one of each card.
- Flip the piles over and say the Scoutmaster called lights out and its time to sleep.
- Pick up each pile, making a stack of the cards.
- Cut the cards 3 or 4 times saying that during the night the scouts tossed and turned and had a terrible time sleeping.
- Deal the cards one at a time into 4 piles (face-down) and say, "But morning finally came ..."
- Flip the piles of cards over as you say, "and they all woke to find themselves back with their own patrol!"
Finding the Aces
deck of cards
- Pull out all the Aces into a pile face-up.
- Shuffle the remaining cards and deal the top 3 cards into a row face-down.
- Deal out the remainder of the cards face-down onto these 3 cards until there are 14 on each. Then, put one more card each on the middle and right piles and put the remaining 4 cards face-down to the right as a 4th pile.
- You have 4 piles and the 4 Aces.
- Have a friend take the first pile and shuffle it all he wants, then put it back face-down.
- Have him place the top Ace face-down on top of the first pile.
- Have the friend shuffle the 2nd pile all he wants and then put it back.
- Have him take any number of cards from the 2nd pile and place them on top of the 1st pile.
- Have him place the 2nd Ace face-down on the 2nd pile.
- Have him shuffle the third pile, replace it, and take any number of cards and put them on the 2nd pile.
- Have him place the 3rd Ace face-down on the 3rd pile.
- Have him shuffle the 4th pile and place it face-down on top of the 3rd pile.
- When he is finished, place the 3rd pile on the 2nd, then the 2nd on the 1st. You still have the 4th Ace sitting aside.
- Now announce that even though the Aces are well hidden throughout the deck, you will bring them to the top.
- Deal 2 cards face-down next to each other. Continue dealing face-down alternating between the two piles until all cards are dealt.
- Pick up the left-hand deck and deal the top card from it onto the remaining deck. Deal the next card down where the left-hand deck had been. Continue dealing out cards alternating between the two piles.
- Repeat picking up the left-hand deck and dealing out the cards, first card on top of the remaining deck, until there are only 3 cards left.
- Dramatically show that these are the 3 missing Aces!
A Number from 1 to 9
deck of cards
- Give the deck of cards to a friend and turn your back to him.
- Let him shuffle the deck as much as he'd like.
- Tell him to think of a number from 1 to 9 and then deal out that many cards face-down into a pile quietly so you can not hear them.
- Tell him to now search through the rest of the deck for a card that matches the number he chose. So, if he chose 5, find the 5C or 5H or 5D or 5S.
- Once he finds his card, tell him to put the deck face-down on the table and put his card face down on top of it.
- Then, place his dealt out pile on top of the deck.
- Now, have him deal off each card from the top of the deck face-up on the table and announce the name of each card as it is dealt.
- Starting at zero, mentally count the cards he deals. When he calls a card that matches the number in your head, that is his card, so memorize it. If he calls 5 Spades when you are at '5', then that is his card.
- Let him continue to deal out cards up to 10 and then ask him to stop.
- Tell him his card was the 5 of Spades, or whichever matched.
- Then, turn around for the applause. :-)
More Cub Scout Information to Use:
Cub Scouts - information about the cub scout program
Bobcat Info - any grade
Tiger Info - 1st grade
Wolf Info - 2nd grade
Bear Info - 3rd grade
Webelos - 4th and 5th grade
To help make your Cub Scouts of America program the best it can be, use these pages to find good stuff:
Monthly Cub Scout Themes
Activities - find age-appropriate, advancement-supporting activites for Cub Scouts
Games - den or pack games just right for 1st through 3rd graders
Projects - fun projects for cub scouts to use to do a good turn
Recipes - easy recipes
Cub Scout Skits - skits that Cub Scouts love
Songs - songs to liven up a cub scout den or pack meeting
Stories - choose stories that cub scouts will enjoy and understand
Awards - see what awards are available to all cub scouts
Cub Scout Academics & Sports - extra recognition opportunities
Pinewood Derby - advice for the big race
Yukon Jack on Starting post
Yvonne N P on Outdoor Activity award
New Advanc Chair on Merit Badges
Mark Kirkendall on Project Search
Tamara on Project Search
Kim on Uniforms
Dwight S on Outdoor Activity award
Dawn on Webelos Super NOVA award
Anna R. on Arrow of Light
Contest - Ask a Question - Add Content - scout software
This site is not officially associated with the Boy Scouts of America

What is a raw food diet?
The recent boon in backyard and community gardens, farmers markets, and availability of organic foods offer evidence of increased consumer demand for more wholesome, sustainable, and environmentally-friendly foods. This growing trend to eat more fruits and vegetables and less processed foods combined with Americans’ favorite past-time of adopting restrictive, hard-to-maintain, weight-loss inducing diets at the turn of the New Year, creates a perfect storm for a surge in interest and popularity of the raw food diet.
The raw food diet emphasizes intake of foods in their natural, unprocessed, uncooked form. Raw fruits and vegetables top the list of food options. Add to that a mix of beans and legumes and it seems like you should have a nutrient-dense, filling, and weight-loss inducing “perfect diet.” After all, each of these foods is packed with nutrients, light on calories, and high in fiber. In a nation known for massive portion sizes and ready access to highly processed foods, this way of eating should be a welcome change. But a closer looks reveals a more complicated, expensive, and questionable eating plan.
Beyond promoting every nutrition expert’s mantra of “eat more vegetables and fruits”, the standard raw food diet is true to its name – most, if not all, foods need to be “raw”. This means dieters are prohibited from cooking food. The only allowed “cooking” is dehydration which requires a special machine that blows hot air through the food and increases the temperature to no more than 118F. Since grains are indigestible raw and the diet prohibits boiling them, raw grains must be soaked overnight or allowed to sprout before consumption. Proponents argue that avoiding heat exposure keeps food enzymes intact leading to better digestion; however, this argument does not physiologically hold merit since the acid in the stomach inactivates the enzymes once the food is eaten. Plus, the body already makes all the enzymes it needs to digest and absorb food. Since food can’t be cooked, meat and most animal products are off limits (unless a dieter chooses to put the risk of severe foodborne illness aside and eat raw meat). For this reason, the raw food diet typically resembles a vegan diet that is free of processed and cooked food. Most raw food devotees also consume a mostly organic foods to avoid exposure to pesticides and other synthetic chemicals. The extent of adherence to these tenants is pending the level of commitment to adopting a “pure” version of the diet.
Few published studies evaluate risks and benefits of a raw food diet. The limited available research suggests a variety of potential benefits such as improved “bad” LDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels (Koebnick et al, 2005), weight loss (Koebnick et al, 1999), improvement in fibromyalgia symptoms (Donaldson et al, 2001) and decreased blood pressure (Douglass et al, 1985) as well as potential harmful effects including decreased “good” HDL cholesterol (Koebnick et al, 2005), decreased bone density (Fontana et al, 2005), and vitamin B12 deficiency (due to elimination of animal products) (Koebnick et al, 2005). Extremists who do not adopt the vegan approach but instead consume raw animal products risk serious foodborne illness. Plus, as with any restrictive diet, strict adherence to a raw food diet is challenging. But it turns out that this imperfect adherence may be its major redeeming feature. After all, an overall concerted effort to eat a healthier, more wholesome, mostly plant-based diet should be the goal of any dietary overhaul.
- Koebnick C., et al. (2005). Long-term consumption of a raw food diet is associated with favorable serum LDL cholesterol and triglycerides but also with elevated plasma homocysteine and low serum HDL cholesterol in humans. Journal of Nutrition, 135, 10, 2372-2378.
- Koebnick C., et al (1999). Consequences of a Long-Term Raw Food Diet on Body Weight and Menstruation: Results of a Questionnaire Survey. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism, 43, 2, 69-79.
- Donaldson M.S., et al (2001). Fibromyalgia syndrome improved using a mostly raw vegetarian diet: an observational study. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 2001, 1, 7. Douglass, J. M., et al (1985). Effects of a raw food diet on hypertension and obesity. Southern Medical Journal, 78, 7, 841-844.
- Fontana L., et al (2005). Low bone mass in subjects on a long-term raw vegetarian diet. Archives of Internal Medicine, 165, 684-689.

Alexander Todorov, an associate professor of psychology and public affairs at Princeton University, has designed a new freshman seminar, "The Face: The Forces That Shape How We Perceive Others," to teach students about humans' specialized mechanisms for processing, recognizing and socially assessing faces — as well as the biases that lead to errors in perception.
Photo by Denise Applewhite
Academic journeys begin with freshman seminars
Princeton's newest undergraduates are setting out on a path of inquiry and discovery this fall through the University's freshman seminar program.
Freshman seminars enable students to build strong relationships with faculty members and classmates in a close-knit intellectual setting. Many students cite the freshman seminar as one of the highlights of their time at Princeton.
Among other subjects, freshmen this fall are exploring forces that shape facial perception, issues related to global environmental change, experiences with sound and music, and notions of individuality. A total of 480 freshmen are enrolled this semester in 35 seminars, each of which is hosted by a residential college. Class discussions often continue in informal settings both on and off campus, through meals, guest lectures, field trips and other activities.
This is part of a series of features highlighting freshman seminars offered at Princeton this semester. Other features:
Exploring the science and nuance of facial perception
Posted October 31, 2011; 12:00 p.m.
Professor Alexander Todorov showed the students in his freshman seminar a series of images of the same blurry face — with the hint that it was a non-American political leader — as it would appear from 200, 100 and 50 meters. At 50 meters, only one student figured out who it was — Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
Todorov's next example illustrated how facial recognition can have serious consequences. He showed the students a photo of Darrell Edwards, a man who is currently fighting a 1999 murder conviction based in part on eyewitness testimony. Then Todorov demonstrated what Edwards would have looked like to the eyewitness who said she saw him the night of the murder from 271 feet (about 82 meters) away, without her prescription eyeglasses. The shocked students laughed at the blurry photograph.
"The jurors didn't have that reaction. They thought it was actually possible from this distance to identify a person," Todorov said. "The fact of the matter is, from this distance, you can't identify a person. You might be able to identify somebody who's a highly familiar person based on their gait and other things, but in this case an unfamiliar person, the eyewitness, didn't know who Darrell is."
In class, Todorov shows students photos of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi from 200, 100 and 50 meters away to demonstrate how distance and familiarity influence facial recognition. (Images courtesy of Geoffrey Loftus)
Todorov, an associate professor of psychology and public affairs at Princeton University, uses a wide array of visual aids in his course "The Face: The Forces That Shape How We Perceive Others," which is being offered for the first time this fall. His 15 students are learning about humans' specialized mechanisms for processing, recognizing and socially assessing faces — as well as the biases that lead to errors in perception.
"My ambition is to make them excited about psychology and cognitive science. It's a specialized topic but has something for everybody," Todorov said, with applications from eyewitness testimony to electoral outcomes to Hollywood casting of "attractive" performers.
Freshman Miriam Pearsall had enjoyed her psychology class in high school and was drawn immediately to the seminar topic.
"I was especially attracted to the fact that face perception has such great relevance in understanding society and the world as a whole," Pearsall said. "I love that this freshman seminar allows me to voluntarily delve in the topic. Then I can discuss what I've learned with people who are just as interested in the topic as I am."
Todorov (left) incorporates material related to topics ranging from criminal justice to Hollywood casting to show students, such as Victor Hsiao (center) and David Dohan (right), the many applications of facial perception. (Photo by Denise Applewhite)
Todorov began the course, which is designated as the Shelly and Michael Kassen '76 Freshman Seminar in the Life Sciences, by explaining how the brain develops facial representations. Students learned about unique ways the brain processes faces unlike other objects almost from birth; the fact that it takes less than 50 milliseconds of glimpsing a face to extract informatino about its familiarity, age, sex, race and attractiveness; and parts of the brain such as the fusiform face area dedicated to face processing.
The class also visited the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) lab in Green Hall on campus where Todorov, with the help of a graduate student, demonstrated how brain scans are done, and students received a primer on analyzing the scans.
For Sarah Cuneo, the trip to the fMRI lab has been the highlight of the class up to this point.
"It was amazing to be able to see for ourselves all the techniques and results that we had been reading about for weeks — there's definitely a huge difference between understanding something in theory and seeing it in practice," Cuneo said.
The classroom discussions have also shed light on and enlivened some of the more technical material, she said.
"The small size of our freshman seminar gives the class an incredibly collaborative feel; we get to really engage our classmates in discussion, which means that we legitimately learn from each other," Cuneo said. "A lot of what we do in class is discussion of scientific journal articles, and it's great to have an active debate about the results. Different people in the class will offer several perspectives on the significance of any given study, and that means we get to examine a hypothesis from a variety of angles."
From left, freshmen Miriam Pearsall, Jacob Simon and Sarah Cuneo are among the 15 students who engage in lively discussions about the nuances of facial perception and recognition in Todorov's seminar. (Photo by Denise Applewhite)
Todorov's lesson on eyewitnesses was meant to contrast sophisticated perception skills for familiar faces with the factors in play when observing unfamiliar faces. Scientists have not yet discovered why and how the processes for perceiving familiar and unfamiliar faces are so different.
In the same class as the discussion on Edwards, students picked out Michael Jordan, Bill Clinton and Jay Leno in a slide of blurry faces. Yet earlier, students had performed poorly on a hypothetical lineup. When they were asked to match the photo of a suspect to one of 10 mug shots, the students came to a consensus on one man and were surprised when Todorov told them that none of the 10 was the suspect.
"It makes sense that we would be less able to identify unfamiliar faces, but I didn't think we would be as bad as we were. We were really, really bad," Cuneo said.
Students suggested many factors and biases that could lead to a misidentification — witnesses may be agitated or motivated to find a culprit, or they may compare the faces in the lineup to each other rather than their own memory, or expect some variation between their memory and the lineup, among other factors.
"We can use these insights for better police procedures for not arresting innocent people," Todorov said, adding that New Jersey is one of the states that changed its lineup procedures to reflect research in this area and remove some sources of bias. "The point is not to dismiss this sort of evidence but to look at it with a critical eye."
From left, students Abidjan Walker, Kelly Kremer and Tova Bergsten listen attentively as Todorov (right) explains how overconfidence plays a role in facial perception. (Photo by Denise Applewhite)
In his own lab, Todorov studies the social perceptions of faces, and he will focus on related issues for the rest of the semester. Some discussion topics include how people perceive emotional expressions, how people form first impressions, how they assess personality traits such as trustworthiness, and what makes a face attractive.
"It's great to explain the basic concepts, and I also learn from teaching them," Todorov said. "I don't really want the students to be face experts, but if they get excited about the right way to do an experiment, how to test a theory, how to rule out alternative explanations and get excited about psychology, that's great."

Small group learning
is a useful educational
approach. The group
work has to be carefully planned and frequently requires a facilitator
to ensure group progress. In addition the group function and the learning that takes place needs to be assessed and evaluated. The material learned is just as important as the group's ability to achieve a common goal
. Facilitatory skills are important and require the teacher
to ensure that both the task is achieved and the group functioning is maintained.
Small group learning allows students to develop problem solving, interpersonal, presentational and communication skills, all beneficial to life outside the classroom. These generic skills are difficult to develop in isolation and require feedback and interaction with other individuals.
Small group communication

During slavery, some slaves were given a day of rest while others were forced to continue work. In some parts of the country, slaves were given a yule log to burn in the big house. As long as the log burned, they were granted rest during the holiday. Sometimes the log would burn until the New Year.
During the days of rest, some slaves would hold quilting bees, with both men and women. It was also sometimes tradition that slaves could keep the money they earned for the sale of goods during the holiday.
While the holiday season was meant to be a joyous occasion, slaves that worked inside the house would be worked hardest during Christmas, as many owners and their families would host Christmas parties.
The Christmas holiday would also be a time that some slaveowners gave wine and alcoholic beverages to their slaves. With business still in mind, the effects of alcohol were something unknown to many slaves, and most would overindulge. The increased lounge and slumber would discourage runaways during the break. This was a theory held by abolitionist Frederick Douglass. Despite, some slaves were given passes to see nearby relatives during Christmas time and allowed visitors from neighboring plantations.
Along with the traditions of the Christmas holiday in Western culture, slaves had dancing and singing in the slave quarters. Sometimes the white masters would come to the slave quarters to watch the celebration. Parents would give children small, homemade tokens.
Another celebration known as Jonkonnu, or a Christmas masquerade, took place on the plantations. It was a basic traveling show in which the slave would put on makeshift costumes and go from house to house to perform for gifts and money.
The traditions of Christmas during slavery were tools for celebration in the harshest working and living conditions for blacks. While the whites in the “big house” were being showered with gifts and feast, they shared a portion of those with their captives, and at the same time, used the opportunity to convince slaves that slavery was their best option for living peacefully and safely among the masters.

Oh my, do I love this video.
But seriously. Don’t do this.
Thanks to Approximately Normal for the find.
I have to show that to my students – or maybe not – do you think they would be insulted?
Mary, it could definitely go south on you. Proceed with caution! I could imagine it being a way to open a conversation about how the class is going for students. As in, “I want to show you something funny, and the I want to talk about it. This video shows a math class going very very badly and I don’t want our class to be like this. So let’s talk afterwards about ways I can keep you from feeling like the student in this video…”
With a class of future teachers, we can use the video to discuss teaching and learning of math in the abstract. But in a College Algebra or Math Center course, we would have to be super careful.
Wow–on the other hand it’s hard to know what to do when you’re the teacher in that sort of situation. So what do you do?
I know some of the answers, of course–acting it out, using manipulatives, making it a more concrete problem (if you had 6 cookies and you ate one, how many would be left), using smaller numbers (if you had 3 cookies and you ate one, how many would be left), and those are the sorts of things I’d hope that my future teachers would come up with if we discussed this video, but even with those mental tools, you do come across students where nothing works.
I was working with a third grader some time ago, for whom the answer to taking away 0 was almost always 0 (what’s 4-0? 0!). Changing the wording and acting it out would work temporarily (though rarely the first time–asking if you had 4 cookies and you ate none of them how many would you have left generally resulted in the answer 0), but the next day we were generally back to 4-0=0, and I was never sure if anything was working or if it was all illusory. So–what should you do? If you have answers (or good resources) I’d love to have them. You never know when you might run into a child where you need a new trick.
Thanks for the thoughtful comment, LSquared.
Let me make explicit what I see in this video.
First of all, I was finishing up a morning’s worth of writing Talking Math with Your Kids posts. So I wasn’t coming at the video so much from the teacher perspective as the parent one.
Either way, though, I suppose I have the same perspective. Namely: The learner’s ideas are nowhere present in this conversation. The goal in the interaction is getting to a right answer to a particular problem. The things you mention, LSquared, are all means to that end. Manipulatives, contextualizing the problem, etc. All positive moves.
But I would argue for putting the learners’ ideas at the center of the lesson (in school) or conversation (at home). My main resource for this is always going to be Children’s Mathematics, from the Cognitively Guided Instruction research project (CGI). CGI begins with the premise that children have mathematical ideas that do not match those of adults very well, but that these ideas have predictable structure and can be used to help kids move forward.
So I would say that what to do involves digging for kids’ ideas. Not giving them strategies so much as asking to find out what they do know. Then build on that.
Or we can just laugh along with the video and marvel at what a crazy and complex profession we’ve chosen for ourselves. I’m cool doing that too.
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( Log Out / Change )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( Log Out / Change )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( Log Out / Change )
Connecting to %s
Notify me of follow-up comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
RSS - Posts
RSS - Comments
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Join 1,051 other followers
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.

The UNESCO World Heritage Convention provides a unique framework for securing the conservation of over 200 of the world’s most important natural areas, recognized as being of Outstanding Universal Value.
The identification of these Sites through the Convention is a direct response to the need to preserve and restore globally outstanding protected areas based on criteria that include scale of natural habitats, intactness of ecological processes, viability of populations of rare species, and rarity, notwithstanding aesthetic appeal which almost always accompany these natural wonders.
The Convention provides a unique platform for developing and sharing best-practice, and can act as a barometer of global protected area performance.
IUCN advises UNESCO on natural World Heritage Sites.This means that IUCN:
- Evaluates sites nominated for inscription on the World Heritage List
- Monitors the conservation state of existing natural sites, working with a global network of member organizations
- Trains and strengthens capacity of site managers, governments, scientists and local communities

PURPOSE: To easily input a three-dimensional picture to a computer by reading positions of picture elements of the reflecting light beams from its two-dimensional picture and inputting the positions to the three-dimensional coordinates of the three-dimensional surface or the surface of the solid body after conversion.
CONSTITUTION: When a solid body 3 is scanned in such a way that an origin O of three-dimensional coordinates is fixed inside the solid body 3 and light beams on a straight line are projected on the radial direction parallel to the XZ-plane by means of a 45°-inclined revolving mirror which successively makes relative movement along the fixed straight line of '0' on Z-axis and a fixed value on X-axis, one sides of plane mirrors 2 and 2' are respectively made coincident the fixed straight line of '0' on X-axis and a fixed value on Z-axis and the inclinations of the mirrors 2 and 2' are adjusted so that the optical beam can reflect in the direction parallel to Z-axis on one sides of the mirrors. Therefore, the optical beam never scans the area where the X-coordinate becomes negative and the terminating ends of the line images of the reflecting light always stay on the YZ-plane. Thus a solid body which is '0' or a positive value on X-coordinate can be scanned over its entire surface. Therefore, a three-dimensional picture can be inputted to a computer easily.
|WO/2011/111506||METHOD FOR DRIVING CIRCUIT AND METHOD FOR DRIVING DISPLAY DEVICE|
|JP2013003629||IMAGE FORMING DEVICE AND CONTROL PROGRAM|
|JP2008242758||PATTERN PRINT TRANSPARENT SHEET|

Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History of Physics
Dover Publications (1961)
|Abstract||This history of physics focuses on the question, "How do bodies act on one another across space?" The variety of answers illustrates the function of fundamental analogies or models in physics as well as the role of so-called unobservable entities. Forces and Fields presents an in-depth look at the science of ancient Greece, and it examines the influence of antique philosophy on seventeenth-century thought. Additional topics embrace many elements of modern physics--the empirical basis of quantum mechanics, wave-particle duality and the uncertainty principle, and the action-at-a-distance theory of Wheeler and Feynman. 1961 ed.|
|Keywords||Physics History Physics Philosophy Force and energy|
|Buy the book||$11.15 new (45% off) $11.15 used (45% off) $15.60 direct from Amazon (22% off) Amazon page|
|Call number||QC7.H62 2005|
|External links||This entry has no external links. Add one.|
|Through your library||Configure|
Similar books and articles
Peter Kosso (1998). Appearance and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics. Oxford University Press.
Karl Rogers (2005). On the Metaphysics of Experimental Physics. Palgrave Macmillan.
Lawrence Sklar (1992). Philosophy of Physics. Westview Press.
Edward G. Ruestow (1973). Physics at Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Leiden: Philosophy and the New Science in the University. The Hague,Nijhoff.
Gordon Fraser (ed.) (2009). The New Physics for the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge University Press.
C. W. Kilmister (1994/2005). Eddington's Search for a Fundamental Theory: A Key to the Universe. Cambridge University Press.
Paul M. Clark (ed.) (1981). Modern Physics and Problems of Knowledge. Open University Press.
José M. Sanchez-Ron (1985). Physics and Philosophy: Action at a Distance in 20th Century Physics. Theoria 1 (2):439-459.
Edward Rosen (1962). Book Review:Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History of Physics Mary Brenda Hesse. [REVIEW] Philosophy of Science 29 (4):434-.
Mary B. Hesse (1962/1970). Forces and Fields. Westport, Conn.,Greenwood Press.
Sorry, there are not enough data points to plot this chart.
Added to index2009-01-28
Recent downloads (6 months)0
How can I increase my downloads?

ASIA NEWS NETWORK
WE KNOW ASIA BETTER
Publication Date : 01-02-2013
Golden goose floats used in the funeral procession are based on the hamsa
The golden goose floats used in the funeral procession for the late King Father Friday are based on the hamsa, the Sanskrit name for an aquatic bird in Hindu mythology.
At least three such floats were seen as the procession got underway. One carried Venerables Bou Kry and Tep Vong, the heads of the two main Buddhist sects in Cambodia.
A second carried National Assembly President Heng Samrin, Prime Minister Hun Sen, Royal Palace Minister Kong Samol and Senate Vice President Say Chhum.
A third carried members of the royal family, who appeared to be grandchildren of the former king.
Brahma, the god of creation, is typically represented with four faces and four arms mounted on a hamsa.
Hamsas are still used as symbols and for decoration in India and Southeast Asia, especially in Myanmar, where they appear on some regional flags, and Thailand, where the mythical bird is featured on the royal barge.
In Cambodia, where the goose is known as a hang, the hamsa is found in the logo of the Ministry of Economy and Finance as well as Acleda Bank.
The Chu Nath Dictionary defines the hang as a wild goose distinguished by a long neck and wings that are usually white but sometimes yellow. It says the geese are known for flying long distances at extremely high altitudes and swimming on water to find food.
Some believe the mythical creature to be based on the bar-headed goose (Anser indicus) which migrates south across the Himalayas to spend the winters in India.
A paper published by America's National Academy of Sciences in 2011 said this species makes one of the highest trans-mountain migrations in the world.
The birds typically cross the Himalayas in a single day, climbing between 4,000 and 6,000 metres in seven to eight hours. According to the paper, they can support minimum climb rates of 0.8 to 2.2 kilometres an hour.
According to Birdlife International, the bar-headed goose mainly breeds in China, Afghanistan and Mongolia. Non-breeding populations are found in Pakistan and India as well as Bangladesh, Myanmar and Thailand.

Summary: With substance and style, Samaha helps students master the complexities of the criminal justice system and the law. His presentation engages students in active learning and encourages them to understand, rather than memorize. That students truly enjoy reading CRIMINAL JUSTICE is a testament to Samaha's skill as a teacher, writer, and scholar. Featuring a critical-thinking approach that encourages students to explore all sides of the criminal justice system, this thor ...show moreough introduction draws students in and encourages them to learn more. Samaha provides students with an important and realistic understanding of the formal and informal dimensions of criminal justice: from there, they have the ideal framework to learn about the sociology, politics, economics, and law of the discipline. ...show lessEdition/Copyright: 7TH 06
More prices and sellers below.

Conservation and Research projects
At Wellington Zoo we support a number of conservation and research projects both at the Zoo (ex situ) and in the field (in situ).
Grand and Otago skinks
Wellington Zoo, in partnership with the Department of Conservation (DoC), is housing and caring for three pairs each of grand and Otago skinks – some of New Zealand’s rarest lizards. We hope that these skinks will breed to create a larger insurance population to conserve them for years to come. Our partnership with DoC allows Zoo staff to gain valuable field experience by monitoring wild skinks in their natural North Otago habitat.
Grand and Otago skinks are two of New Zealand’s rarest reptiles, estimated to remain in just 8% of their natural habitat and under increasing threat from predators. With no further protection in the wild, these species are predicted to become extinct within the next 10 years. The Department of Conservation has been working on grand and Otago skink recovery in Central Otago for several years. The decision was made in early 2007 to create an insurance population of both species in captivity, to ensure survival of genetic diversity of the skinks into the next decade.
Wellington Bush Builders
Bush Builders is a hands-on environmental education programme coordinated by Wellington Zoo, with the aim of connecting urban students with their local flora and fauna.
The programme uses the living world to excite and empower students to take positive action in their own communities. Bush Builders accesses a range of Wellington Zoo resources to create and in-depth learning experience for local students at curriculum levels 1 -8.
The Bush Builders programme develops environmental literacy over three distinct phases including a launch at Wellington Zoo and biological surveying at school. Schools can also choose to use Bush Builders as a Primary CREST Award activity.
To talk with us about how your school can get involved with Bush Builders contact firstname.lastname@example.org
Brothers Island tuatara
For just over six years, Wellington Zoo was the guardian of 53 Brothers Island tuatara – the rarest sub-species of New Zealand’s living dinosaur. Incubated and hatched at Victoria University of Wellington, the tuatara came to us in 2001 and were raised and cared for, off display, at the Zoo. In October 2007 the tuatara were released onto Long Island in the Marlborough Sounds, in conjunction with Victoria University, the Department of Conservation and Te Ati Awa, in hopes of establishing an insurance population for this rare reptile.
Other research projects undertaken by Zoo staff include:
- Kakapo vaccination 05/06: veterinary project: DoC asked us to help with the vaccination of all kakapo after an outbreak of Erysipelotrix rhusiopathiae (bacterium). Wellington Zoo staff went to Codfish Island and vaccinated and took blood samples from over 20 birds.
- Kea respiratory research 04/05: veterinary research project: First publication of chronic cystic pulmonary disease in a Kea together with Dr B Gartrell of Massey University. CT scans at Pacific Radiology helped make the diagnosis.
- New Zealand fur seal Jan 08: veterinary conservation project: Landcare Research asked us to perform the veterinary work on the Fur seals. 64 animals were caught and assessed by the vet team of the Zoo in January 2008.
- New Zealand sea lion 06 ongoing: veterinary conservation project: ongoing project with DoC in which we support them by providing the veterinary staff to anaesthetise sea lions and conduct health exams.
- Oral vaccination of exotic birds against salmonella strain May 08: Veterinary research: world first large scale vaccination of exotic birds with salmonella vaccine. Research trial into the efficacy of the vaccination by one of our vet residents.

Household Safety Checklist
In order to protect you and your family, a thorough safety check of every room in your home should be conducted on a regular basis. Unintentional accidents, injuries, and nontraumatic emergencies may be prevented and your family will be healthier and safer when you practice a little prevention.
The following checklist may be printed so it can be used for the inspection of your home.
___ Do not leave medications, toiletries, or other household products in drawers or on night stands.
___ To avoid accidental injuries or choking, keep penknives, nail files, scissors, and pocket change out of reach.
___ Install a smoke detector in the hallway outside of the bedrooms. Check and change the batteries regularly.
___ Make certain drapery cords and/or blind cords are well out of reach of children.
___ Make certain the crib mattress fits snugly.
___ Crib slats should be placed no wider than 2 and 3/8 inches apart.
___ Make certain the crib has been put together properly and is not missing screws or bolts to prevent it from collapsing.
___ Make certain there is a carpet or rug beneath the crib or changing table to soften the impact if an infant falls.
___ Make certain drapery cords and/or blind cords are well out of reach of children and cribs.
___ Remove all crib gyms, hanging toys, and decorations form a crib by the time a baby can raise up on hands and knees.
___ Make sure there is a safety belt on the infant changing table, and that it is used consistently and properly.
___ Make sure baby powder and lotions are out of a baby or child's reach. But, make sure the baby powder and lotions are within your reach, so you do not have to leave the infant to reach these items.
___ If your child can climb out of the crib, consider a youth bed with guard rails, or place the crib mattress on the floor.
___ Never leave small parts or pieces of a toy(s) in a child's room.
___ Make certain a night light is not near or touching drapes or the bedspread.
___ Never place a crib, playpen, or bed near a window.
___ Make certain window screens are securely in place, or that window guards are present to prevent a child from falling from a window.
___ Make certain there are plug protectors in the unused electrical outlets.
___ If there is a lid on the toy box, it should not be heavy, hinged, or lockable. Children may crawl inside and become trapped.
___ Put a nonskid bathmat on the floor and a nonskid mat or decals in the bathtub.
___ Protect all electrical outlets with ground fault circuit interrupters.
___ Store medicines, cosmetics, toiletries, and cleansers well out of reach of children.
___ When children are present, put child-resistant safety latches on all cabinets storing potentially harmful substances.
___ Store electrical appliances, such as hair dryers and curling irons, out of reach.
___ Always unplug such an appliance before leaving it unattended, no matter how briefly.
___ To avoid accidental scalding, make certain to set the water heater no higher than 120 degrees Fahreinheit (49 degrees Celsius).
___ Never leave a child or disabled person unattended in a bathtub, or in a bathroom where there is a tub, sink, or bucket containing water.
___ Keep toilet lids closed.
___ Do not store vitamins (or medications) on the kitchen table, counter top, or window sill.
___ Make certain knives, scissors, and other sharp utensils are out of reach.
___ Store dishwasher detergent and other cleaning supplies in their original containers and out of reach.
___ When children are present, install safety latches on cabinets and drawers within a child's reach.
___ Keep chairs and step stools away from counters and stoves.
___ Always turn pot handles inward when cooking on the stove. Use back burners whenever possible.
___ Keep the toaster out of the reach of toddlers.
___ Make certain appliance cords are not dangling, so they cannot be pulled from a counter.
___ Unplug appliance extension cords when not in use.
___ When children are present, use plug protectors for all unused wall outlets.
___ If a child is in a highchair, make sure it is sturdy and has a seat belt with a strap between the legs.
___ Keep a working fire extinguisher in your kitchen.
___ Keep houseplants out of reach of children. A number of plants are poisonous.
___ Make certain television sets and other heavy items are secure so they cannot be tipped over.
___ Remove unnecessary extension cords.
___ Put plug protectors in any unused electrical outlets when children are present.
___ Move tables and other objects with sharp edges away from the center of a room, especially if there are toddlers or disabled persons in the home.
___ Place protective material on sharp furniture edges.
___ Keep drapery and blind cords out of reach of children and/or disabled persons.
___ Secure area rugs to prevent falls and slips.
___ Keep stairs and walkways clear of snow, wet leaves, or other debris.
___ Repair cracks or chips in cement sidewalks and stairs.
___ Make certain railings, gates, and fences are secure and in good repair.
___ Keep garbage cans covered.
___ There should be a fence with a locked gate between the house and the backyard swimming pool.
___ Garden tools and lawn equipment should be securely stored.
___ Play equipment, such as swing sets and garden furniture, should be properly anchored and assembled. Check regularly for rust, splintered wood, or cracks.
___ If you have a fireplace, wood burning stove, or other heat source, place barriers around it to avoid accidental burns.
___ Inspect and clean chimneys and stovepipes regularly.
___ Make certain hazardous items, such as bug sprays, cleaners, auto care products, and weed killers, are secured and stored in their original containers in the garage, utility room, or basement.
___ Place "Mr. Yuk" stickers on all hazardous items.
___ The first action when a person has ingested a toxic substance is to consult with the local poison control center at the universal telephone number in the United States--800-222-1222.
___ Make certain plastic bags, broken pieces of toys, buttons, screws, and other choking or suffocation hazards are stored out of reach of children.
___ Post emergency telephone numbers near each telephone in your home.
___ When children are present, safety devices, such as gates, locks, and doorknob covers, should be in use at all stairways and exits in your home.
___ Make sure all indoor and outdoor stairways and entries are well-lighted and clear.
___ Make certain bathrooms and bedrooms can be unlocked from the outside.
___ Keep matches and lighters out of the reach of children and disabled persons.
___ A home should have two unobstructed exits, in case of fire or other emergency.
___ Check all electrical cords to make sure they are not cracked or frayed.
___ Make certain outlets or extension cords are not overloaded.
___ It is best not to use space heaters. If they are used, make sure they are in safe condition. Never plug them into an extension cord. Do not place them near drapes or furnishings.
___ Paint or wallpaper should not be chipping or peeling.
___ Keep purses, backpacks, and other portable storage bags out of a child's reach. They may contain medicines, penknives, hard candies, and other items that may harm children.

T2T || FAQ || Ask T2T || Teachers' Lounge || Browse || Search || Thanks || About T2T
View entire discussion
I have a person in my class who has trouble communicating with math language. Recently I taught my class fractions. He has a hard time trying to do word problems with fractions. He understands how to change improper fractions to mixed fractions, fractions to decimals etc. He has trouble with word problems. What activities can I do to support the areas he has trouble with and not interrupt the whole class's learning pace?
Math Forum Home || The Math Library || Quick Reference || Math Forum Search

The Rand Corporation has released a new report "Strategies for Advancing Preschool Adequacy and Efficiency in California."
Among the reports key findings:
- Disadvantaged children, who are more likely to start school behind and stay behind, are also the least likely to attend high-quality preschool programs.
- California's underfunded preschool system serves only half the eligible three- and four-year-olds, and the system does not reward higher-quality providers.
- Increasing access to high-quality preschool for disadvantaged children can narrow existing achievement gaps.
- In the short term, California can allocate existing resources more efficiently and provide infrastructure supports for raising quality in the future.
- In the longer term, new resources should be used to expand access to and raise the quality of preschool programs for those who can benefit most.

This 1914 fire aerial ladder truck was in service at the 1915 Panama-Pacific Exposition (world's fair) held in San Francisco to celebrate the completion of the Panama Canal.
It is a 1905 Cadillac with an original price tag of $950.00 from Detroit. It was restored and has been part of the museum for 35 years. The sign says only 4,029 of these vehicles were made and very few remain today.
Drum roll, please...
From what I read, early fire departments used baking soda and acid (vinegar) together to form carbon dioxide gas to extinguish fires; thus, the term "chemical" hose.
It was purchased for $4,345.00 in 1890, a lot of money back then, and used in the 1906 earthquake. The fire station collapsed, but the firemen dug out the engine and used it to fight fires for 2 straight days.

Build a solid foundation in science, formulation and product development—find out more!
Most Popular in:
Formulate This: Inverse Emulsions
By: Ken Klein, Cosmetech Labs
Posted: February 1, 2010, from the February 2010 issue of Cosmetics & Toiletries.
Editor’s note: Cosmetics & Toiletries presents "Formulate This,” a new column highlighting commonly asked formulating questions with answers provided by seasoned industry experts. This feature is designed to provide cosmetic chemists and formulators with ideas and advice to solve formulating challenges. To submit a question, e-mail FormulateThis@allured.com.
Question: I’m trying to understand cosmetic emulsion inversion. What actually happens inside the emulsion at the phase borders?
Answer: First, remember the HLB system. For ethoxylated emulsifiers, as the temperature increases, the HLB decreases--i.e., they switch from o/w emulsifiers at a low temperature to w/o emulsifiers at a high temperature. When an oil phase is added to a water phase, an o/w emulsion is formed.
As the temperature heats to 75°C, the HLBs of the o/w emulsifiers (ethoxylates) decrease and they orient to w/o. As the temperature is lowered, the HLB increases and there is a point at which the emulsifiers then orient to form an o/w emulsion (the Phase Inversion Temperature or PIT), resulting in an inverse emulsion.
From a theoretical standpoint (and in reality, too), to form an o/w emulsion, it is a good idea to first form a w/o emulsion and invert it into an o/w emulsion. The resulting resistant emulsion will have a narrow particle size distribution, and oftentimes a smaller average particle size, thus making it a more stable emulsion.

For many people, learning a language involves going to classes, doing homework, taking tests and trying to memorise vocabulary. Others try to teach themselves languages using similar techniques. These are all useful things to do, but won’t necessarily give you a fluency in the language. Conscious learning of a language using these methods tends to feel like hard work.
If you really want to become highly proficient in a language, you need to spend a lot of time immersed in it. To become good at speaking the language, for example, you need to find opportunities to use it with other people, ideally in situations where you have to use it, or at least try to say as much as you can without falling back on your native language. Listening to radio programmes, watching videos, films and TV programmes, reading books and other material, and writing it as often as you can are also good things to do. This may not feel like study, especially if they involves subjects and activities you really enjoy, but you will be absorbing and acquiring a lot of the language without realizing it.
Conscious learning and sub-conscious acquisition are both good ways to learn languages. You can probably make faster progress if you study a language consciously, but sub-conscious acquisition probably gives you a deeper knowledge of it. Combining the two together is even better.

All the evidence to date shows that value-added techniques are being employed responsibly
In one suburban school district, teachers across the system were ranked and evaluated according to the contribution they had made to student learning–based on a value-added analysis of state test results. When they were ranked again the next year, the results were very similar except for one teacher who moved from a top rank to a very low rank. When the school superintendent looked at the results, he immediately identified the teacher–her husband had died during the second year of rankings.
What does this anecdote illustrate? For starters, that value-added assessments can misidentify good and bad teachers–and that the discrepancies can be cleared up by local administrators. More important, however, was the fact that the findings were robust; teachers’ rankings were similar across three years of analysis. Moreover, these rankings were used to grant a standard reward to a top group of teachers, not to make fine distinctions in the amount of compensation that teachers received. In other words, the results of value-added analysis, when examined over a period of two or three years, were stable and were used in a way that respected the margin of error involved in using these statistical techniques.
Critics of value-added assessment tend to embrace the concept but don’t want the results gleaned from such analysis to be used for accountability purposes–and especially don’t want to use the results to reward or sanction teachers. But teachers are the dominant school input, in terms of both spending and impact on student learning. Excluding them essentially leaves the education system without accountability.
The main concern with value-added assessment is that the technique exacerbates the amount of random error involved in measuring student performance. The risk is that teachers and schools may be wrongfully rewarded or punished because value-added techniques either over- or underestimated their students’ learning gains. However, no intelligent users of standardized testing would make policy choices based on a single year’s result or small differences among schools and teachers. Texas, for example, rewards schools based on value-added achievement gains calculated using two-stage regression analysis. The state does not hand out awards based on decimal-point differences among schools; officials reward a previously set percentage of top-ranking schools. The point here is that most of the statistical objections to value-added measurements assume a misuse of the analysis. The statistical “noise” involved in measuring value-added should preclude decisions that are based on small, unreplicated analysis; it should not preclude decisions that are based on gross findings.
Confidence in gross findings can be developed by replication, by averaging results over several time periods, and by using several measures of the development of human capital–not tests alone, but also attendance rates, dropout rates, and promotion rates (a very high-quality assessment will track indicators of human capital such as post-secondary school earnings and higher-education outcomes as well). The richer the measures used, the less weight there is on the psychometric concerns involving test scores. The alternative is to rest teacher compensation on factors that have little to do with student learning. It is now well established, for example, that the number of degrees teachers possess and the number of hours teachers spend in education courses are unrelated to student learning. Put another way, an important criterion in the determination of a teacher’s salary does not have any bearing on the ability of the teacher to develop human capital. We know that because it has been replicated in many studies in many school districts, even though salary schedules have yet to reflect this information.
Critics often cite the difficulty of comparing the results of large and small schools and comparing one subject with another. It is essential in the debate over the usefulness of the value-added assessment approach that the unit of observation and the comparison group be specified. If, as has been the case in a number of places, the comparison group is all the teachers in a given grade in the school district–with, say, the top 15 percent of the 4th grade teachers receiving an award–what is the significance of a big or small school? The class is the unit, and class size tends to be uniform within a school district. At the high-school level, the comparison group is likely to be, for example, all history teachers or all science teachers across the district. The award-receiving group is a percentage of that comparison group, and it is not affected by the test scores in another subject.
If multiple factors are used for assessment, efforts to check on robustness are made, only extreme performances are rewarded or sanctioned, and comparison groups are selected carefully, the technical psychometric points raised by critics should not swamp the incentive and information benefits of performance-based compensation plans for teachers. If we are ready to determine reading programs, language labs, class sizes, and the use of computerized learning on the basis of value-added assessments, we should be ready to reward teachers using the same techniques.
There is already considerable evidence from several places–such as Tennessee and Florida, where value-added analysis has been used for accountability purposes–that low-achieving students are the main beneficiaries of the changes that occur when these techniques are implemented. When low-achieving students are taught the same body of knowledge over and over again, and when they are taught how to work under a time constraint, they benefit. Value-added assessment techniques reveal that information.
The Illusion of Transparency
Critics of value-added assessment say that it is just too complicated for teachers and the public to understand the results these systems will generate. In other words, the results will not be transparent. But if transparency is the criterion that trumps all other criteria, we would be compelled to use an assessment method that we know to be wrong. For example, there is no satisfactory way to make judgments about which method of teaching reading is superior–whole language or phonics–without factoring in the socioeconomic, school, and teacher characteristics of each of the groups of students in the experiment. Statistical controls must be used if the assessments of teachers, schools, or programs are to be accurate, even though very few educators understand the statistical principles and methods involved. I do not require a transparent understanding of the efficacy of the flu shot I take, nor do I require a transparent understanding of the operating characteristics of my car; I trust the experts on the techniques. So must it be in educational evaluation.
The problems with the use of value-added assessments, even for teachers, are greatly exaggerated, and the alternatives are simply untenable.
One proposed alternative is the use of one or more methods of subjective evaluation. Other teachers, students, and/or parents can be surveyed to make the judgments. Most of those surveys focus on whether respondents like the teacher, are happy in the classroom, or equally soft attributes. They do not really determine what kind of learning gains a certain teacher is eliciting relative to other teachers. Most people look back at their primary and secondary schooling and identify an extremely demanding teacher (whom they disliked at the time) as the one who made the biggest contribution to their educational development.
A second possibility is to set up a standard–some threshold–of student achievement as an absolute hurdle to define adequate performance. The problems with this are legion. How should the threshold be determined? Those who want to be rewarded set lower thresholds than those who watch budgets. The threshold becomes a major bargaining tool, quite divorced from the informed decisionmaking objective. What incentives for improvement are there for those who crossed the threshold?
Basically, subjective evaluation allows the information essential to the rational allocation of educational resources to be derived politically rather than scientifically.
The state of American public education has been deplored by critics for many years. The notion that student learning has remained somewhat stagnant over the past century, though the country has spent steadily more real resources on education, is a matter of profound concern. This surely indicates that we do not know a lot about what works and what doesn’t.
We need to know if we are to change the pattern. We must have calibrated results; we must use sophisticated statistical methods to interpret the data; we need to use multiple measures of performance; and we need to implement the analysis in ways that are appropriate to the quality of the information. And teachers, the most important school-controlled input into the educational process, cannot be exempt from this information-gathering activity. Our current unhappy results are consistent with the subjective and/or unsophisticated tools we use for assessing effectiveness and creating incentives.
-Anita A. Summers is a professor emeritus of public policy and management at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
Sign Up To Receive Notification
when the latest issue of Education Next is posted
In the meantime check the site regularly for new articles, blog postings, and reader comments

Monday, September 24, 2012 - 18:30 in Astronomy & Space
NASA's rover Curiosity touched a Martian rock with its robotic arm for the first time on Sept. 22, assessing what chemical elements are in the rock called "Jake Matijevic."
- Curiosity on Mars sits on rocks similar to those found in marshes in MexicoTue, 30 Oct 2012, 11:07:11 EDT
- How Martian winds make rocks walkThu, 8 Jan 2009, 14:01:08 EST
- MIT moves toward greener chemistryFri, 3 Sep 2010, 12:51:40 EDT
- Martian rock arrangement not alien handiworkWed, 7 Jan 2009, 13:17:55 EST
- ASU instrument on NASA rover helps identify outcrop of long-sought rare rock on MarsThu, 3 Jun 2010, 14:52:54 EDT

Ike Dike Proposed to Protect Texas Coast
One year after the Hurricane Ike's 20-foot storm surge devastated Galveston, Texas, and surrounding areas, local governments are in the midst of making a decision about the proposed "Ike Dike" - an expansion of the existing Galveston Seawall that would cost the federal government billions of dollars.
The Ike Dike, as proposed by Texas A&M University at Galveston professor William Merrell, would extend the existing seawall by over 50 miles and add floodgates that would close before an approaching hurricane (more details). The idea is based on the Delta Works, a series of dams and barriers that protect the southwest Netherlands from storm surge and coastal flooding.
Supporters suggest that these additions would prevent future damage to Galveston Bay and the Port of Houston, protecting the region's oil production and shipping industry, in addition to Galveston Island's residents, infrastructure and the Galveston National Laboratory, a high-security medical research facility that houses some of the most contagious diseases in the world. Given the estimated $32 billion in damages to the Houston-Galveston area already caused by Ike and the likelihood of another catastrophic hurricane and rising sea levels, the Ike Dike's $2 to 3 billion dollar price tag and ten year timeline could make the project a worthwhile investment.
Opponents voice concern that the proposed storm barrier would alter the fragile Gulf of Mexico ecosystem, cause more coastal erosion and offer no protection from hurricane-force winds, which contributed to damage during Ike. They argue that the region could take alternative actions and that the Ike Dike should not be considered a final solution, but rather one step toward protecting the coast.
The questions remain: if rising sea levels and strong hurricanes remain constant threats to the Gulf Coast, should development along the shoreline and on barrier islands continue? Would the Ike Dike prove to be a lasting solution or just a band-aid to the already-injured subtropical shoreline that will be susceptible to hurricanes indefinitely?
| September 9, 2009; 10:00 AM ET
Categories: Posegate, Tropical Weather
Save & Share: Previous: Forecast: Overcast, Cool & Damp Through Friday
Next: A Hot and Dry August for the Region
Posted by: nematode1 | September 9, 2009 11:55 AM | Report abuse
Posted by: Ann-CapitalWeatherGang | September 9, 2009 12:16 PM | Report abuse
Posted by: Jamie66 | September 9, 2009 12:30 PM | Report abuse
Posted by: VaTechBob | September 9, 2009 2:22 PM | Report abuse
Posted by: Ann-CapitalWeatherGang | September 9, 2009 6:50 PM | Report abuse
Posted by: Mr_Q | September 10, 2009 2:23 AM | Report abuse
Posted by: Mr_Q | September 10, 2009 11:34 AM | Report abuse
The comments to this entry are closed.

The fillings referred to as "silver" are actually a mixture of silver, tin, copper, and mercury, and are more properly called amalgam fillings. The silver, tin, and copper are provided in a powder form by various manufacturers, with silver being the major constituent (40 to 70 percent), and tin and copper constituting 4 to 33 percent each, depending on the manufacturer. This powder is then mixed rapidly with mercury in a special machine, usually by the dental assistant, yielding a liquid that is from 50 to 60 percent mercury. The filling material is then placed in the tooth and smoothed with various dental tools.
|DID YOU KNOW . . .
Mercury (Hg), sometimes known as quicksilver, is named for the speedy Roman god who served as messenger for the other gods. The silver-white chemical is the only common metal that is a liquid at room temperature. It is used in thermometers, barometers, and some batteries, as well as in dental amalgams.
Since the 1970s, there has been controversy in the dental profession regarding the safety of mercury as a filling material. Some dentists contend that no matter what the amount used in dental fillings, the mercury is toxic. At the same time, the American Dental Association (ADA) asserts that only a small percentage of individuals exhibit allergies to mercury, and that once mercury is mixed and hardened as a filling material, the percentage of individuals who are sensitive to it becomes even smaller.
While the ADA has maintained that mercury in amalgam is stable, various researchers have demonstrated that it is not. In 1970, dentist Wallace Johnson and others published the results of their research in Journal of the American Dental Association. The report indicated that "mercury, an essential element of dental amalgams, is not a stable material but one that vaporizes at ordinary temperatures." In 1985, the Journal of Dental Research published a report by dentists Murry Vimy and F.L. Lorscheider, who also claimed that mercury vapor is released from amalgam fillings. These researchers further stated that the vapor is then distributed throughout the body via the respiratory system, but accumulates mostly in the brain, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract. Some of the symptoms associated with mercury toxicity include a metallic taste in the mouth, severe headaches, dizziness, fatigue, weakness, depression, hair loss, memory loss, coma, and death. Furthermore, a natural balance of microorganisms in the body is upset by excess mercury in the gastrointestinal tract, and this imbalance may lead to candida.
In addition, the previously mentioned researchers have reported that when the metal comes in contact with saliva, there is a "battery effect" in which currents are generated, causing mercury molecules from the surface of the fillings to be released into the tissues.
Another negative report was published in the Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry in 1983. David Eggleston, a dentist in private practice and a researcher and professor at the University of Southern California School of Dentistry, indicated that when amalgam and nickel-based fillings are present, there is a reduction in the T-lymphocytes of the immune system. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that are the core of the body's immune system. Lymphocytes that circulate through the thymus gland are called T-lymphocytes (thymocytes). They recognize foreign invaders in the body and form antibodies against them. Eggleston concluded that the introduction of mercury into the body might weaken the immune system by reducing the number of T-lymphocytes.

UNICEF says Children's Lives Are Improving
But 20 years after the adoption of a treaty guaranteeing children's rights, hundreds of millions still go without basics like food and health care, and violence against children remains a global problem.
Last updated on: November 20, 2009 3:54 AM
It's 20 years since the United Nations adopted a treaty guaranteeing children's rights and now the U.N. says children's lives have been transformed during those two decades. But it says there's a lot still to be done - to this day hundreds of millions go without basics like food and health care and violence against children remains a global problem. Selah Hennessy brings us this report from London.
The United Nations Children's Fund, commonly known as UNICEF, released a special report to mark this 20th Anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
VOA spoke to the author of the report, David Anthony. He said globally the lives of children have improved over the last 20 years.
"During its era, we have seen tremendous progress in child survival and development," he said. "For example, on average 10,000 fewer children now die every day than they did in 1990 - that's something that saves countless of millions of lives over the years."
The report lists a series of positive statistics showing great leaps in children's quality of life. It says globally 84 percent of primary-school-age children are in class and the gender gap is narrowing. And important steps have been taken, it says, to protect children from serving as soldiers or being trafficked into prostitution.
But Anthony adds there is still a long way to go. He says as many as one billion children still live without basic necessities such as clean water and food. And he says more needs to be done in the fields of protection and participation - the right of all children to have their opinions taken into account.
These problems, Anthony says, are global.
"You find that violence is something that no society can say it's immune from," he said. "I think protection in particular, and participation, are things which the industrialized countries, and the richer countries, cannot feel any great superiority over the developing countries and the least developed countries."
More than 70 countries have adopted the convention's principles into their own legal codes. Only two countries in the world, Somalia and the United States, have not ratified the treaty. The U.S. has been slow to approve the Convention because of fears of government interference in family life.
Anthony says although the convention has the widest support of any human rights treaty, not all countries are implementing its basic principles.
"One of the main emphasis of this report has been implementation," he said. "Countries who ratify the treaties - who sign the treaties - then have an obligation to implement them and the symbolism I think of endorsement is most welcome but the more important thing is that all countries apply the principles that are embodied within the convention and to ensure that all of their children have their rights met."
The report says despite progress, 24,000 children under the age of five die every day from largely preventable causes. And it says 150 million children between five and 14 are engaged in child labor.

What Is a Virtual Tape Library
Last Updated: 09-01-2010 , Posted: 06-16-2006
Virtual tape is a concept that has been in the data center for many years. Originally introduced for IBM mainframes, it is now exploding in the open systems arena. VTLs are logically just like physical tape libraries: They logically appear and operate as physical tape devices including virtual tape drives, data cartridges, tape slots, barcode labels and robotic arms.
Traditional Tape SolutionsTraditional tape devices have a few problems: They are slow and the only way to solve that problem is to add more and more tape drives. Tape library robotics are prone to failure and the tape media itself is "delicate" and must be stored in a conditioned, secure environment.
To increase backup performance, backups can be multiplexed across multiple drives and tapes. This increases the odds of a failed backup due to a bad tape, a faulty drive or malfunctioning robotics.
Restores from tape are also time-consuming. Consider trying to recover a file that was part of a five-tape multiplexed backup. Each of the five tapes must be located in the library and loaded into tape drives. If the drives have tapes in them already, the tapes must be removed from the drives and moved to free slots before another tape may be loaded. Once the tapes are loaded, they must be advanced to where the file is and then, finally, the file can be read from tape. It can take many minutes just to start the recovery. If the tapes are not in the library, it can take many hours to recover a single file.
On the plus side, tape-based solutions are usually considered to be relatively inexpensive. But when the tape media is considered, the cost can skyrocket.
Some studies show that users will buy 30 times the amount of slots worth of tapes during the life of a library. For a medium-sized, 100-slot library, that's 3,000 tapes. LTO-3 tapes are currently in the $100 price range. Add the fact that extensive human intervention is required to manage and maintain a tape solution and they are not very inexpensive. It can cost a lot of money to be able to successfully backup your data 60 percent of the time.
Comparing the problems associated with tape solutions with a virtual tape solution shows how a VTL can change how a data center can be run.
A virtual tape library solution can perform 10-times tape speeds for backups. Speeding up the backups will greatly shrink the backup window, which allows servers to be backed up faster. With existing backups finishing quicker, second- and third-tier servers that have not been backed up in the past may now fit into the backup schedule.
Recoveries are also significantly faster using a VTL (typically much faster than the backup). A single file can be recovered from a VTL faster than most tape libraries can find and load a tape into a drive. Full backups that span multiple tapes (as apposed to multiplexed) will also recover very slowly compared to a VTL since after the data is read from one tape the next tape must be located and loaded compared to a VTL that just keeps streaming data from disk.
All virtual tape loads are immediate so there is virtually no delay when a new "tape" is "loaded." People who resort to multiplexing backups to increase the performance of the backup are usually shocked to discover that their recovery times will be about twice as long as the backup was.
Most virtual tape library solutions also contain RAID-protected storage that has redundant, hot-swap components (drives, power, cooling). Backups that use a VTL rarely fail because of a VTL failure. Recoveries will never fail due to a bad or lost tape.
VTLs are just not prone to the types of failures that a traditional tape library has. For example, a backup to disk will never fail because of a bad tape, broken tape drive or broken robotics.
The initial cost of a tape library can be less than the cost of a VTL. But when a three- or five-year cost-of-ownership is considered (tape media, failed backups, lost data due to failed recoveries, management costs, and so on) a VTL will be less expensive.
Also consider the lower cost of backup software. Some backup software is tiered based on the number of tape slots. By configuring a virtual library to have few slots, but very large "tapes," the software tier can be lowered. For backup software that is tiered on the number of tape drives, configure a virtual library with fewer "drives." Some backup software solutions are now adding a virtual tape library option that is priced based on the capacity of the library.
Today's virtual tape libraries range from a customer-supplied server with VTL software and separate disk to a completely productized solution where the server, software and disk are all bundled.
There are pros and cons for both extremes.
With an unbundled solution, the user gets to purchase each piece separately. The pieces include the VTL software, server, disk and potentially the SAN infrastructure. Unfortunately, the user must also purchase separate support agreements for the VTL software, server, disk and SAN infrastructure and each piece must be managed and monitored by the IT staff.
With a bundled solution, all the pieces are included, tightly integrated and guaranteed to work together. The solution is managed and monitored as one entity and support is covered by one contract.
With current bundled VTL solutions expanding to a petabyte or more, scaling the solutions is not an issue. Adding an additional VTLs for each petabyte of backup is acceptable for most environments. The only negative with a bundled solution is that it is bundled. Some people just do not like that. When it comes to backup, it is best to keep things simple so a bundled VTL solution is probably the best bet (there are not very many home-made tape libraries in production so why make your own VTL solution?).
Adding a virtual tape library into an existing tape environment will always improve the reliability of backups and recoveries. Even if a VTL is configured to backup only as fast as an existing library, the increase in performance for day-to-day data recovery makes the investment a no-brainer.
Add the robust data processing capabilities not available in physical tape libraries (e.g., replication, single-instance data storage) and a VTL can open the door for tremendous advances in tape backup methodology and revolutionize traditional operations.
Did You Know...
|Key Terms To Understanding VTL:
virtual tape library

International Women’s Day 2013
Every year the United Nations chooses a theme for that year’s International Women’s Day. This theme is something many organizations choose to build on, make their own, or change it completely. This year, 2013, I believe the UN has chosen a great theme: “A promise is a promise: Time for action to end violence against women.”
International Women’s Day has been celebrated since the early 1900s and is still thriving, and unfortunately necessary, today. We live in a country where the Violence Against Women Act comes up for reauthorization too often, with too much debate about its merits. Really, who could be against anything that aims to reduce violence against women?
Campaigning against violence against women does not diminish any pursuance of eliminating violence for all humans, but there is a particular reason why this must be a focus of the world at this time:
The United Nations General Assembly defines “violence against women” as “any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.” The 1993 Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women noted that this violence could be perpetrated by assailants of either gender, family members and even the “State” itself.
Women are often the victims of violence simply because they are women.
To end these horrific acts, it must be a decision made by our local communities and global society. We must prioritize a solution for all. What kind of world do we want our daughters, and sons, to grow up to inherit?
- Follow @womensday on twitter #womensday
- Network at facebook.com/internationalwomensday.
- Celebrate and understand women’s strength and through photographs.
- Take action with We Are Equals: Join the Big Inequality Debate. The Facebook App showing your 1950s life is interesting.
- Learn more about International Women’s Day.
- Share, share, share!
What will you do today to support women?
This post was written for the Global Team of 200, a highly specialized group of Mom Bloggers for Social Good members who focus on maternal health, children, hunger, and women and girls.

What does a price tell you?
Assume that you were going to purchase a GE Advantium 120 microwave oven on Sunday, August 12. Comparing Sears, Best Buy and Amazon’s sellers at 3 a.m., you would have seen, respectively, $899.99, 809.99 and 744.46. At Amazon’s website, the price changed to slightly more than $850 at 5 a.m., it dropped again to their $744.46 low several hours later and then back above $850 at 10 p.m. During that day, Sears kept the same price, Best Buy changed twice and Amazon, 9 times.
Call it dynamic pricing.
The story of dynamic pricing begins with airline deregulation in 1978. American Airlines (although some say Delta) was the first to realize that different classes of passengers were willing and able to pay different fares. Of course they could not ask if someone was planning a vacation or a business trip, but they could snag the business traveler by charging more if the flight was the next day. And so began what they called yield management. Spreading to hotels and cruises, rental car businesses and a host of others, yield management helped many firms increase revenue.
The dynamic pricing version of yield management has the same revenue enhancing goal. As you probably know, all sorts of goods like bicycles, jewelry and detergents are dynamically priced online. One baby clothes vendor changes his prices every 15 minutes because being cheaper than everyone else means he will top the list of price related search results.
But what does this mean? In a market economy, price is a source of information. Prices enable the supply side to assess productivity, to identify cost and to project profits. On the demand side, price can convey quality and affordability. With price changing frequently, the information flow increases.
Or, as one market participant commented, “The long term implication is that a price is no longer a price.”
My sources and other resources: A front page WSJ article, “Don’t Like This Price? Wait a Minute ” was interesting and had this fascinating graphic comparing price changes from Sears, Amazon and Best Buy. In addition, this academic article explains yield management while this more recent study looks at internet dynamic pricing.

System designed for household and neighborhood power generation
RICHLAND, Wash. – Individual homes and entire neighborhoods could be powered with a new, small-scale solid oxide fuel cell system that achieves up to 57 percent efficiency, significantly higher than the 30 to 50 percent efficiencies previously reported for other solid oxide fuel cell systems of its size, according to a study published in this month's issue of Journal of Power Sources.
The smaller system, developed at the Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, uses methane, the primary component of natural gas, as its fuel. The entire system was streamlined to make it more efficient and scalable by using PNNL-developed microchannel technology in combination with processes called external steam reforming and fuel recycling. PNNL's system includes fuel cell stacks developed earlier with the support of DOE's Solid State Energy Conversion Alliance.
"Solid oxide fuels cells are a promising technology for providing clean, efficient energy. But, until now, most people have focused on larger systems that produce 1 megawatt of power or more and can replace traditional power plants," said Vincent Sprenkle, a co-author on the paper and chief engineer of PNNL's solid oxide fuel cell development program. "However, this research shows that smaller solid oxide fuel cells that generate between 1 and 100 kilowatts of power are a viable option for highly efficient, localized power generation."
Sprenkle and his co-authors had community-sized power generation in mind when they started working on their solid oxide fuel cell, also known as a SOFC. The pilot system they built generates about 2 kW of electricity, or how much power a typical American home consumes. The PNNL team designed its system so it can be scaled up to produce between 100 and 250 kW, which could provide power for about 50 to 100 American homes.
Goal: Small and efficient
Knowing the advantages of smaller SOFC systems (see the "What is an SOFC?" sidebar below for more information), the PNNL team wanted to design a small system that could be both more than 50 percent efficient and easily scaled up for distributed generation. To do this, the team first used a process called external steam reforming. In general, steam reforming mixes steam with the fuel, leading the two to react and create intermediate products. The intermediates, carbon monoxide and hydrogen, then react with oxygen at the fuel cell's anode. Just as described in the below sidebar, this reaction generates electricity, as well as the byproducts steam and carbon dioxide.
Steam reforming has been used with fuel cells before, but the approach requires heat that, when directly exposed to the fuel cell, causes uneven temperatures on the ceramic layers that can potentially weaken and break the fuel cell. So the PNNL team opted for external steam reforming, which completes the initial reactions between steam and the fuel outside of the fuel cell.
The external steam reforming process requires a device called a heat exchanger, where a wall made of a conductive material like metal separates two gases. On one side of the wall is the hot exhaust that is expelled as a byproduct of the reaction inside the fuel cell. On the other side is a cooler gas that is heading toward the fuel cell. Heat moves from the hot gas, through the wall and into the cool incoming gas, warming it to the temperatures needed for the reaction to take place inside the fuel cell.
Efficiency with micro technology
The key to the efficiency of this small SOFC system is the use of a PNNL-developed microchannel technology in the system's multiple heat exchangers. Instead of having just one wall that separates the two gases, PNNL's microchannel heat exchangers have multiple walls created by a series of tiny looping channels that are narrower than a paper clip. This increases the surface area, allowing more heat to be transferred and making the system more efficient. PNNL's microchannel heat exchanger was designed so that very little additional pressure is needed to move the gas through the turns and curves of the looping channels.
The second unique aspect of the system is that it recycles. Specifically, the system uses the exhaust, made up of steam and heat byproducts, coming from the anode to maintain the steam reforming process. This recycling means the system doesn't need an electric device that heats water to create steam. Reusing the steam, which is mixed with fuel, also means the system is able to use up some of the leftover fuel it wasn't able to consume when the fuel first moved through the fuel cell.
The combination of external steam reforming and steam recycling with the PNNL-developed microchannel heat exchangers made the team's small SOFC system extremely efficient. Together, these characteristics help the system use as little energy as possible and allows more net electricity to be produced in the end. Lab tests showed the system's net efficiency ranged from 48.2 percent at 2.2 kW to a high of 56.6 percent at 1.7 kW. The team calculates they could raise the system's efficiency to 60 percent with a few more adjustments.
The PNNL team would like to see their research translated into an SOFC power system that's used by individual homeowners or utilities.
"There still are significant efforts required to reduce the overall cost to a point where it is economical for distributed generation applications," Sprenkle explained. "However, this demonstration does provide an excellent blueprint on how to build a system that could increase electricity generation while reducing carbon emissions."

Wheezing is a high-pitched whistling sound during breathing. It occurs when air moves through narrowed breathing tubes.
Wheezing is a sign that a person may be having breathing problems. The sound of wheezing is most obvious when breathing out (exhaling), but may be heard when taking a breath (inhaling).
Wheezing most often comes from the small breathing tubes (bronchial tubes) deep in the chest, but it may be due to a blockage in larger airways or in persons with certain vocal cord problems.
Click to download
Always take all of your medications as directed.
Sitting in an area where there is moist, heated air may help relieve some symptoms. This can be done by running a hot shower or using a vaporizer.
Call your health care provider if
Call your health care provider if:
If wheezing is severe or occurs with severe shortness of breath, you may have to go directly to the nearest emergency department.
What to expect at your health care provider's office
The doctor or nurse will perform a physical examination and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including:
- When did the wheezing begin?
- How long does it last?
- When and how often does it occur?
- Is it worse at night or in the early morning?
- What does the wheezing sound like?
- Does it make breathing difficult?
- What seems to cause it?
- Eating certain foods?
- Taking certain medications?
- Do any of the following things make it worse?
- Being around pollens, insects, dust, chemicals (perfumes, cosmetics)
- Being in cold air
- Sickness (such as a cold or the flu)
- Does it go away without treatment?
- What helps relieve it?
- Medications such as bronchodilators?
- Do you have any other symptoms, such as:
- Did you have an episode of choking
- Did you have an insect bite?
- Do you have a history of asthma
- What medications do you take?
- Have you been around tobacco smoke?
- Have you recently been sick?
The physical examination may include listening to the lung sounds (auscultation
). If your child is the one with symptoms, the doctor will make sure he or she did not swallow a foreign object.
Tests that may be done include:
- Blood work, possibly including arterial blood gases
- Chest x-ray
- Lung function tests
A hospital stay may be needed if:
Breathing is particularly difficult
Medicines need to be given through a vein (IV)
Supplemental oxygen is required
The person needs to be closely watched by medical personnel
Schatz M. Asthma in adolescents and adults. In: Bope ET, Rakel RE, Kellerman R, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy 2012. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2012:section 6.
Szefler SJ. Advances in pediatric asthma in 2009: gaining control of childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Jan;125(1):69-78.
Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.

It may be the site of the town of Hilfa, which is mentioned in the Talmud. The foundations of an ancient synagogue were discovered near there in 1929 by explorations done on behalf of the Hebrew University. The synagogue, measuring 46 x 92 feet, included a courtyard, hall, two side aisles and a women's gallery. It faced south toward Jerusalem. A small cavity in the floor probably served as a genizah; above it was an Ark for scrolls of the Law. The whole floor of the building is paved with mosaics.
Two inscriptions were found at the entrance to the hall. One, in Aramaic, states that the mosaics were made during the reign of Emperor Justin (518--527). The other, in Greek, gives the names of those who made the mosaics, Marianos and his son Hanina. There are three mosaic panels in the center of the hall. The first shows the Akedah, the binding of Isaac on the altar. The second mosaic represents the signs of the Zodiac. The third depicts a synagogue ark with a gabled roof and an "eternal light" suspended from its top. On either side is a lion with a seven-branched menorah. Above the menorah and between the lions are pictured ritual items such as lulavim (palm branches), etrogim (citrons), and incense holders. Curtains adorned it on either side. The designs are simple and strong. In these mosaics, the artists took great care to make each scene expressive. The mosaics of Bet Alfa are striking in their coloring and style, and are among the finest examples of Jewish art in the Byzantine period.
Kibbutz Bet Alfa was founded at in 1922.
A scene at one of the children's houses
Making up the daily work schedule (August 1946)
A Man with his cow (August 1930)

Literary Research Paper
Simple Ways To Write A Literary Research Paper
Unlike most other research papers, a literary research paper generally requires an argumentative style of writing rather than a descriptive style. Loads of support content would be available to support an opinion, but knowing how to present it is a totally different ball game.
The topics in these research papers may vary from character analysis of a fictitious character to analyzing the change in writing styles of different authors. Different alternative endings may have to be suggested for a plot. For instance, the assignment could be to write a critical commentary on a Shakespearian tragedy or Joyce’s writing. Attempting such varied topics is not easy. It is absolutely essential that research is conducted the right way to come up with a decent paper.
Guidelines To Adapt While Writing A Literary Research Paper
- Read the whole works several times. Literature is interesting, and reading it often makes you an expert on the piece. Ideas develop in your mind, which then become part of the review process.
- Have a fair idea of your own opinion on the topic. Personal opinions carry great weight, because readers are more interested in what is written about the storyline .They may or may not actually know the story in detail.
- Learn to come up with your own original content after you have read the piece of literature. Attempt writing each paragraph and try to rewrite it with your own ideas in place. This is a practical way to improve writing skills.
- Develop the right research skills. For instance, to write a review of William Shakespeare’s style of writing, check other works by the same author. It would offer you further insight.
ResearchPaperWriter.net specializes in providing you with your own blueprint for the essay. Experienced writers are at hand to guide you along the way. The dedicated writer would most certainly assist in putting your thoughts together in your literary research paper. A draft of the essay is reviewed at every step, and we can even assist you in choosing the style and format to best suit the nature of your essay. When the right metaphor or quotation eludes you, rely on us to supply you with the appropriate alternative.
Be it the pre-classical poems of Byron and Shelley or the cold, morbid nature of a Dostovievskian character, we have expert writers on our panel to ease your workload. To help you make a decision, we have provided research paper samples to suit various levels of writing.
ResearchPaperWriter.net has achieved excellence in the field of academic writing, and caters to a wide range of students and researchers. We leave no stone unturned in ensuring that our clientele get the best custom writing services. Our authors use the latest anti-plagiarism software to ensure that all research papers are original.
Correspondence with our clients is always strictly confidential. For a very nominal amount, you can choose to avail of our services. We guarantee that your order for a literary research paper will be well received and appreciated.

Type of Culminating Activity
Graduate Student Project
As world-wide energy consumption continues to increase, so does the demand for the use of alternative energy sources, such as Nuclear Energy. Nuclear Power Plants currently supply over 370 gigawatts of electricity, and more than 60 new nuclear reactors have been commissioned by 15 different countries. The primary concern for Nuclear Power Plant operation and lisencing has been safety. The safety of the operation of Nuclear Power Plants is no simple matter- it involves the training of operators, design of the reactor, as well as equipment and design upgrades throughout the lifetime of the reactor, etc. To safely design, operate, and understand nuclear power plants, industry and government alike have relied upon the use of best-estimate simulation codes, which allow for an accurate model of any given plant to be created with welldefined margins of safety. The most widely used of these best-estimate simulation codes in the Nuclear Power industry is RELAP5-3D. Our project focused on improving the modeling capabilities of RELAP5-3D by developing uncertainty estimates for its calculations. This work involved analyzing high, medium, and low ranked phenomena from an INL PIRT on a small break Loss-Of-Coolant Accident as well as an analysis of a large break Loss-Of-Coolant Accident. Statistical analyses were performed using correlation coefficients. To perform the studies, computer programs were written that modify a template RELAP5-3D input deck to produce one deck for each combination of key input parameters. Python scripting enabled the running of the generated input files with RELAP5-3D on INL’s massively parallel cluster system. Data from the studies was collected and analyzed with SAS. Summaries of the results of our studies are presented.
Gertman, Alexandra E. and Mesina, George L., "Uncertainty Analysis of RELAP5-3D©" (2012). Mathematics Graduate Projects and Theses. Paper 1.

Charles Robert Darwin (18091882). Origin of Species. The Harvard Classics. 190914.
XI. On the Geological Succession of Organic Beings
On the Forms of Life Changing Almost Simultaneously throughout the World
SCARCELY any palæontological discovery is more striking than the fact that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the world. Thus our European Chalk formation can be recognised in many distant regions, under the most different climates, where not a fragment of the mineral chalk itself can be found; namely in North America, in equatorial South America, in Tierra del Fuego, at the Cape of Good Hope, and in the peninsula of India. For at these distant points, the organic remains in certain beds present an unmistakable resemblance to those of the Chalk. It is not that the same species are met with; for in some cases not one species is identically the same, but they belong to the same families, genera, and sections of genera, and sometimes are similarly characterised in such trifling points as mere superficial sculpture. Moreover, other forms, which are not found in the Chalk of Europe, but which occur in the formations either above or below, occur in the same order at these distant points of the world. In the several successive palæozoic formations of Russia, Western Europe, and North America, a similar parallelism in the forms of life has been observed by several authors; so it is, according to Lyell, with the European and North American tertiary deposits. Even if the few fossil species which are common to the Old and New Worlds were kept wholly out of view, the general parallelism in the successive forms of life, in the palæozoic and tertiary stages, would still be manifest, and the several formations could be easily correlated.
These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of the world: we have not sufficient data to judge whether the productions of the land and of fresh water at distant points change in the same parallel manner. We may doubt whether they have thus changed: if the Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought to Europe from La Plata, without any information in regard to their geological position, no one would have suspected that they had co-existed with seashells all still living; but as these anomalous monsters co-existed with the mastodon and horse, it might at least have been inferred that they had lived during one of the later tertiary stages.
When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this expression relates to the same year, or to the same century, or even that it has a very strict geological sense; for if all the marine animals now living in Europe, and all those that lived in Europe during the pleistocene period (a very remote period as measured by years, including the whole glacial epoch) were compared with those now existing in South America or in Australia, the most skilful naturalist would hardly be able to say whether the present or the pleistocene inhabitants of Europe resembled most closely those of the southern hemisphere. So, again, several highly competent observers maintain that the existing productions of the United States are more closely related to those which lived in Europe during certain late tertiary stages, than to the present inhabitants of Europe; and if this be so, it is evident that fossiliferous beds now deposited on the shores of North America would hereafter be liable to be classed with somewhat older European beds. Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future epoch, there can be little doubt that all the more modern marine formations, namely, the upper pliocene, the pleistocene and strictly modern beds of Europe, North and South America, and Australia, from containing fossil remains in some degree allied, and from not including those forms which are found only in the older underlying deposits, would be correctly ranked as simultaneous in a geological sense.
The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously, in the above large sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck these admirable observers, MM. de Verneuil and dArchiac. After referring to the parallelism of the palæozoic forms of life in various parts of Europe, they add, If, struck by this strange sequence, we turn our attention to North America, and there discover a series of analogous phenomena, it will appear certain that all these modifications of species, their extinction, and the introduction of new ones, cannot be owing to mere changes in marine currents or other causes more or less local and temporary, but depend on general laws which govern the whole animal kingdom. M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the same effect. It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of currents, climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these great mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the most different climates. We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to some special law. We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the present distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the relation between the physical conditions of various countries and the nature of their inhabitants.
This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection. New species are formed by having some advantage over older forms; and the forms, which are already dominant, or have some advantage over the other forms in their own country, give birth to the greatest number of new varieties or incipient species. We have distinct evidence on this head, in the plants which are dominant, that is, which are commonest and most widely diffused, producing the greatest number of new varieties. It is also natural that the dominant, varying, and far-spreading species, which have already invaded to a certain extent the territories of other species, should be those which would have the best chance of spreading still further, and of giving rise in new countries to other new varieties and species. The process of diffusion would often be very slow, depending on climatal and geographical changes, on strange accidents, and on the gradual acclimatisation of new species to the various climates through which they might have to pass, but in the course of time the dominant forms would generally succeed in spreading and would ultimately prevail. The diffusion would, it is probable, be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct continents than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous sea. We might therefore expect to find, as we do find, a less strict degree of parallelism in the succession of the productions of the land than with those of the sea.
Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense, simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the world, accords well with the principle of new species having been formed by dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new species thus produced being themselves dominant, owing to their having had some advantage over their already dominant parents, as well as over other species, and again spreading, varying, and producing new forms. The old forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inheriting some inferiority in common; and therefore, as new and improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups disappear from the world; and the succession of forms everywhere tends to correspond both in their first appearance and final disappearance.
There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making. I have given my reasons for believing that most of our great formations, rich in fossils, were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that blank intervals of vast duration, as far as fossils are concerned, occurred during the periods when the bed of the sea was either stationary or rising, and likewise when sediment was not thrown down quickly enough to embed and preserve organic remains. During these long and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants of each region underwent a considerable amount of modification and extinction, and that there was much migration from other parts of the world. As we have reason to believe that large areas are affected by the same movement, it is probable that strictly contemporaneous formations have often been accumulated over very wide spaces in the same quarter of the world; but we are very far from having any right to conclude that this has invariably been the case, and that large areas have invariably been affected by the same movements. When two formations have been deposited in two regions during nearly, but not exactly, the same period, we should find in both, from the causes explained in the foregoing paragraphs, the same general succession in the forms of life; but the species would not exactly correspond; for there will have been a little more time in the one region than in the other for modification, extinction, and immigration.
I suspect that cases of this nature occur in Europe. Mr. Prestwich, in his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England and France, is able to draw a close general parallelism between the successive stages in the two countries; but when he compares certain stages in England with those in France, although he finds in both a curious accordance in the numbers of the species belonging to the same genera, yet the species themselves differ in a very, difficult to account for, considering the proximity of the two areas,unless, indeed, it be assumed that an isthmus separated two seas inhabited by distinct, but contemporaneous, faunas. Lyell has made similar observations on some of the later tertiary formations. Barrande, also, shows that there is a striking general parallelism in the successive Silurian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds a surprising amount of difference in the species. If the several formations in these regions have not been deposited during the same exact periods,a formation in one region often corresponding with a blank interval in the other,and if in both regions the species have gone on slowly changing during the accumulation of the several formations and during the long intervals of time between them; in this case the several formations in the two regions could be arranged in the same order, in accordance with the general succession of the forms of life, and the order would falsely appear to be strictly parallel; nevertheless the species would not be all the same in the apparently corresponding stages in the two regions.

stockArticle Free Pass
stock, in finance, the subscribed capital of a corporation or limited-liability company, usually divided into shares and represented by transferable certificates. The certificates may detail the contractual relationship between the company and its stockholders, or shareholders, and set forth the division of the risk, income, and control of the business.
Common stock, or ordinary shares.
Many companies have only one class of stock, often called common stock, or ordinary shares. This class of stock carries residual ownership of the company, entitling the holder to unlimited interest in the earnings and assets of the company after limited claims are paid. Common stockholders have the right to control the company through their voting rights, unless such rights are specifically withheld, as in special classes of “nonvoting” shares. The common stockholders’ legal rights may also include preemptive rights to maintain their proportion of equity when new stock is issued. Dividends paid on common stock are usually unstable because they tend to vary with earnings; they are also usually less than earnings, the difference being used by management to expand the firm and allow the stockholders’ equity to grow. The market price of common stock is often subject to wide fluctuations, because it depends largely upon investors’ expectations of future earnings.
Preferred stock, or preference shares.
To appeal to investors who wish to be sure of receiving dividends regularly, many companies issue what is called preferred stock, or preference shares. This class of stock has a prior claim to dividends paid by the company and, usually, to the assets of the company in the event of its dissolution. Dividends are usually set at a fixed annual rate that must be paid before dividends are distributed to the common stockholders. Preferred stock may be participating, meaning that its holders share with common stockholders in any company earnings over and above the stated dividends on the preferred stock. Preferred stock may be cumulative or noncumulative: if cumulative, dividends not paid in one year must be paid in addition to dividends earned in the following year, before any dividend payments are made on the common stock.
What made you want to look up "stock"? Please share what surprised you most...

Originally printed in 1997, this revised "Orion DeepMap 600" is among those indispensable publications that Company Seven recommends to anyone who interested in learning their way around the night sky. The editor Steve Peters conceived of this as a very helpful device for anyone interested in astronomy and who may little or no observational experience. This has become the most popular chart of the night sky among our customers who are new to the hobby and who buy a telescope or binocular and now seek out what to see and when. This is often bought as a economical but valued and durable gift.
Fully color illustrated, it is the first-ever star chart that folds up like a road map! DeepMap 600 shows the positions of more than six hundred of the finest celestial objects visible from the Northern Hemisphere. Each of these objects are plotted on a giant 33 x 21 inch full-color star chart by world-renowned celestial cartographer Wil Tirion. But what really makes this star chart invaluable is its convenience; it folds "accordion style" into a thin, pocket-size 4-¾ x 10-½ inches format - just like a road map!
Even with no knowledge of the night sky one should be able to go out and find the patterns that make up the larger Constellations, and then match them to the DeepMap 600 chart to obtain their orientation to the night sky. But note that since this does mention some astronomical/navigational terms (zenith, meridian, latitude, magnitude, etc.) then a little homework about these terms in advance of going out at night with this chart will help the least understanding buyer to mover forward quickly.
Above: sample of the Star Chart showing some of the symbols and nomenclature about to scale, and all readable by red light (189,505 bytes).
On the side opposite the chart is a map of the northern circumpolar region, as well as a listing of essential data for each of the objects plotted on the DeepMap 600 chart. The information including coordinates (very helpful for those who have telescopes with Setting Circles), apparent magnitude (to help one know how bright the object is), angular size ('how big is big'), and even a brief description of how it will appear to the eye when looking through binocular or a telescope. Instructions offers tips on using the "Orion DeepMap 600", with general observing hints, and more.
The contrast and clarity of your computer screen are not likely to match the original so you may click on image to see enlarged view (487,844 bytes).
No longer must you fumble with bulky books, star atlases, and observing references to find interesting objects to view. The quick-reference DeepMap 600 is all you need to get started.

WebMD Medical News
Brenda Goodman, MA
Laura J. Martin, MD
July 14, 2011 -- People who say they vigilantly apply sunscreen are more likely to experience painful, damaging sunburns, a new study shows.
The study, the first to look at how people in the U.S. shield themselves from the sun and how well those different strategies work, analyzed information on more than 3,000 white adults that was collected through the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
Sunscreen was the most commonly used kind of protection, grabbing the top spot with 30% of people saying they regularly apply it when they’re outside for longer than an hour.
The next most common skin-saving strategies were seeking shade (25% said they frequently stayed under cover when the sun was blazing), wearing a hat (16%), and donning long sleeves (6%).
People who said they frequently used sunscreen, however, had 23% greater risk of multiple sunburns in the past year compared to people who said they seldom used the stuff.
Those who frequently sought shade and pulled on long sleeves, however, had about a 30% lower sunburn risk compared to people who rarely used those measures.
Those risks remained even after researchers corrected for factors known to influence burn risk, including the skin’s sensitivity to the sun, alcohol use, season, physical activity, age, gender, education, and income.
“I really like this study,” says Ronald P. Rapini, MD, professor and chairman of the department of dermatology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. “I’ve always felt the same way, and I tell my patients the same thing.”
“Just last week, one of my melanoma patients came in with a sunburn all over their back, and I said, ‘What happened?’ and they said, ‘Well, I had sunscreen.’ But they missed an area on their back, which is what always happens. They think that they can stay out in the sun because they’re using sunscreen, and the truth is it doesn’t really cover stuff that well,” says Rapini, who was not involved in the research.
“Myself, personally, I’m a dermatologist, and I don’t even wear sunscreen all that much. I stay in the shade,” he says. “I try to stay out of the sun.”
The study is published in the journal Cancer Causes & Control.
“I was quite surprised to find the associations that we’ve found with the different types of sun protection,” says study researcher Eleni Linos, MD, DrPH, MPH, a dermatologist at Stanford University.
“What we saw was that wearing long-sleeved clothing, wearing a hat, and staying in the shade were associated with fewer sunburns,” she says. “However, wearing sunscreen was actually associated with more sunburns.”
Linos is quick to point out that her results don’t mean that sunscreen doesn’t work or shouldn’t be used.
The study was designed to look at patterns, not to prove cause and effect.
It’s possible that people with the fairest, most easily burned skin are also simply the group most likely to use sunscreen.
But if that were the case, Linos says, she would have expected to see the same phenomenon across all the different groups. That is, frequent shade seekers and long-sleeve wearers would also report having more burns compared to those who rarely reported those tactics.
The more likely explanation, she thinks, is user error -- people simply aren’t applying as much sunscreen as often as they should.
Numerous studies have shown that most people, even after they’re carefully schooled in proper sunscreen application, still don’t get enough on.
One of the latest, from researchers in Brazil, asked study participants to cover both forearms with sunscreen, and 30 minutes later, to reapply the sunscreen to just one arm.
Researchers used tape strips to measure how thickly the lotion went on.
Sunscreen is tested to work at its SPF when it’s applied to a depth of at least 2 milligrams per square centimeter on the skin.
After the first application, study participants got only a quarter of that amount on. For the arm that got the second application, the depth of the sunscreen eventually reached half of what it should have been, suggesting that even people who remember to reapply aren’t being fully protected.
Another problem is that many people rely on sunscreen as their sole form of protection, when really, shade and protective clothing need to be part of a multi-pronged approach to avoiding sunburns, which increase the risk of skin cancer.
“There’s still a lot of work that we as physicians, especially dermatologists, need to do to educate individuals about proper photoprotection,” says Henry W. Lim, MD, chair of the department of dermatology at Henry Ford Health System in Detroit.
He says this study is consistent with previous research.
“It’s known that people use sunscreen, but they don’t use it at the appropriate amount and because of that, they have a false sense of a security,” says Lim, who was not involved in the research.
That false sense of security can lead people to stay in the sun longer than they safely should, leading to an increased risk of sunburns and greater UV exposure, which can cause skin cancer.
Sunscreen use has been shown to reduce some kinds of skin cancers, however, and earlier this year, a prospective study, the first of its kind, found that regular sunscreen use in a group of 1,621 Australian adults cut their risk of melanoma by 50%.
Importantly, however, the study participants in that trial carefully and repeatedly applied sunscreen while also seeking shade and wearing protective clothing.
“The best data that’s out there shows the combination of seeking shade, wearing protective clothing and wearing sunscreen, those three things together clearly lower your risk,” says Darrell S. Rigel, MD, a clinical professor of dermatology at New York University.
Rigel says there is an important caveat about this study which should reassure people about their sunscreen.
The latest data used in the study is now about five years old, and he says sunscreens have improved in a couple of key ways since then.
“How long it lasts, 'substantivity' it’s called, has markedly improved, really with new formulations,” he says, and many of the newer formulations offer better broad-spectrum protections against both UVB, the burning rays, and UVA, the cancer-causing rays.
New FDA rules for sunscreens, which will go into effect next year, should make it easier to pick a good product.
That’s important, Rigel points out, because it’s not always possible to stay in the shade or wear longs sleeves.
In those cases, it’s more important than ever to put sunscreen on correctly.
Experts say the rule of thumb is a golf ball-sized blob for every exposed body part, applied at least 30 minutes before going outside, since sunscreen takes that long to absorb into the skin.
That much sunscreen should be reapplied every two hours, and even more frequently, every 60 to 90 minutes, when swimming, sweating, or using a spray product, since those don’t last as long.
SOURCES:Linos, E. Cancer Causes & Control, June 2011.De Villa, D. Photochemistry and Photobiology, March-April 2011.Kester, B. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, July 2010.Burnett, M. Photodermatology, Photoimmunology and Photomedicine, April 2011.Robinson J. Journal of the American Medical Association, June 28, 2011.Autier, P. Journal of Clinical Oncology, April 4, 2011.Ronald P. Rapini, MD, professor and chairman, department of dermatology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.Eleni Linos, MD, DrPH, MPH, Stanford University.Henry W. Lim, MD, chair, department of dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit.Darrell S. Rigel, MD, clinical professor of dermatology, New York University.
Here are the most recent story comments.View All
The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of KOKI FOX23 - Tulsa
The Health News section does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.

You are here
Edward Elgar (1857-1934) was 50 years old before he began what was to become his first symphony. It was not, strictly speaking, his first attempt at a symphony: he had actually composed a symphony modeled on Mozart as an exercise 30 years earlier (only one movement survives), and in 1898 took a stab at a programmatic symphony based on the life of the English military-imperial hero General Gordon, which, fortunately, did not get far.
Any composer approaching the symphony after Beethoven might well have had some trepidation about it. Brahms’ difficulties with his first symphony were legend. By the early 20th century, there was the additional problem of whether the symphony’s day had passed. Though some composers of Elgar’s generation were moving away from the symphony, Elgar remained convinced that it was still viable. In a 1905 lecture at Birmingham University, he said
“It seems to me that because the greatest genius of our days, Richard Strauss, recognizes the symphonic-poem as a fit vehicle for his splendid achievements, some writers are inclined to be positive that the symphony is dead… but when the looked-for genius comes, it may be absolutely revived.”
A few years later, Elgar took it upon himself to be the “looked-for genius,” and the result was a staggering immediate success: the Symphony was performed about 100 times worldwide within a year after its premiere in December 1908. It has not done so well since, and is now only an occasional visitor to the standard repertory.
The Symphony might be regarded as a battle, a study of opposites in conflict: the stately versus the agitated, the singable diatonic melody against the sinewy chromatic theme, the foreboding against the triumphant. At the very outset, Elgar pens one of his most stately melodies (he already had four of the five “Pomp and Circumstance” marches behind him). Elgar uses the unusual key of A-flat major for this introduction and “motto” theme, but does not stay there long. The tumultuous Allegro begins in D minor, a key as far as possible from A-flat (Elgar wrote to his friend August Jaeger that he had “thrown over all key relationships as formerly practiced” but that he “was not silly enough to think (or wish) that I have invented anything” in the process), with the motto inserting itself, and its mood, into the storm, and eventually establishing calm at the end. Throughout the symphony, Elgar uses a peculiar device to insinuate motifs such as the motto in an almost subliminal way: he writes them as “solos” for the players on the last stand of a string section. He commented:
“I have employed the last desks of the strings to get a soft diffused sound: the listener need not be bothered to know where it comes from — the effect is of course different from that obtained from the first desk soli.”
The second movement is another kind of battle. A turbulent main section, (in another distant key, F-sharp minor) features a driving perpetual motion figure and an ominous quick march. It modulates to B-flat major, where gossamer strings, flutes, and harp play an idyllic interlude that Elgar said should be played “like something we hear down by the river.”
The perpetual motion figure reasserts itself, but gradually slows until, improbably, it becomes, note for note, the principal theme of the Adagio third movement. Both Hans Richter, who conducted the premiere, and August Jaeger, a longtime champion of Elgar’s music, compared this movement to the adagios of Beethoven, though to modern audiences it will more likely recall Mahler in its breadth, heart-on-sleeve passion, and richness (a richness which is due considerably to Elgar’s subdividing the strings into nine parts instead of the usual five).
The finale begins with another slow introduction, in D minor, in which a foreboding opening gives way to a minor-key march figure in the low strings and bassoons, and then to the motto theme. Elgar gives the march figure a series of startling transformations, including thundering it out fortissimo and turning into a lush cantabile. At the end, the motto theme emerges triumphant over hammer blows from the brass and percussion, the battle clearly won.
— Lawyer and lutenist Howard Posner has also annotated programs for the Los Angeles Baroque Orchestra and the Coleman Chamber Concerts. His notes have appeared in the program of the Salzburg Festival.
Length: 50 minutes
Orchestration: piccolo, three flutes, two oboes, English horn, two clarinets, bass clarinet, two bassoons, contrabassoon, four horns, three trumpets, three trombones, tuba, timpani, bass drum, snare drum, cymbals, two harps, and strings
First Los Angeles Philharmonic performance: July 29, 1926, Sir Henry Wood conducting

BlogsCan Chocolate Make You Slimmer?
New research hints at another potential health benefit of chocolate.
Chocolate continues to gain ground as a health food, this time as a way to stay slim while enjoying regular decadent snacks. Yes, regular. A new study found that people who ate chocolate a few times a week were leaner than those who ate it once in a while. The study, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, compared the diet, chocolate intake, and body mass index of over 1,000 men and women. The researchers used BMI as an indicator of whether the participants were overweight or obese. Even when taking into account other factors, like exercise and total calories consumed, people who ate chocolate regularly had lower BMIs. While there was a connection between frequency and thinness, there was none for quantity. So it’s more important to eat chocolate throughout the week than to load up on King Size bars. Previous studies have shown that chocolate has many other health benefits. Eating chocolate can promote beneficial changes to your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, both of which are good for the heart. Chocolate, especially dark, also contains plentiful levels of antioxidants that neutralize damage done to cells by “free radicals.” The researchers are uncertain what aspect of chocolate promotes slender physiques, but suspect it is caused by catechins. These compounds have been shown to improve lean muscle mass and reduce weight in mice. Chocolate also contains caffeine, which can boost metabolism. This research, however, is not a free pass to binge on chocolate. Further research is needed to determine whether the health benefits of chocolate outweigh the additional calories consumed. Don’t be concerned about eating the occasional chocolate bar. If you are trying to lose weight, though, eating more fruits and vegetables is a better option.

Studies of Disorders With Increased Susceptibility to Fungal Infections
- Researchers are interested in studying disorders that make individuals more susceptible to fungal infections, specifically infections with the Candida yeast. These disorders are often related to problems with the immune system and may have genetic factors, which suggests that researchers should study not only the individual with the disorder, but also his or her first- and second-degree relatives (such as parents, siblings, children, and first cousins). To provide material for future research, individuals with immune disorders and their first- and second-degree relatives will be asked to provide blood and other samples for testing and comparison with samples taken from healthy volunteers with no history of immune disorders.
- To collect blood and other biological samples to study immune disorders that make individuals more susceptible to fungal infections.
- Individuals of any age who have abnormal immune function characterized by recurrent or unusual fungal infections, recurrent or chronic inflammation, or other types of immune dysfunction.
- First- or second-degree genetically related family members (limited to mother, father, siblings, grandparents, children, aunts, uncles, and first cousins).
- Healthy volunteers at least 18 years of age (for comparison purposes).
- Participants will provide blood samples and buccal (cells from the inside of the mouth near the cheek) samples.
- Participants with immune disorders will also be asked to provide urine samples, saliva or mucosal samples, or skin tissue biopsies, and may also have imaging studies (such as x-rays) to collect information for research.
- Samples may be collected at the National Institutes of Health or at other clinical locations for the samples to the sent to the National Institutes of Health.
- No treatment will be provided as part of this protocol....
Primary Immune Deficiency
Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy Candidiasis Ectodermal
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis (CMC)
|Study Design:||Time Perspective: Prospective|
|Official Title:||Studies of Disorders With Increased Susceptibility to Fungal Infections|
|Study Start Date:||September 2010|
This study is designed for the evaluation, diagnosis, and long-term follow up of selected patients with primary immune deficiencies and other conditions associated with fungal, and more specifically with Candida spp. infections. The primary immune deficiencies to be studied include, but are not limited to, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC), myeloperoxidase deficiency (MPO), immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked (IPEX), Job's syndrome, chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), and biotinidase deficiency. Diabetic patients and infants also show increased susceptibility to such infections and might be studied. Patient participants (who we will refer to as patients in this study) will undergo evaluations that include history/physical, blood sampling, genetic testing, and possible tissue sampling. We may use some of the blood cells to investigate the utility of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) for immune cell derivation and targeted gene correction. First or second degree genetically related family members (limited to mother, father, siblings, grandparents, children, aunts, uncles, and first cousins of an affected patient and who we will refer to as relatives in this study) might also be screened for clinical, in vitro, and genetic correlates of immune abnormalities. Healthy volunteers will be enrolled as a source of control samples for research testing. Among the aims of this protocol are to better understand the genetic and pathophysiologic factors that lead to defects in host defense, and to use modern and evolving methods in molecular and cellular biology to elucidate the pathogenesis of this particular susceptibility. A better understanding of primary immunodeficiency could allow for the rational development of novel therapies for such diseases and to benefit future patients, but it might not benefit current patient participants directly. Routine follow-up may occur every 6 months -with evaluation and blood sampling. Under some circumstances, we may provide treatment that relates to the immune deficiency. These treatments will follow standard medical practice.
|Contact: Sandra Maxwell, R.N.||(301) email@example.com|
|Contact: Sergio D Rosenzweig, M.D.||(301) firstname.lastname@example.org|
|United States, Maryland|
|National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, 9000 Rockville Pike||Recruiting|
|Bethesda, Maryland, United States, 20892|
|Contact: For more information at the NIH Clinical Center contact Patient Recruitment and Public Liaison Office (PRPL) 800-411-1222 ext TTY8664111010 email@example.com|
|Principal Investigator:||Sergio D Rosenzweig, M.D.||National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)|

A new report from the Institute for Women’s Policy Research shows that the pay gap between men and women increased between 2011 and 2012, leaving women making $163 less per week:
In 2012, the ratio of women’s to men’s median weekly full-time earnings was 80.9 percent, a decline of more than one percentage point since 2011 when the ratio was 82.2 percent. This corresponds to a weekly gender wage gap of 19.1 percent for 2012. Women’s median weekly earnings in 2012 were $691, a marginal decline compared to 2011; men’s median weekly earnings were $854, a marginal increase compared to 2011.
Another measure of the earnings gap, the ratio of women’s and men’s median annual earnings for full-time year-round workers, was 77.0 in 2011 (data for 2012 are not yet available), less than half of a percentage point lower than in 2010 and equal to the gap in 2009. (This means the annual gender wage gap for full-time year-round workers is 23 percent.)
As Bryce Covert noted at Forbes, “What’s particularly strange about this is that the wage gap typically narrows during a recession.” But women have been hammered by the hemorrhaging of public sector jobs that has occurred in the last few years, as states and the federal governments cut back significantly due to conservative insistence on austerity.
The wage gap between women and men persists even for high-paying jobs, and women are significantly more likely to work for the minimum wage. A woman’s total lifetime earnings lost to the pay gap could feed a family of four for 37 years.

The 65 ft tall interactive sculpture was created from wood from the 165 ft long schooner Wawona, which sailed from 1897 to 1947. It is connected to the museum at its top and bottom. © John Grade
The new sculpture at the Museum of History and Industry in Seattle required a great deal of structural analysis to ensure it can withstand seismic forces—and curious visitors.
January 29, 2013—It’s plain to see that turning the remains of a sailing schooner more than a century old into a 65 ft tall interactive sculpture for the Museum of History and Industry (MOHAI) in Seattle, required a great deal of artistic vision. But what might not be as obvious is the amount of structural analysis required to ensure the sculpture maintains its structural integrity under seismic forces and human-induced loads.
Dedicated to preserving and sharing the history of Seattle and the Puget Sound region, the MOHAI commissioned Seattle-based artist John Grade to create a sculpture for the museum’s new home: the renovated Naval Reserve Armory along the shore of Lake Union. Shortly after winning the commission, Grade was entrusted with the remains of the dismantled schooner Wawona.
Built by influential shipbuilder Hans Ditlev Bendixsen, the 165 ft long schooner Wawona sailed from 1897 to 1947, carrying lumber and, later, fish through Puget Sound. After it was decommissioned, the ship was on display until 2009, when it was disassembled. A great deal of the vessel’s wood had rotted significantly by that time, but much of the planking was in good condition despite having been under water all those years. Leaching from the ship’s wrought iron and temporary copper cladding and staining from the oils of the fish it once carried brought out a variety of colors within the wood, making it perfect for the sculpture, Grade said in written responses to questions posed by Civil Engineering online.
Named for the vessel from which the wood was derived, the 10,000 lb Wawona sculpture extends from the floor of the museum to its ceiling. Grade said the vertical orientation of the sculpture references the old-growth trees that once covered the landscape near the museum. Its tapered shape—roughly 10 ft in diameter at its base and approximately 4 ft in diameter at its top— recalls a ship’s hull, he said. To further connect it to the natural world, the sculpture penetrates the museum’s floor and ceiling, enabling visitors who walk within the hollow form to see the lake below and the sky above, Grade explained.
Creating such a large sculpture required a great deal of engineering expertise. Grade worked with the Seattle office of Arup, an international engineering firm headquartered in London, to turn his vision into a reality. “Arup provided structural engineering services, starting at concepts ... on through artwork permitting, construction documents, and construction administration,” said Hans-Erik Blomgren, P.E., P.Eng., M.ASCE, the project manager for Arup, in written responses to questions from Civil Engineering online. “Interactive artwork of this scale, weight, and permanence requires it to be treated as an element and component of the building from a code standpoint.”
Artist John Grade wanted visitors to be able to walk within the
sculpture, to be able to view the lake below and the sky above, and
to be able to touch and push on the sculpture without damaging it.
© John Grade
But before they began getting into the details of the structural design, Arup’s engineers suggested using digital technology to fabricate the components of the sculpture. As a result, Grade engaged the University of Washington College of the Built Environments to individually cut the sculpture’s more than 200 wooden pieces using computer numerical control (CNC) fabrication. The CNC technology was also used to fashion the steel hangers and rods that hold the sculpture’s wooden components together horizontally and vertically. The digital fabrication plans were developed parallel with the structural design.
Arup had several performance objectives for the project, including ensuring that the sculpture could endure human-induced movement, resist metal fatigue under cyclic motion, and withstand seismic forces. The team also had to ensure that the wood was kiln dried to the correct moisture content and that the sculpture would hang vertically through its center of mass over the correct location on the museum’s floor, Blomgren said.
To meet these objectives, Arup and the team from the college used Rhino 3D and a parametric plug-in tool known as Grasshopper (both produced by Seattle-based Robert McNeel & Associates) to model each of the sculpture’s steel and wooden components for fabrication and structural analysis. They then exported a wireframe model from the Rhino files into another program that enabled them to analyze the sculpture under its own weight, seismic forces, and human-induced loads, Blomgren said.
For the seismic forces, the team treated the sculpture as an element and component as defined in ASCE Standard 7-05 (Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures, ASCE, Reston, Virginia, 2006.) “We then applied an equivalent static force in orthogonal directions,” Blomgren said. On the basis of the analysis, the team added rubber damper restraints at the base of the sculpture to provide lateral support under seismic loads and make the sculpture flexible between the floor and the ceiling, Blomgren said.
Arup engineers used computer numerical control techniques to
fabricate the more than 200 wooden pieces that form the sculpture
as well as the steel hangers and rods that hold those wooden
components together. © Arup
The human-induced forces were studied as a 200 lb force at a height of roughly 4 ft from the sculpture’s base. “We wanted to be sure the wooden planks supporting this concentrated load were sufficient,” Blomgren explained. As a result of the analysis, the team included a steel rod that extends from the underside of the sculpture to approximately 10 in. below the floor. This rod is allowed to articulate but a viscoelastic polymer disk provides resistance to quickly dampen human-induced oscillation, Blomgren said. “It was important to me that people directly, physically interact with the sculpture,” Grade explained. “I wanted it to have enough flex that a small child could push the base of the sculpture into movement but that movement would stop quickly and not endanger other people simultaneously interacting with the sculpture.”
Following 20 months of design, the Wawona sculpture was unveiled when the MOHAI opened at its new location on December 29, 2012. “The MOHAI is a fantastic and rich place full of cherished Seattle artifacts,” Blomgren said. “The Wawona sculpture, however, stands apart as something distinct because it is a new creation that employs state-of-the-art design but is richly and brilliantly tied to the Pacific Northwest’s history of shipbuilding, fishing, and old-growth forests.”

I mentioned Wolbachia in my parthenogenesis post; here I will talk about it in more detail, because it’s a really cool parasite, as well as in the center of much research nowadays.
Wolbachia are Gram-negative ⍺-Proteobacteria (order Rickettsiales, family Anaplasmataceae; Dumler et al.,2001), systematically split into 6 supergroups, lettered from A to F (Lo et al., 2002). Those in supergroups C and D have coevolved with their nematodan hosts and are mutualistic (Bandi et al., 1998). Those in supergroups A and B are parasites in arthropods. Morphologically, they come in two groups: ~1µm large rods, and ~0.5µm diameter coccoids. They can be found in a membrane-bound vacuole in the host cell’s cytoplasm (Yen & Barr, 1971); in arthropods, this will be in egg and ovarian cells (see diagram above, from Weiss et al. (2009)), although it has also been found in other tissues, including the Malpighian tubules, and muscle and nervous tissue (Stouthamer et al., 1999). When found in sperm cell cytoplasm, it disappears during spermatogenesis (Clark et al., 2002).
Note that in this post and in the literature, what’s referred to as Wolbachia is Wolbachia pipientis. Before DNA sequencing, when bacteria were classified morphologically, W. persica and W. melaphagi were also thought to be related, but these have nothing to do with the famous Wolbachia (W. persica is a γ-proteobacterium, W. melaphagi is a rhizobacterium).
Being present endosymbiotically in 20+% of all known insect species (Werren & Windsor, 2000), and given that some estimate that over half of all insect species are infected by it (Hilgenboecker et al., 2008), it’s obviously extremely successful, although it should be noted that the virulence of each Wolbachia strain is different (Min & Benzer, 1997), and each species is has a different susceptibility. In Australian and Panamanian fig wasps, Wolbachia has been found to infect over 70% of all species (Haine & Cook, 2005). A host database can be found here.
The biggest reason for its success is its parasitic effect: it’s always transferred maternally in the cytoplasm of the eggs, and in order to ensure maximal transfer rates, it alters its host’s reproductive abilities to favour their own reproductive success (Charlat et al., 2003). It has four ways to do this, in contrast to the one or two ways present in other such parasites:
- Inducing thelytokous parthenogenesis in haplodiploid organisms, e.g. hymenopterans, thus making sure that only female offspring are produced (e.g. Stouthamer et al., 1993). It occurs by forcing the fusion of the two nuclei of the first mitotic division (Huigens et al., 2000).
- Feminizing males, i.e. males reproduce as females (Wilkinson, 1998). The mechanism for this varies; for example, in the pillbug, Wolbachia blocks the formation of the androgenic gland which produces the masculinising androgenic hormone (Martin et al., 1990).
- Killing males, either in the embryonic stages or later (Hurst, 1991). The mechanisms of action are still largely unknown, although recent pioneering research by Riparbelli et al. (2012) shows that it happens due to Wolbachia (purposely?) messing around with male chromosomes at various stages in development, leading to defective embryos and death.
- Inducing cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) between infected males and uninfected females (Hurst & Werren, 2001), causing sterility (Bordenstein & Werren, 2007) and eventually reproductive isolation within a species.
The latter was the first of Wolbachia‘s effects to be discovered, by Yen & Barr (1971) in mosquitoes; Wolbachia itself was first spotted by Hertig & Wolbach (1924). What happens is that the sperm enters the cell as normal, but its chromosomes don’t decondense and fuse with maternal chromosomes due to a delay in the breakdown of the nuclear envelope in the male’s pronucleus (Tram & Sullivan (2002); see Landmann et al. (2009) for more molecular details), and so can’t enter the first mitosis, meaning they get discarded (Lassy & Karr, 1996). The embryo either becomes a haploid female (in haplodiploid organisms), or it dies. In evolutionary theory terms, in a population susceptible to Wolbachia-induced CI, uninfected females become more unfit, therefore giving a fitness advantage to infected females (Bourtzis et al., 2003), hence explaining how the phenotype persists.
Which manipulation happens cannot be predicted even within the same species, as demonstrated by Hornett et al. (2008), who found that in their North American Hypolimnas bolina butterflies, Wolbachia was a male killer while in Southeast Asian ones, it was a CI-inducer. The difference came from a dominant allele in the SE Asian butterfly genome suppressing the male-killing. Charlat et al. (2007) showed that such a mutation can become fixed in a population in under 10 generations due to the extreme selection pressure to maintain a decent sex ratio, a testament to the ecological power of Wolbachia.
However, in some cases, Wolbachia can be so prominent that the entire affected population gets a very female-biased sex ratio, which in the case of the butterfly Acarea encedon has led to females reversing their sexual roles and behaving like males (Jiggins et al., 2000). In other cases, Wolbachia is counteracted by other elements, for example the B chromosome in the parasitoid wasp Trichogramma kaykai which turns Wolbachia-feminised males back into regular males (Stouthamer et al., 2001).
It must be mentioned that part of their success is their ability to be transmitted horizontally across different species (Raychoudhury et al., 2009) – they aren’t host-specific. This has been shown as happening through parasitoids (Heath et al., 1999) or through the environment (e.g. by sharing a common food source (Huigens et al., 2000)). This also means that a single individual may have multiple Wolbachia species (or, better said, strains) co-existing and mingling inside it; the largest number I know of is eight, in the fire ant Solenopsis daguerrei (Dedeine et al., 2005). Note that this ability only comes in the arthropod-associated Wolbachia, whose genomes are more plastic, with recombination and phage-derived elements (Wu et al., 2004), none of which are characteristics present in their nematodan counterparts (Foster et al., 2005).
One study also reported the possibility of Wolbachia having transferred part or all of its genome to its hosts, albeit with only 2% of the genes able to be transcribed and none of them having any described effect (Hotopp et al., 2007).
The negative effects of Wolbachia are obviously of great interest for biocontrol of pests and disease vectors. For example, Alam et al. (2011) discuss the possibility of using Wolbachia to control the tsetse fly, a vector of trypanosomiasis; Atyame et al. (2011) do the same for mosquitoes. Such biocontrol would work by allowing a chosen genotype to dominate the population by infecting the undesired genotype (e.g. Xi et al. (2005)), or by shortening lifespans to prevent sexual maturity (e.g. Moreira et al. (2009)). Wolbachia can also lead to population bottlenecks with very few individuals becoming able to reproduce (Nice et al., 2009), which is another way to control a pest population.
In non-pest studies, Wolbachia leads to increased susceptibility to parasitoids in Drosophila (Fytrou et al., 2006). It also leads to a less effective immune system in the pillbug Armadillidum vulgare, as seen by a lower density of haemocytes and higher density of bacteria (Bracquart-Vanier et al., 2008). These would be other avenues for pest control if a similar effect is seen in pest groups.
Positive Effects of Wolbachia
Interestingly, the effects of Wolbachia aren’t all negative. In the Cimicidae (bed bugs), Wolbachia is a mutualist; getting rid of it with antibiotics reduces the amount of food the host gets (Hosokawa et al., 2010). In mosquitoes, Wolbachia was found to boost their immune system and cause resistance to dengue virus (Bian et al., 2010). Pinto et al. (2012) describe how this happens at the genetic level. This is another potential use of Wolbachia as a biocontrol agent for disease vectors. In Drosophila, Wolbachia has been shown to confer resistance to several RNA viruses (Teixeira et al., 2008). In a Drosophila lab culture, Weeks et al. (2007) showed that the Wolbachia went from being a parasite to being a mutualist within two decades.
At the extreme end, nematode-infecting Wolbachia are needed for nematode development and fertility (Foster et al., 2005), so Wolbachia antibiotics could be used to control their populations (Taylor & Hoerauf, 1999). This is useful knowledge, given that some of the affected nematodes are vectors for very serious diseases like elephantiasis and onchocerciasis. It’s a similar story with the wasp Asobara tabida, wherein no ovocyte can even be produced when Wolbachia isn’t present (Dedeine et al., 2001) because its absence promotes excessive apoptosis in the ovarioles (Pannebakker et al., 2007).
Other effects of Wolbachia on sexual physiology have been documented, for example an increase in sperm competition in Tribolium beetles (Wade & Chang, 1995), or changes to the spermathecal duct in female Allonemobius crickets (Marshall, 2007).
An interesting point can be made about the process of molecular evolution in Wolbachia. As I said in the introductory paragraph, Wolbachia is a nematode mutualist and arthropod parasite (generally speaking). One of the Wolbachia genes involved in interaction with the host is wsp, which codes for cell membrane proteins. It was found to be undergoing divergent selection when it is in a parasitic relationship, but not when it’s in a mutualistic relationship (Jiggins et al., 2002). This is in line with what we expect: wsp being involved in host recognition means it theoretically should experience heightened evolutionary rates, and this is confirmed by the empirical data.
Many, if not all, negative and positive effects of Wolbachia have evolved by natural selection in order to maximise the transmission of the strain, either by allowing the bacterium to survive in the host (depressed immune system), or reducing competition by blocking the transmission of other pathogens (as Teixeira et al. (2008) suggest for the viral resistance effect). By extension, this means that parthenogenic arthropods aren’t expected to be Wolbachia hosts, since the manipulations are useless there. In terms of evolutionary theory, they can be treated as nothing more than selfish genetic elements.
When I first heard of Wolbachia, my intuition was that it played a sizeable role in speciation, since it promotes reproductive isolation, or by selecting for subdivided populations (Hatcher et al., 2000). Some analyses showed it not to be true (Rousset & Raymond, 1991), but more and more recent studies are supportive of the idea (Bordenstein, 2003), so it’s accepted as a cause of speciation. It definitely has been demonstrated (Thompson, 1987), and in some cases has also induced rapid speciation (Bordenstein et al., 2001).
On a general evolutionary synthesis level, Wolbachia is pretty interesting as a very recognisable case of inheritable symbiosis, one of the few proper examples that lend credence to the view that symbioses are a driving force behind evolution.
Milder effects of large-scale Wolbachia infection and sex ratio-skewing include altering dispersal ability – many insects have dispersing females and non-dispersing males, or vice versa. On a more influential level, there is also evidence that they can play a role in sexual selection (Jiggins et al., 2000), since sexual conflict gets reduced when levels of polyandry fall (Arnqvist & Rowe, 2005).
Wolbachia can sometimes present a methodological stumbling block for molecular phylogenies based on mitochondrial DNA, since mtDNA will also hitchike maternally, favouring the maternal mtDNA haplotype, eventually leading to the entire dataset being worthless; see Ballard & Rand (2005) for more information. However, Arthofer et al. (2010) tested this idea using infected bark beetles and found no significant effect from Wolbachia, so it is still unsure just how significant this slight inaccuracy is.
Where it is definitely a problem is in barcoding initiatives using mtDNA. For successful barcoding of a species, a stable molecular marker needs to be used that is guaranteed not to vary across individuals, populations, or ecomorphs. However, there are some studies that show that Wolbachia causes divergences in mtDNA sequences even among individuals of the same species, e.g. in the butterfly genus Hypolimnas (Galtier et al., 2009). The reason for this is that mitochondrial genes are transferred only maternally, so only the maternal set plays a role in evolution. Given the ubiquity of Wolbachia, this is definitely a large problem that should be studied carefully before proceeding with mtDNA barcoding.
Wolbachia alone can’t be cultivated, but it is possible to keep a Wolbachia line using host cell lines (Noda et al., 2002), so experimental evolution studies are possible with them.
For the entomologists among you, make sure to check any colonies for Wolbachia infections, as they could invalidate your results, especially if you’re doing population biology. They can be gotten rid of using any antibiotic. I hear that tetracycline is recommended; if that’s not possible, high heat is enough, since Wolbachia is sensitive to temperature. If you’re sequencing your insects as well, using DNA from the legs is probably the safest way to avoid getting contaminating Wolbachia DNA amplified (this is standard procedure anyway).
Other symbionts that alter the reproduction of their arthropod hosts include Buchnera and Cardinium – but I’ll leave them for other posts.
Alam U, Medlock J, Breisfoard C, Pais R, Lohs C, Balmand S, Carnogursky J, Heddi A, Takac P, Galvani A & Aksoy S. 2011. Wolbachia Symbiont Infections Induce Strong Cytoplasmic Incompatibility in the Tsetse Fly Glossina morsitans. PLoS Pathogens 7, e1002415.
Arnqvist G & Rowe L. 2005. Sexual Conflict.
Arthofer W, Avtzis DN, Riegler M & Stauffer C. 2010. Mitochondrial phylogenies in the light of pseudogenes and Wolbachia: re-assessment of a bark beetle dataset. ZooKeys 56, 269-280.
Atyame CM, Pasteur N, Dumas E, Tortosa P, Tantely ML, Pocquet N, Licciardi S, Bheecarry A, Zumbo B, Weill M & Duron O. 2011. Cytoplasmic Incompatibility as a Means of Controlling Culex pipiens quinquefasciatus Mosquito in the Islands of the South-Western Indian Ocean. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 5, e1440.
Ballard JWO & Rand DM. 2005. The population biology of mitochondrial DNA and its phylogenetic implications. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 36, 621-642.
Bandi C, Anderson TJC, Genchi C & Blaxter ML. 1998. Phylogeny of Wolbachia in Filarial Nematodes. Proc. R. Soc. B 265, 2407-2413.
Bian G, Xu Y, Lu P, Xie Y & Xi Z. 2010. The Endosymbiotic Bacterium Wolbachia Induces Resistance to Dengue Virus in Aedes aegypti. PLoS Pathogens 6, e1000833.
Bordenstein SR. 2003. Symbiosis and the origin of species. In: Bourtzis K & Miller TA (eds.). Insect Symbiosis, Vol. 1.
Bordenstein SR & Werren JH. 2007. Bidirectional incompatibility among divergent Wolbachia and incompatibility level differences among closely related Wolbachia in Nasonia. Heredity 99, 278-287.
Bordenstein SR, O’Hera FP & Werren JH. 2001. Wolbachia- induced incompatibility precedes other hybrid incompatibility in Nasonia. Nature 409, 707-710.
Bourtzis K, Braig HR & Karr TL. 2003. Cytoplasmic incompatibility. In: Bourtzis K & Miller TM (eds). Insect Symbiosis.
Bracquart-Vanier C, Lachat M, Herbinière J, Johnson M, Caubet Y, Bouchon D & Sicard M. 2008. Wolbachia media variation in host immunocompetence. PLoS ONE 3, e3286.
Charlat S, Hurst GDD, Merçot H. 2003. Evolutionary consequences of Wolbachia infections. Trends in Genetics 19, 217-223.
Charlat S, Hornett EA, Fullard JH, Davies N, Roderick GK, Wedell N & Hurst GDD. 2007. Extraordinary Flux in Sex Ratio. Science 317, 214.
Clark ME, Veneti Z, Bourtzis K & Karr TL. 2002. The distribution and proliferation of the intracellular bacteria Wolbachia during spermatogenesis in Drosophila. Mechanisms of Development 111, 3-15.
Dedeine F, Vavre F, Fleury F, Loppin B, Hochberg ME & Boulétreau M. 2001. Removing symbiotic Wolbachia bacteria specifically inhibits oogenesis in a parasitic wasp. PNAS 98, 6247-6252.
Dedeine F, Ahrens M, Calcaterra L, Shoemaker DD. 2005. Social parasitism in fire ants (Solenopsisspp.): a potential mechanism for interspecies transfer of Wolbachia. Molecular Ecology 14, 1543-1548.
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP, Dasch GA, Palmer GH, Ray SC, Rikihisa Y & Rurangirwa FR. 2001. Reorganization of genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrlichia and Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia, descriptions of six new species combinations and designation of Ehrlichia equi and ‘HGE agent’ as subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 51, 2145-2165.
Foster J, Ganatra M, Kamal I, Ware J, Makarova K, Ivanova N, Bhattachryya A, Kapatral V, Kumar S, Posfai J, Vincze T, Ingram J, Moran L, Lapidus A, Omelchenko M, Kyprides N, Ghedin E, Wang S, Goltsman E, Joukov V, Ostrovskaya O, Tsukerman K, Mazur M, Comb D, Koonin E & Slatko B. 2005. The Wolbachia Genome of Brugia malayi: Endosymbiont Evolution within a Human Pathogenic Nematode. PLoS Biology 3, e121.
Fytrou A, Schofield PG, Kraaljeveld AR & Hubbard SF. 2006. Wolbachia infection suppresses both host defence and parasitoid counter-defence. Proc. R. Soc. B 273, 791-796.
Galtier N, Nabholz B, Glémin S & Hurst GDD. 2009. Mitochondrial DNA as a marker of molecular diversity: a reappraisal. Molecular Ecology 18, 4541-4550.
Haine ER & Cook JM. 2005. Convergent incidences of Wolbachia infection in fig wasp communities from two continents. Proc. R. Soc. B 272, 421-429.
Hatcher MJ, Dunn AM & Tofts C. 2000. Co-existence of hosts and sex ratio distorters in structured populations. Evolutionary Ecology Research 2, 185-205.
Heath BD, Butcher RDJ, Whitfield WGF & Hubbard SF. 1999. Horizontal transfer of Wolbachia between phylogenetically distant insect species by a naturally occurring mechanism. Current Biology 9, 313-316.
Hertig M & Wolbach SB. 1924. Studies on Rickettsia-Like Micro-Organisms in Insects. Journal of Medical Research 44, 329-374.
Hilgenboecker K, Hammerstein P, Schlatmann P, Telschow A & Werren JH. 2008. How many species are infected with Wolbachia? – a statistical analysis of current data. FEMS Microbiology Letters 281, 215-220.
Hornett EA, Duplouy AM, Davies N, Roderick GK, Wedell N, Hurst GDD & Charlat S. 2008. YOU CAN’T KEEP A GOOD PARASITE DOWN: EVOLUTION OF A MALE-KILLER SUPPRESSOR UNCOVERS CYTOPLASMIC INCOMPATIBILITY. Evolution 62, 1258-1263.
Hosokawa T, Koga R, Kikuchi Y, Meng X-Y & Fukatsu T. 2010. Wolbachia as a bacteriocyte-associated nutritional mutualist. PNAS 107, 769-774.
Hotopp JCD, Clark ME, Oliveira DCSG, Foster JM, Fischer P, Torres MCM, Giebel JD, Kumar N, Ishmael N, Wang S, Ingram J, Nene RV, Shepard J, Tomkins J, Richards S, Spiro DJ, Ghedin E, Slatko BE, Tettelin HE & Werren JH. 2007. Widespread Lateral Gene Transfer from Intracellular Bacteria to Multicellular Eukaryotes. Science 317, 1753-1756.
Huigens ME, Luck RF, Klaassen RHG, Maas MFPM, Timmermans MJTM & Stouthamer R. 2000. Infectious parthenogenesis. Nature 405, 178-179.
Hurst LD. 1991. The Incidences and Evolution of Cytoplasmic Male Killers. Proc. R. Soc. B 244, 91-99.
Hurst GDD & Werren JH. 2001. The role of selfish genetic elements in eukaryotic evolution. Nature Reviews Genetics 2, 597-606.
Jiggins FM, Hurst GDD & Majerus MEN. 2000. Sex-ratio-distorting Wolbachia causes sex-role reversal in its butterfly host. Proc. R. Soc. B 267, 69-73.
Jiggins FM, Hurst GDD & Yang Z. 2002. Host-Symbiont Conflicts: Positive Selection on an Outer Membrane Protein of Parasitic but not Mutualistic Rickettsiaceae. Molecular Biology and Evolution 19, 1341-1349.
Landmann F, Orsi GA, Loppin B & Sullivan W. 2009. Wolbachia-Mediated Cytoplasmic Incompatibility Is Associated with Impaired Histone Deposition in the Male Pronucleus. PLoS Pathogens 5, e1000343.
Lassy CW & Karr TL. 1996. Cytological analysis of fertilization and early embryonic development in incompatible crosses of Drosophila simulans. Mechanisms of Development 57, 47-58.
Lo N, Casiraghi M, Salati E, Bazzocchi C & Bandi C. 2002. How Many Wolbachia Supergroups Exist? Molecular Biology and Evolution 19, 341-346.
Marshall JL. 2007. Rapid evolution of spermathecal duct length in the Allonemobius socius complex of crickets: species, population and Wolbachia effects. PLoS ONE 2, e720.
Martin G, Juchault P, Sorokine O & van Dorsselaer. 1990. Purification and characterization of androgenic hormone from the terrestrial isopod Armadillidium vulgare Latr. (Crustacea, Oniscidea). General and Comparative Endocrinology 80, 349-354.
Min K-T & Benzer S. 1997. Wolbachia, normally a symbiont of Drosophila, can be virulent, causing degeneration and early death. PNAS 94, 10792-10796.
Moreira LA, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Jeffery JA, Lu G, Pyke AT, Hedges LM, Rocha BC, Hall-Mendelin S, Day A, Riegler M, Hugo LE, Johnson KN, Kay BH, McGraw EA, van den Hurk AF, Ryan PA & O’Neill SL. 2009. A Wolbachia Symbiont in Aedes aegypti Limits Infection with Dengue, Chikungunya, and Plasmodium. Cell 139, 1268-1278.
Nice CC, Gompert Z, Forister ML & Fordyce JA. 2009. An unseen foe in arthropod conservation efforts: the case of Wolbachia infections in the Karner blue butterﬂy. Biological Conservation 142, 3137-3146.
Noda H, Miyoshi T & Koizumi Y. 2002. In vitro cultivation of Wolbachia in insect and mammalian cell lines. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology – Animal 38, 423-427.
Pannebakker BA, Loppin B, Elemans CPH, Humblot L & Vavre F. 2007. Parasitic inhibition of cell death facilitates symbiosis. PNAS 104, 213-215.
Pinto SB, Mariconti M, Bazzocchi C, Bandi C & Sinkins SP. 2012. Wolbachia surface protein induces innate immune responses in mosquito cells. BMC Microbiology 12 (Suppl. 1), S11.
Raychoudhury R, Baldo L, Oliveira DCSG & Werren JH. 2009. Modes of acquisition of Wolbachia: horizontal transfer, hybrid introgression, and codivergence in the Nasonia species complex. Evolution 63, 165-183.
Riparbelli MG, Giordano R, Ueyama M & Callaini G. 2012. Wolbachia-Mediated Male Killing Is Associated with Defective Chromatin Remodeling. PLoS ONE 7, e30045.
Rousset F & Raymond M. 1991. Cytoplasmic incompatibility in insects: Why sterilize females? TrEE 6, 54-57.
Stouthamer R, Breeuwer JAJ, Luck RF & Werren JH. 1993. Molecular identification of microorganisms associated with parthenogenesis. Nature 361, 66-68.
Stouthamer R, Breeuwer JAJ, Hurst GDD. 1999. WOLBACHIA PIPIENTIS: Microbial Manipulator of Arthropod Reproduction. Annual Review of Microbiology 53, 71-102.
Stouthamer R, van Tilborg M, de Jong JH, Nunney L & Luck RF. 2001. Selfish element maintains sex in natural populations of a parasitoid wasp. Proc. R. Soc. B 268, 617-622.
Taylor MJ & Hoerauf A. 1999. Wolbachia Bacteria of Filarial Nematodes. Parasitology Today 15, 437-442.
Teixeira L, Ferreira Á & Ashburner M. 2008. The Bacterial Symbiont Wolbachia Induces Resistance to RNA Viral Infections in Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS Biology 6, e1000002.
Thompson JN. 1987. Symbiont induced speciation. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 32, 385-393.
Tram U & Sullivan W. 2002. Role of delayed nuclear envelope breakdown and mitosis in Wolbachia-induced cytoplasmic incompatibility. Science 296, 1124-1126.
Wade MJ & Chang NW. 1995. Increased male fertility in Tribolium confusum beetles after infection with the intracellular parasite Wolbachia. Nature 373, 72-74.
Weeks AR, Turelli M, Harcombe WR, Reynolds KT & Hoffmann AA. 2007. From Parasite to Mutualist: Rapid Evolution of Wolbachia in Natural Populations of Drosophila. PLoS Biology 5, e114.
Weiss BL, Attardo GM & Aksoy S. 2009. Insect–Protozoa–Bacteria Associations: a Model System for Investigating Host–Parasite Interactions. In: Stock SP, Vandenberg J, Glazer I & Boemare N. Insect Pathogens: Molecular Approaches and Techniques, pp. 223-240.
Werren JH & Windsor DM. 2000. Wolbachia infection frequencies in insects: evidence of a global equilibrium? Proc. R. Soc. B 267, 1277-1285.
Wilkinson T. 1998. Wolbachia come of age. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 13, 213-214.
Wu M, Sun LV, Vamathevan J, Riegler M, Deboy R, Brownile JC, McGraw EA, Martin W, Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, Madupu R, Beanan MJ, Brinkac LM, Daugherty SC, Durkin AC, Kolonay JF, Nelson WC, Mohamoud Y, Lee P, Berry K, Young MB, Utterback T, Weidman J, Nierman WC, Paulsen IT, Nelson KE, Tettelin H, O’Neill SL & Eisen JA. 2004. Phylogenomics of the Reproductive Parasite Wolbachia pipientis wMel: A Streamlined Genome Overrun by Mobile Genetic Elements. PLoS Biology 2, e69.
Xi Z, Dean JL, Khoo C & Dobson SL. 2005. Generation of a novel Wolbachia infection in Aedes albopictus (Asian tiger mosquito) via embryonic microinjection. Insect Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 35, 903-910.
Yen JH & Barr AR. 1971. New Hypothesis of the Cause of Cytoplasmic Incompatibility in Culex pipiens L. Nature 232, 657-658.
Research Blogging necessities :)
R. Stouthamer, J. A. J. Breeuwer, & G. D. D. Hurst (1999). WOLBACHIA PIPIENTIS: Microbial Manipulator of Arthropod Reproduction Annual Review of Microbiology DOI: 10.1146/annurev.micro.53.1.71

86 is conjectured to be the largest power of 2 not containing a zero. This simply stated conjecture has proven itself to be proof-resistant. Let us see why.
What is the probability that the nth power of two will not have any zeroes? The first and the last digits are non-zeroes; suppose that other digits become zeroes randomly and independently of each other. This supposition allows us to estimate the probability of 2n not having zeroes as (9/10)k-2, where k is the number of digits of 2n. The number of digits can be estimated as n log102. Thus, the probability is about cxn, where c = (10/9)2 ≈ 1.2 and x = (9/10)log102 ≈ 0.97. The expected number of powers of 2 without zeroes starting from the power N is cxN/(1-x) ≈ 40 ⋅ 0.97N.
Let us look at A007377, the sequence of numbers such that their powers of 2 do not contain zeros: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 24, 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 49, 51, 67, 72, 76, 77, 81, 86. Our estimates predicts 32 members of this sequence starting from 6. In fact, the sequence has 30 conjectured members. Similarly, our estimate predicts 2.5 members starting from 86. It is easy to check that the sequence doesn’t contain any more numbers below 200 and our estimate predicts 0.07 members after 200. As we continue checking larger numbers and see that they do not belong to the sequence, the probability that the sequence contains more elements vanishes. With time we check more numbers and become more convinced that the conjecture is true. Currently, it has been checked up to the power 4.6 ⋅ 107. The probability of finding something after that is about 1.764342396 ⋅10-633620.
Let us try to approach the conjecture from another angle. Let us check the last K digits of powers of two. As the number of possibilities is finite, these last digits eventually will start cycling. If we can show that all the elements inside the period contain zeroes, then we need to check the finite number of powers of two until this period starts. If we can find such K, we can prove the conjecture.
Let us look at the last two digits of powers of two. The sequence starts as: 01, 02, 04, 08, 16, 32, 64, 28, 56, 12, 24, 48, 96, 92, 84, 68, 36, 72, 44, 88, 76, 52, 04. As we would anticipate, it starts cycling. The cycle length is 20, and 90% of numbers in the cycle don’t have zeroes.
Now let’s continue to the last three digits. The period length is 100, and 19 of them either start with zero or contain zero. The percentage of elements in the cycle that do not contain zero is 81%.
The cycle length for the last n digits is known. It is 4 ⋅ 5n-1. In particular the cycle length grows by 5 every time. The number of zero-free elements in these cycles form a sequence A181610: 4, 18, 81, 364, 1638, 7371, 33170. If we continue with our supposition that the digits are random, and study the new digits that appear when we move from the cycle of the last n digits to the next cycle of the last n+1 digits, we can expect that 9/10 of those digits will be non-zero. Indeed, if we check the ratio of how many numbers do not contain zero in the next cycle compared to the previous cycle, we get: 4.5, 4.5, 4.49383, 4.5, 4.5, 4.50007. All of these numbers are quite close to our estimation of 4.5. If this trend continues the portion of the numbers in the cycle that don’t have zeroes tends to zero; however, the total of such numbers grows exponentially. We can even estimate that the expected growth is 4 ⋅ 4.5n-1. From this estimation, we can derive the conjecture:
Conjecture. For any number N, there exists a power of two such that its last N digits are zero-free.
Indeed, the last N digits of powers of two cycle, and there are an increasing number of members inside that cycle that do not contain zeroes. The corresponding powers of two don’t have zeroes among N rightmost digits.
So, how do we combine the two results? First, the expected probability of finding the power of two larger than 86 that doesn’t contain zero is minuscule. And second, we most certainly can find a power of two that has as many zeroless digits at the end as we want.
To combine the two results, let us look at the sequences A031140 and A031141. We can deduce from them that for the power 103233492954 the first zero from the right occupies the 250th spot. The total number of digits of that power is 31076377936. So 250 is a tiny portion of the digits.
As time goes by we grow more and more convinced that 86 is the largest power of two without zeroes, but it is not at all clear how we can prove the conjecture or whether it can be proven at all.
My son, Sergei, suggested that I claim that I have a proof of this conjecture, but do not have enough space in the margin to fit my proof in. The probability that I will ever be shamed and disproven is lower than the probability of me winning a billion dollars in the lottery. Though then, if I do win the big bucks, I will still care about being shamed and disproven.

I have been trying to consolidate my beliefs and understandings about practice the last few weeks. As the mother of a hockey player and two dancers I am all too familiar with the idea of practice in sport. In their activities my children have the opportunity to work on isolated skills repeatedly until they become fluid, efficient and second nature. Their coaches are constantly giving them feedback, modelling and helping them get the “feel” for their sport. These practiced skills are constantly being put into use…be it a game or a dance. It is in those game situations where I really see my kids light up. They love to play, perform and just plain have FUN!! In those moments all of the practice becomes worth it and it is in those moments they become reenergize for and reinvested in further practice.
It is with this notion of practice in my head that I began to explore what practice is in education. How it is like practice in sport? I do believe that practice is important in both sport and students learning, but I also believe that not all practice is created equal. Some practice can support learning, consolidate understanding and build confidence for students while other practice can frustrate, confuse and create a barrier for learning. Practice can make “perfect” or at least better but it can also make permanent…and if the practice isn’t effective we run the risk of making permanent misconceptions.
But what is “perfect” practice? Can “perfect” practice really exist? I do not think that “perfect” is an attainable goal but I do think that purposeful is. Purposeful practice implies that teachers and coaches have an aim…intent…goal…target for the practice they want students to engage in. They identify a student/player need, envision what success would look like and with those things in mind create a plan to support the learning with practice. Purposeful practice takes careful thinking into the what, how and why of the practice with the goal of furthering individual students’ learning in ways that are the most meaningful. It is more than just practice for practice sake, more than a stack of worksheets for all students to complete…it is practice with purpose, practice that is deliberate, powerful and focused. The thing that I think we as teachers need to remember and that coaches do so well, is to put the practice into the game. After all it is in the game where the FUN is.
As I continue to think about Purposeful Practice I am consolidating my beliefs into what it truly is in education. These beliefs are far from set in stone but are hopefully the start of a discussion.
My Purposeful Practice Beliefs:
- Students should practice what they understand. Practice without understanding can change the goal of the practice from fluidity of skills to simply getting to the end of the page to make the teacher happy.
- Practice should focused on supporting individual student learning challenges and enhancing strengths.
- Practice should be focused on progress and monitored constantly. If a student is not progressing then the practice needs to change.
- Practice can be and should be messy…we need to see where errors are occurring so that we can help.
- When students make mistakes (and they will) teachers need to be there to help them by offering support, feedback and additional instruction. We should use practice to inform instruction.
- Practice should be sustained over time. It is not a one time thing. In order for practice to become permanent students will need to move the learning into their long-term memory
- Students should be given opportunities to put their practice into authentic “game like” situation as often as possible. It is through the game that students can discover the purpose for the skills, transfer them to new situations and make connections.
- Practice can be cooperative and noisy. Students can learn from each other.
Once upon a time, in a land not so far away there lived a girl named Jennifer. Jennifer was a student and on this particular day she was sitting in her desk carefully writing her name on the back of a piece of white paper. When her teacher said GO and not a second before (it was strictly forbidden to peek) she turned over her paper to reveal a page full of math basic facts. As quickly as possible, she began computing math facts and writing the answers on the paper. The whole class was silent, the only exception was the quite sounds of pencils frantically scratching and the odd moan. The gauntlet had been thrown down and the race was on to conquer the sheet and then celebrate your triumph in front of your friends. After two minutes the class was told to stop..turn the page over and put their pencils down. Some students smiled with victory as the teacher walked between the rows collecting the sheets. Some students hung their heads defeated, deflated and quite frankly exhausted from the effort. Jennifer lived in both groups some days she felt the sweet sensation of victory, some days the sheer agony of defeat. On this day the sheet, only half completed had declared it’s victory over her. The teacher would return the worksheet the next day with X’s and checks marks on it, along with the final score out of 50. Students who did well were told to keep up the good work. Those who didn’t were told to try harder next week when Mad Minute day came. On this particular day Jennifer asked her teacher if they had to have Mad Minutes day every week. She was given this short, simple answer…”It will help you learn your basic facts”.
Years later Jennifer was a teacher, with her own group of students sitting before her eagerly awaiting their signal to turn over the sheet of paper and begin. She had been given the most wonderful opportunity to teach students their basic math facts and was using the one tool she knew would ensure that students learned… The Mad Minute. After all, she had successfully learned her basic facts and had long since abandoned using her fingers and toes…well most of the time anyways. Some of her students experienced success, some struggled, some downright refused to start. Jennifer reflected on this fact with a colleague the next day. Why didn’t the kids get it?…she was doing all she could…she had even increased her Mad Minute time to twice a week…yet they refused to learn. Her colleague suggested sending the worksheets home for more practice. Maybe parents would have the time to help the students continue to learn those basic facts. After all they had now completed the unit on operations.
As I reflect on this story I feel sad, for that young girl who felt defeated, that young teacher who knew very little about teaching mathematics, and for all of those students. I was that girl and knew how defeated the Mad Minute made me feel…yet I created that same experience for my students. I simply knew no other way. A few years later I heard a speaker say something that really struck home to me… “When teachers align what they teach… with what students learn…and with what they assess… they honour the learners in their classrooms.
Mad Minutes, at least the way they had been modelled for me, were considered the one stop shop for teaching students to learn and assessing progress in basic facts. Knowing what I know now I understand that they are none of those things. They didn’t teach…they evaluated, they didn’t support learning…they evaluated, at best you could say they assessed and provided feedback for teacher planning and instructional decision-making (which they didn’t). At worst…they evaluated. They became an activity for survival of the fittest. The strong survived to basked in their success. The weak were defeated, crushed and left to feel like math failures. No one was honored. If you were one of those bright-eyed, trusting students in my classroom…I sincerely apologize. You deserved a teacher who would teach so that you could learn. A teacher who would assess and use those assessments for learning. A teacher who would not send home the very object of your frustration only to have you experience failure in a new environment. You deserved better! Knowing what I know now…I COULD do better. I now believe that:
- Teaching mathematics is about developing student competence AND confidence
- Teaching of basic facts should be done in a way that is strategic, and in attainable steps that can inspire confidence
- Practice should be purposeful and targeted
- Fluency is important and students should be given opportunities to develop fluency that is built on a foundation of conceptual knowledge
- Monitoring of Progress is key and should inform instructional decisions
- Assessments can be timed if necessary but students should be allowed to finish and only “compete” with themselves
- Students should be given opportunities to see patterns within operations and connections between addition/subtraction and multiplication/division
- Numbers are flexible and teaching/ learning about them should be as well
My next few posts will continue to develop my thinking on purposeful practice and procedural fluency in a way that I hope honors our learners and inspires success. As always your comments and feedback are always welcome.

Ongoing developments into memristor technologies have helped researchers come even closer to bendable, wearable electronics.
Memristors are a fourth class of electric circuit, and, despite being hypothesised in the seventies, are a very new addition to the transistors, capacitors and inductors that usually make up chips.
And now researchers at the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), have found a novel use for memristors that could see bendable electronics become commonplace in the “near future”.
The team says that one of the main problems with the production of flexible electronics has been the development of operational flexible memory.
However they believe that they have solved this with what they describe as “fully functional” flexible resistive random access memory (RRAM). With this memory, they say, a cell can be randomly accessed, written and erased on a plastic substrate that is able to be bend and rolled easily.
It is not the first time that flexible memory has been under development. However the researchers believe that their device overcomes one of the major problems of cell to cell interference.
To solve this it is necessary to integrate switching elements like transistors with memory elements. However most transistors which are built on flexible plastic substrates are unable to achieve the performance level required to drive conventional memory.
The team at KAIST managed to fix this by developing memory which is not affected by cell to cell interference, using the properties of memristors alongside a silicon transistor on flexible substrates.
By applying the properties of both technologies they were able to get all the memory function in a matrix memory array functioning without problems.

By DANIEL SUDDEATH
NEW ALBANY —
Judging by the pleasure clearly shown by the children as they wheeled their robots around the Ed Endres Boys & Girls Club, it would be easy to assume the kids were only having fun Wednesday afternoon.
But the hours they spent turning Lego kits into functional robots that can play music, light up on command and spin around on four wheels introduced the kids to computer programming and basic engineering.
Instruction is part of the reason behind the RoboTech program, officials and organizers behind the project said. In September, students at the New Albany club were selected to pilot the program locally.
Time Warner Cable — parent company of Insight Communications — partnered with Boys & Girls Club of America and FIRST Robotics to bring the program to 20 chapters across the country.
In September, New Albany students at Ed Endres Boys & Girls Club were introduced to robotics for the first time. When they saw the Lego Mindstorms boxes waiting to be opened, many had no idea the toy parts could be transformed into a robot.
“They didn’t actually know they could build it themselves,” said Santanna Lea, program director at the Ed Endres Boys & Girls Club.
She conceded she didn’t know much about robotics at the time either, or how drawn to the program the kids would be. They almost immediately were enticed with the idea of building their own robots, and their interest only grew with the more functions they learned how to program, she continued.
“They actually taught me a lot,” Lea said. “It was a learning process for all of us.”
Science-Technology-Engineering-Math — or STEM — youth activities and programs are vital because they help train kids for a new frontier of jobs, Insight Communications Director of Communications Dan Ballister said.
“Time Warner and Insight are very excited about partnerships like these,” he said.
The program is geared toward middle school students, though some younger kids also participated in the project at Ed Endres. The children formed groups to work on the robots and demonstrated their work Wednesday at the club.
To congratulate them for their progress, Ballister and Insight donated several gifts to the clubs including games and gadgets that emphasize science and technology.
Ballister said robotics are quite popular across the country, and there are tournaments regularly where kids can enter their robots in competitions based on functionality.
Hopefully the students at the Ed Endres Boys & Girls Club will continue their interest in robotics and enter some tournaments, he continued.
“The kids have to practice and practice and work as a team to make sure their robot can compete,” Ballister said.
Jennifer Helgeson, president and CEO of Boys and Girls Clubs of Kentuckiana, was on hand to see the kids display their robots. Seeing the pride the kids had for their work proved how valuable the project was, she said.
“I think the program is incredible,” Helgeson said. “It encourages them and gets the kids excited about science and technology.”

With the exceptions of peas and broad beans, fruit vegetables are warm-season crops, and with the exception of sweet corn and peas, all are subject to chilling injury. Fruit vegetables are not generally adaptable to long-term storage. Exceptions are the hard rind (winter) squashes and pumpkin. A useful classification for postharvest discussion of the fruit vegetables is based on the stage of maturity at harvest. This presents an overview of the general postharvest requirements and handling systems for this group of commodities.
Legumes: snap, lima, and other beans, snow pea, sugar snap and garden peas
Cucurbits: cucumber, soft rind squashes, chayote, bitter melon, luffa
Solanaceous vegetables: eggplant, peppers, tomatillo
Others such as okra and sweet corn
Cucurbits: cantaloupe, honeydew, and other muskmelons; watermelon, pumpkin, hard-rind squashes
Solanaceous vegetables: mature green and vine-ripe tomatoes, ripe peppers
The harvest index for most immature fruit vegetables is based principally on size and color. Immature soft-rind squashes, for example, may be harvested at several sizes or stages of development, depending upon market needs. Fruit that are too developed are of interior internal quality and show undesirable color change after harvest. This also applies to other immature fruit vegetables such as cucumber and bell peppers.
The harvest index for mature fruit vegetables depends on several characteristics, and proper harvest maturity is the key to adequate shelf life and good quality of the ripened fruit. For cantaloupe, the principal harvest indices are surface color and the development of the abscission zone.
Most fruit vegetables are harvested by hand. Some harvest aids may be used, including pickup machines and conveyors for melons. Cantaloupe is also harvested with "sack" crews who empty the melons into bulk trailers. Crenshaw and other specialty melons are easily damaged and require special care in handling and transport to the packing area. Mature green tomatoes are usually hand harvested into buckets and emptied into field bins or gondolas. Almost all fresh market tomatoes grown in California are bush type, and the plants are typically harvested only once or twice. At the time of harvest, 5 to 10 percent of the tomatoes have pink and yellow color and are separated out later on the packing line as vine-ripest
Immature fruit vegetables generally have very tender skins that are easily damaged in harvest and handling. Special care must be taken in all handling operations to prevent product damage and subsequent decay. Sweet corn, snap beans, and peas may be harvested mechanically or by hand.
Many of the mature fruit vegetables are hauled to packinghouses, storage, or loading facilities in bulk bins (hard rind squashes, peppers, pink tomatoes), gondolas (mature green tomatoes and peppers), or bulk field trailers or trucks (muskmelons, hard rind squashes).
Harvesting at night, when products are the coolest, is common for sweet corn and is gaining in use for cantaloupe. Products reach their lowest temperature near daybreak. Night harvest may reduce the time and costs of cooling products, may result in better and more uniform cooling, and helps maintain product quality. Fluorescent lights attached to mobile packing units have permitted successful night harvesting of cantaloupe in California.
The trend is increasing toward field packing of fruit vegetables. Grading, sorting, sizing, packing, and palletizing are carried out in the field. The products are then transported to a central cooling facility. Mobile packing facilities are commonly towed through the fields for cantaloupe, honeydew melon, eggplant, cucumber, summer squashes, and peppers. Field-pack operations entail much less handling of products than in packinghouses. This reduces product damage and, therefore, increases packout yield of products. In melons, for example, field packing means less rolling, dumping, and dropping and thus helps reduce the "shaker" problem, in which the seed cavity loosens from the pericarp wall. It also reduces scuffing of the net which reduces subsequent water loss. Handling costs are also reduced in field pack operations. One difficulty with field packing, however, is the need for increased supervision to maintain consistent quality in the packed product. Field packing is not used for commodities that require classification for both color and size, such as tomato.
Loaded field vehicles should be parked in shade to prevent product warming and sunburning. Products may be unloaded by hand (soft rind squashes, eggplant, some muskmelons, cucumber, watermelon), dry-dumped onto sloping, padded ramps (cantaloupe, honeydew melon, sweet peppers) or onto moving conveyor belts (tomatoes), or wet-dumped into tanks of moving water to reduce physical injury (honeydew melon, tomatoes, and peppers). Considerable mechanical damage occurs in dry-dumping operations; bruising, scratching, abrading and splitting are common examples. The water temperature in wet-dump tanks for tomatoes should be slightly warmer than the product temperature to prevent uptake of water and decay-causing organisms into the fruits. The dump tank water needs to be chlorinated. An operation may have two tanks separated by a clean water spray to improve overall handling sanitation.
Presizing. For many commodities, fruit below a certain size are eliminated manually or mechanically by a presizing belt or chain. Undersize fruit are diverted to a cull conveyor or used for processing.
Sorting or selection. The sorting process eliminates cull, overripe, misshapen, and otherwise defective fruit and separates products by color, maturity, and ripeness classes (e.g. tomato and muskmelons). Electronic color sorters are used in some tomato operations.
Grading. Fruit are sorted by quality into two or more grades according to U.S. standards, California grade standards, or a shipper's own Trade standards.
Waxing. Food grade waxes are commonly applied to cucumber, eggplant, sweet peppers, cantaloupe, and tomato, and occasionally to some summer squashes. The purpose is to replace some of the natural waxes removed in the washing and cleaning operations, to reduce water loss, and to improve appearance. Waxing may be done before or after sizing, and fungicides may be added to the wax. Application of wax and postharvest fungicides must be indicated on each shipping container. Waxing and fungicides are used only in packinghouse handling of fruit vegetables. European cucumbers are frequently shrink-wrapped rather than waxed.
Sizing. After sorting for defects and color differences, the fruit vegetables are segregated into several size categories. Sizing is done manually for many of the fruit vegetables, including the legumes, soft and hard rind squashes, cucumber, eggplant, chili peppers, okra, pumpkin, rnuskmelons, and watermelon. Cantaloupes may be sized by volumetric weights, or diverging roll sizers, sweet peppers are sized commonly by diverging bar sizers, and tomatoes are sized by diameter with belt sizers or by weight.
Packing. Mature green and pink tomatoes, sweet and chili peppers, okra, cucumber, and legumes are commonly weight- or volume-filled into shipping containers. All other fruit type vegetables and many of the above are place-packed into shipping containers by count, bulk bins (hard rind squashes. pumpkin, muskmelons, and watermelon) or bulk trucks (watermelon). Fruit type vegetables that are place-packed are often sized during the same operation.
Palletizing. Packed shipping containers of most fruit vegetables in large-volume operations are palletized for shipment. This is a common practice with cantaloupe, muskmelons, sweet peppers, and tomato. Except for sweet corn, the immature fruit vegetables are often handled in low volume operations, where palletizing is not common because of lack of forklifts. In these cases, the products are palletized at a centralized cooling facility or as they are loaded for transport. Palletizing is usually done after hydrocooling or package-ice cooling, but before forced-air cooling. In field-pack operations, palletizing is generally done in the field.
Various methods are used for cooling fruit vegetables. The most common methods are discussed here.
Forced-air cooling is used for beans, cantaloupe, cucumbers, muskmelons, peas, peppers, soft rind squashes, and tomato. Forced-air evaporative cooling is used to a limited extent on chilling-sensitive commodities such as squashes, peppers, eggplant, and cherry tomato.
Hydrocooling is used before grading, sizing, and packing of beans, cantaloupe, sweet corn, and okra. Sorting of defective products is done both before and after cooling. Hydrocooling cycles are rarely long enough during hot weather. The need to maintain a continuous, adequate supply of cantaloupes to the packers often results in the melons being incompletely cooled. This can be remedied if, after packing and palletizing, enough time is allowed in the cold room to cool the product to recommended temperatures before loading for transport to markets.
Package icing and liquid-icing are used to a limited extent for cooling cantaloupe and routinely as a supplement to hydrocooling for sweet corn.
Temporary cold storage. In large-volume operations, most fruit vegetables are placed in cold storage rooms after cooling and before shipment. Cold rooms are less used in small farm operations; the products are often transported to central cooperatively owned or distributor-owned facilities for cooling and short-term storage.
Loading for transport. Some tomatoes, cantaloupe, and other muskmelons are shipped in refrigerated railcars, but most fruit vegetables are shipped in refrigerated trucks or container vans. Except for the major volume products such as cantaloupe and tomato, most are shipped in mixed loads, sometimes with ethylene-sensitive commodities. Among the immature fruit type vegetables, products such as cucumber, legumes, bitter melon, and eggplant are sensitive to ethylene exposure. Among the mature fruit types, watermelon is detrimentally affected by ethylene, resulting in softening of the whole fruit, flesh mealiness, and rind separation.
For uniform and controlled ripening, ethylene is often applied to mature green tomatoes and sometimes to honeydew, casaba, and Crenshaw melons. Ethylene treatments may be done at the shipping point or the destination, although final fruit quality is generally considered best if the treatment is applied at the shipping point soon after harvest. Satisfactory ripening occurs at 12.5° to 25°C (55° to 77°F), the higher the temperature, the faster the ripening (table 29.3). Above 30°C (86°F), red color development of tomato is inhibited. An ethylene concentration of about 100 ppm is commonly used. Honeydew melons (usually class 12 melons) are sometimes held in ethylene up to 24 hours; tomatoes are usually held at 20°C (68°F) and treated for up to 3 days.
Tomatoes may be ethylene-treated before or after packing, but most are treated after packing. An advantage of treating before packing is that the warmer conditions favor development of any decay-causing pathogens on the fruit, so infected fruit can be eliminated before final packout. Packing after ethylene treatment also permits a more uniform packout. Because most of the mature green tomatoes produced in California are packed and then treated with ethylene, "checkerboarding" may still occur and make a repack operation necessary.
Modified atmospheres are seldom used commercially for these commodities, although shipments of melons and tomato under modified atmospheres are being tested for long-distance markets. Consumer packaging of vine-ripe tomatoes may also involve the use of modified atmospheres. For tomatoes held at recommended temperatures, oxygen levels of 3 to 5 percent slow ripening, with carbon dioxide levels held below 5 percent to avoid injury. Muskmelons have been less studied, but recommended atmospheres under normal storage conditions are 3 to 5 percent oxygen and 10 to 20 percent carbon dioxide.
Recommended storage/transit conditions
For mature fruit type vegetables temperature can effectively control the rate of ripening. Most mature-harvested fruit vegetables are sensitive to chilling injury when held below the recommended storage temperature. Chilling injury is cumulative, and its severity depends on the temperature and the duration of exposure. In the case of tomato, exposure to chilling temperatures below 10°C (50° F) results in lack of color development decreased flavor, and increased decay
The optimum temperatures for short-term storage and transport are:
Mature green tomatoes, pumpkin, and hard rind squashes: 12.5° to 15° C (55° to 60° F)
Partially to fully ripe tomatoes, muskmelons (except cantaloupe): 10° to 12.5° C (50° to 55° F).
Honeydew melons that are ripening naturally or have been induced with ethylene are best held at 5° to 7.5° C (41° to 45° F).
Watermelon: 7° to 10° C (45° to 50° F)
Cantaloupe: 2.5° to 5° C (36° to 41° F)
The optimum relative humidity range is 85 to 90 percent for tomato and muskmelons (except cantaloupe), 90 to 95 percent for cantaloupe, and 60 to 70 percent for pumpkin and hard rind squashes.
Immature fruit vegetables
All fruit vegetables harvested immature are sensitive to chilling injury. Exceptions are the peas and sweet corn, which are stored best at 0° C (32° F) and 95 percent RH.
The optimum product temperatures with RH at 90 to 95 percent for short-term storage and transport are as follows:
Eggplant, cucumber, soft rind squashes, okra: 10° to 12.5° C (50° to 55° F)
Peppers: 5° to 7° C (41° to 45° F)
Lima beans, snap beans: 5° to 8° C (41° to 46° F)
Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of California.
All contents copyright © 2011 The Regents of the University of California. All Rights Reserved.
Development funding from the University of California and USDA, CSREES.
Please e-mail your comments to: email@example.com
Last updated: February 15, 2012 | Website design by Lauri Brandeberry

Women Bear Greatest Burden of Alzheimer's
Survey finds they're more likely than men to have Alzheimer's or take care of someone with the disease.
MONDAY, July 18 (HealthDay News) — Women fear Alzheimer's disease more than any other illness except cancer, and they are more often on the front lines of providing care for loved ones battling the disease, new research shows.
"With statistics consistently pointing to the fact that more women are living with Alzheimer's and caring for people with Alzheimer's, it is clear women are disproportionately affected by this disease," said Angela Geiger, chief strategy officer of the Alzheimer's Association.
A survey of women in France, Germany, Spain, Poland and the United States revealed that women are at the center of the global Alzheimer's epidemic. The multinational research team found women in all five countries were more concerned than men about a loved one developing the disease.
Women in all countries, the survey also found, were more likely than men to be involved in the daily care of someone with the disease. In fact, women in France and Poland were significantly more involved in the decision-making and financial support of an Alzheimer's patient.
If roles were reversed and those polled were to develop the disease, most identified their spouse as the person who would be responsible for their primary care. Men, however, identified their wives 6 percent to 18 percent more often than wives identified their husbands. In contrast, women were more likely to say they would rely on their children or paid caregivers outside the family to care for them.
Despite their fear of the disease, which currently affects 36.5 million people worldwide, and their greater burden as caregivers, 71 percent of women in France and 76 percent of women in the United States seem to be more optimistic that a treatment for Alzheimer's will be developed within five years. That may be one reason why the survey also showed that women believe government spending on Alzheimer's research should be increased.
"These insights reinforce the conclusions published in The Shriver Report: A Women's Nation Takes on Alzheimer's, which found the impact of Alzheimer's on women is significant. The perspectives we see in this survey must prompt thoughtful conversations about Alzheimer's with our friends, family members and government officials to change the trajectory of Alzheimer's disease," concluded Geiger.
The research was slated for presentation Monday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in Paris. Research presented at medical meetings should be viewed a preliminary until it is published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

51°15' / 22°34'
Translation of "Lublin" chapter from Pinkas Hakehillot Polin
Published by Yad Vashem
Published in Jerusalem
Project Coordinator and Translator
Morris Gradel z"l
Our sincere appreciation to Yad Vashem
for permission to put this material on the JewishGen web site.
This is a translation from: Pinkas Hakehillot:
Encyclopedia of Jewish Communities, Poland, Volume VII, pages 13 - 38, published by Yad Vashem, Jerusalem
JewishGen is not responsible for inaccuracies or omissions in the original work and cannot rewrite or edit the text to correct inaccuracies and/or omissions.
Our mission is to produce a translation of the original work and we cannot verify the accuracy of statements or alter facts cited.
Lublin (hereafter L), the largest town in Eastern Poland, is the main town of the region and province. It stands on the banks of the River Bystrzyca. In the 12th century it was a fortified settlement on the trade route leading to Ruthenia. In the 13th century it was destroyed several times during invasions by the Tatars, Ruthenians and Jadvingians (a Lithuanian tribe). For some time the settlement was under the ægis of the Princes of Halicz. In 1317 L was granted the Magdeburgian privileges of a town by King Wladislaw Lokietek. His son, Casimir the Great, erected a wall around the town. It was granted the privilege in 1385 of free trade with the Lithuanian Principality and in 1392 the right to store in the town goods in transit - and these advantages contributed to its rapid development. In 1474 L was the seat of the king's representative (the Woiwoda). It reached the zenith of its prosperity in the 16th and beginning of the 17th centuries, when its markets attracted merchants from the whole of Poland and even beyond. The same period also saw the expansion of various trades.
In the 16th century L was also a political centre, where the nobility held its meetings; in 1578 it became the seat of the Crown Court and the Appeal Court of "Lesser Poland", and in 1569 there convened in L the Sejm that united Poland and Lithuania under one crown (this was the celebrated Polish-Lithuanian "Unia"). Resident in the town were writers and poets renowned at the time (Kochanowski, Rej and others), and a printing works and paper factory were established.
In the 16th and 17th century the population of L was more than 10,000, and embraced some suburbs. In the period of the "deluge" (the wars in the middle of the 17th century waged in Poland by the Cossacks, the Swedes and the Muscovites) L suffered heavy damage to life and property. Repairs were not undertaken for some time, and only in 1780 did work on reconstruction begin. In 1795 L passed under the sovereignty of Austria, in 1809 it formed part of the "Principality of Warsaw", and from 1815 until the rise of independent Poland in 1918 it was included in Congress Poland.
In the course of the 19th century L developed into the metropolis of the eastern part of the Polish Kingdom. Its population increased from 7,000 at the beginning of the century (during the Napoleonic Wars) to 56,000 at its conclusion. During the century it was under the "Jurisdiction of Wieniawa" (a suburban noble estate with autonomous legal status). Only late in the century did L start to develop a modern economy. After being linked to the rail network in 1877 existing industries developed and new ones were established. Concomitant with this there was cultural development and cultural and educational institutions were founded. L contained some well-known Polish writers, such as Kraszewski, Vincenty Paul and Boleslaw Prus, and many figures of the Polish national underground movement chose to settle there.
The 20th century saw no radical changes in L's economic structure, and the town remained the centre of an agricultural area. World War I had a considerable stagnating effect on local industry, and its recovery between the two world wars was protracted. In the 20s and 30s new plants connected with the aviation industry were established, as were factories for pipes, screws, tobacco and chicory (coffee substitute). The town's public services (sewage, waterworks, electric power, slaughterhouse and the like) were also developed. Nevertheless, during the whole inter-war period L was in economic decline, or at best stagnant. The number of unemployed went on increasing and with it the number of demonstrations and strikes. The process of impoverishment affected broad spectra of the population. The situation was particularly bad during the crisis of 1929-33, and even in 1933 the number of unemployed (12,000) surpassed the number in employment. There was virtually no natural increase of population in the years preceding the Second World War.
During the 19th and 20th centuries L was the scene of activity by political movements and youth organisations, both open and clandestine. In 1918, after Poland gained its independence, a council of Polish representatives assumed political control of the town and its environs.
On the very first day of World War II L suffered heavy bombardment. During the German occupation the leading Polish intellectuals were liquidated. Many people were imprisoned in the town's fortress on political grounds. In 1941 the first batch of 160 prisoners was despatched to the concentration camp at Ravensbrück. In 1941 too, an extermination camp was established at Majdanek, near L. It served at first as a camp for 2,000 Soviet prisoners of war. In Majdanek some 360,000 beings met their death, most of them Jews from Poland, but also from other parts of occupied Europe.
During the German occupation whole quarters of the town were destroyed, as was most of the infrastructure (such as roads and bridges). L became an important centre of the Polish Resistance.
On July 24th, 1944, L was liberated by the Red Army, and for seven months was the capital of the new Poland. The process of recovery was rapid: ruined factories were restored and new ones built, and L again became an important cultural centre. New institutions of higher education were set up, including the University of Marie Sklodowska Curie, as were various categories of secondary schools. The Theatre and the Philharmonic Orchestra resumed their activities. The Lupaczinski Library was expanded to contain 200,000 volumes. However, in the 60s stagnation and even recession set in, as was the case in the rest of "Socialist Poland". The crisis reached its peak in the late 80s, and even continued into the beginning of the new Polish Republic that came into being in 1990-91, following the collapse of the "Polish People's Republic".
The first Jews in L are mentioned in documents from the 15th century, though there may possibly have been some there earlier. A few Jews lived in the town itself, with the consent of the authorities, despite the royal edict of 1535 that forbad Jews to live in L. In the 15th and 16th centuries many Jews settled in the town and established a Jewish quarter to the north and north-east of the palace and the fortress. For the privilege of living there the Jews were obliged to pay a tax to the fortress administrators. In 1555 the boundaries of the Jewish quarter were extended; the Governor of Lublin, Stanislaw Winczinski, with the approval of the King of Poland, Sigismund August, granted the Jewish community three large plots of land, One of these was to contain the slaughterhouse and butcher shops; the second, on the palace hill near the old cemetery, was to serve as an additional burial-ground; and the third, on the slopes of the palace hill, was set aside for religious purposes. In return for these plots the community agreed to pay an annual tax of 12 marks and an annual sum for candle grease.
In 1557 Governor Winczinski presented Dr. Yitzhak Maj, a well-known doctor in L, a large plot (which also had a pool) and permitted him to build on it. In 1566 a synagogue was erected there in the name of the Maharashal (Rabbi Shlomo Luria), and the following year other buildings were added, in one of which a yeshiva was opened. In 1603 the merchant Yaakov ben Aharon received from Governor Firlay a plot on which to erect buildings and shops. The Jewish quarter continued to grow, from 24 houses in 1550 to 100 at the end of the century. The main street was Sieroca Street, where the activities of the community were concentrated. In addition to the Maharashal Synagogue and the Bet Midrash, there was another prayer-house, in the name of Avraham ben Chaim, one of the leaders of the Council of the Four Lands*, and the study house of the "Seer of Lublin". A third synagogue was built in Podzamcze Street - the "Leifer", associated with the name of Shaul Wahl, of whom it was said that he ruled Poland for one day, but gave up power in favour of a Pole. In 1638 Tsvi Hirsch, an agent of the royal court and a leader of the Council of the Four Lands, built a synagogue in the name of his father, Moshe Doctor ("Doctor-Shul"), this too in Sieroca Street.
In time the Jewish quarter became too restricted and some of its inhabitants tried to circumvent the rule of "de non tolerandis judais" (not to tolerate Jews within the confines of the city) implemented by watchful citizens, with a view to moving to other parts of the town. Few, however, were permitted to do so, and these only for a limited period. In 1655 a fire broke out in the Jewish quarter and most of the houses went up in flames. Reconstruction took many years. As mentioned above, after the "deluge" (the wars of 1648-60) L lost its privileged status. The Council of the Four Lands, which until then usually met in L, moved in 1680 to Jaroslaw, which was developing at the time and was an important centre of trade and markets.
In the 18th and the second half of the 19th century also, the Jews continued their attempts to be allowed to live outside the Jewish quarter, but generally without success. In 1761 Jews who were there without authorisation were expelled from the centre of town and, with a few fortunate exceptions, were compelled to return to the crowded conditions of the quarter. This state of affairs continued until the Tsar's edict of 1862 annulling the restrictions on Jewish dwellings in the Kingdom of Congress Poland.
Thanks to its status as an important commercial centre as early as the 15th century and its position at the crossroads of the trade route from Western Poland to the North and South-East of the country, the markets of L attracted large numbers of Jewish merchants from all corners of Poland and beyond. The Jews traded in almost all the wares bought and sold on these occasions. In 1530/31 Jewish merchants transported through the auspices of the Chamber of Commerce in L 136 barrels of wine, 503 oxen, 15,000 ells of cloth, 47 rolls of silk, 38,297 furs and hides, 5 wagons of iron, 82 stone of steel, 22,170 ells of fabrics, and other wares. In 1584 Jewish merchants from Krakow brought to the market in L 185 wagons loaded with goods. The communities of Poznan and Krakow even had in L brokers, whose task was to settle differences between the merchants during the markets. For their part, the merchants of L maintained contact with important merchants outside Poland.
At the end of the 15th century and the beginning of the 16th the name of the merchant Yoska Szachnowicz of L (the father of Rabbi Shalom Shachna Hacohen) was well-known for his trading and leasing activities. Yoska was the King's excise officer and in charge of customs in Reisen and Podolia.
The markets of L, where Jewish notables from all over Poland gathered, became in time the core around which the Council of the Four Lands grew. However, before they achieved commercial status the Jews of L had to overcome many difficulties. In 1518 King Sigismund I acquiesced in the request of the citizens and town council, and ordered his representative in L, Jan of Filicia, to curtail the trading rights of the local Jews. In 1521 the king issued an edict forbidding Jewish pedlars to purchase produce brought into town by the local farmers. Two years later another order was published with a view to placing the trading rights of the L Jews on an equal footing with those of Lwow, Poznan and Krakow. This order contained a set of restrictions, mainly a ban on retail trading by Jews and a curb on their wholesale activities. The Jews of L were also forbidden to have shops, and were only allowed to set up temporary booths in their own quarter. Christians were forbidden to lease shops or stalls to Jews, infringements being punishable by fines. In spite of this, the Jews managed to rent stalls and shops during the annual markets.
In 1531 there was an action brought by the Municipality of L against the Jews concerning payment of tax on imports of woven goods. The king ruled that the Jews had to pay this tax, despite the fact that non-Jewish citizens were exempt. Contrariwise, there were instances where the Jews were freed of various taxes by royal order; for example, in 1530 the Jews were exempted from paying road tax.
Generally speaking, the Jews strove to arrive at a compromise with their non-Jewish townsmen. The Christians in the Podzamsze quarter held a monopoly on the right to produce and market wines, beer and mead; and in 1590 the king forbad the Jews to engage in these activities. They, however, managed to circumvent this ban through an arrangement whereby, cash in advance, they could sell spirits purchased from the Christians. In return for this favour, the Jews agreed to make an annual gift of 35 ells of finest quality cloth to each member of the town council, and twice a year a pound of pepper to the town clerk and the seven members of the council. The Jews were forbidden to sell bread and flour to non-Jews. This agreement was renewed by the two parties every few years, with the approval of the king. From time to time new edicts and restrictions were imposed on the Jews. In 1650, as a result of Jesuit pressure, Jewish apothecaries were forbidden to prepare or sell medicine. And four years later, in 1654, Jewish musicians were banned from appearing in public without special permission from the town authorities.
In their battle against Jewish trade the other citizens employed not only legal means, but also violence. Now and then they would burst into the Jewish quarter and kill, and loot property and wares. Such an incident occurred in 1623. There was also violence for its own sake. In 1646 pupils of the ecclesiastical "colleges" (also known as "Dzakim") fell upon the Jewish quarter. In the course of this disturbance eight Jews were killed, many injured, and 20 houses emptied of their contents. In 1598 a rumour of blood libel spread through the town; three Jews of L were accused of murdering a Christian child for ritual purposes, and the mob tried them and slaughtered them brutally. Members of the Jesuit Order in L set up a printing press and distributed leaflets with virulent accusations against the Jews.
Jewish artisans too were forced to wage a hard battle against their non-Jewish competitors for the right to engage in their trade. Even before the "deluge" the Christian artisan guilds enjoyed privileges that entailed bans or restrictions on Jewish business. In 1535, for example, the Christian tailors' guild obtained from the king an order banning Jewish tailors from engaging in their trade, and in 1595 the bakers' guild obtained a similar decree from King Sigismund III forbidding Jews to bake bread or trade in flour. This devout king also granted privileges to the guilds of carpenters, glaziers and ropemakers, according to which the guilds were excluded from accepting as members unbelievers, heretics and Jews.
The municipality, the official patron of the arts, also approved many measures directed against Jewish artisans. In the 17th and 18th centuries Christian artisans, with the approval of the municipality, adopted regulations designed to forbid the Jews to engage in various trades, or to restrict them to marginal activities. The Christian artisans also obtained from the authorities a ban on Jewish merchants supplying various trades with raw materials.
However, in not a few cases the Christian organisations waived some of the prohibitions and restrictions in return for money; a typical example of this was the agreement of 1689 with the guild of weavers of gold and silver threads, by which three Jewish weavers were permitted to work in eight workshops, and 13 Jewish brokers and suppliers in the branch were allowed to buy and sell raw materials - apart from Christian ritual articles - exclusively to non-Jewish artisans. In return the Jews consented to pay to the guild 100 guilders four times a year and to accept supervision of their workshops by the guild. Clearly the Jewish artisans could not put up with these numerous restrictions and endeavoured to circumvent them by all means possible, both legal and illegal. In 1600 a group of Christian tailors seceded from their guild and started a separate guild in Podzamcze (a residential area open to Jews). The new guild accepted 24 Jewish tailors on payment of an annual fee. Since, however, the number of active Jewish tailors far exceeded those accepted by the guild, and since this majority also had to earn a living, many of them plied their trade illegally. This led to friction and violence. In 1781 a new agreement was signed by which the number of Jewish tailors permitted to work was increased to 42; but this new arrangement also included the old restrictions and obligations incumbent upon the Jews. In 1792 the parties concerned drew up yet another agreement, but neither did this put an end to dissension. The Christian guild continued to complain that the Jews were in arrear of payments and that they employed Jewish tailors from other towns. In 1805 the two tailoring guilds of the town amalgamated, and 15 years later the number of Jewish members had surpassed that of the Christian. One restriction though still remained: Jews were not eligible for election to the guild council. But in 1832 this disability was also removed, and two Jews were elected to this body.
Similar struggles were waged by other Jewish artisans. For example, in 1595 the Christian bakers were granted by the king's representative the privilege of trading in flour and baking products - this was denied to the Jews. This right was renewed in 1611 by Sigismund III, and again several times by successive Polish kings. Yet after a difficult struggle by the Jewish bakers a breach was made; it transpired that the Jews were allowed to bake products for their own use, and they also exploited this paragraph with extra-legal activity.
The attitude of the royal authorities in the town to Jewish artisanship was far more obdurate than towards Jewish trade. The reason for this was mainly fiscal: Jewish trade constituted an important source of revenue for the king and the town, and the authorities were therefore prepared to compromise and allow Jewish trade, albeit with various restrictions. Despite such difficulties and curbs, however, Jewish workshops in L increased their activity and extended into more and more branches. According to the Census of 1764/5 there were 38 artisan workshops in all, nine of which were unspecified. Over 20 years later, in 1786, there were 30 tailor-shops (only nine were Christian); 30 shoemakers (masters only, excluding journeymen and apprentices); 30 glaziers (only one Christian); an unspecified number of jewellers (nearly all Jews - only two non-Jews are mentioned); and furriers, where Jews outnumbered non-Jews by four to one. The tinsmiths and coppersmiths were all Jews, as were the bookbinders and coopers.
In addition to trade and artisanship the Jews engaged in credit transactions and leased the right to collect national and municipal monies (taxes and public revenue). Some of the tax and rent collectors and lessees prospered greatly and accumulated much capital. Joska Szachnowicz, who lived at the end of the 15th and the beginning of the 16th century, and was the main lessee of royal revenue in "Lesser Poland" and in Reisen, has already been mentioned. After his death in 1507 his wife Golda took over his business, and she was followed by her son, Pesach Joskowicz (his younger brother, Szachna, was known as the greatest of L's rabbis). Much business in credits was carried out in the 16th century by the doctor Yitzhak Maj and his brothers Moshe and Joel. The sum of these transactions amounted to 5,000 guilders, an enormous figure for those times. In 1604 Moshe Doktorowicz (son of a doctor), a leader of the community, leased tax collection of the Jews in 20 towns in the districts of Belz and Chelm.
The struggle of the Jews to earn a living was especially difficult because of the heavy tax burden. These included royal taxes, municipal taxes, and other duties and payments, both regular and extraordinary - property taxes to estate owners (juridically included in L), and the constant need to give presents to the royal functionaries, to the artisan guilds, to priests, to the Jesuit schools, and so on and so forth.
In addition to a poll-tax (one guilder for every Jew over the age of one - this was raised to three guilders in the 18th century) the Jews of L in 1640 paid to the royal treasury (via the Starustra) 700 guilders a year. To this sum was added an annual tax to the Woiwoda (300 guilders), payments for maintenance of the royal court and entourage whenever they passed through L, and a tax called "royal szos" on houses and land. The Jews of L contributed "voluntarily" to the liquidation of the kingdom's public debts - their share sometimes amounted to as much as 60,000 guilders.
The Jews of L paid a whole series of direct and indirect taxes to the municipality and to the council of Podzamce, where the Jewish quarter lay. The shopkeepers, artisans, and house owners paid duties on goods, funeral tax, tax on drinks, market tax, import tax, and so forth. In addition to all these, the Jews also paid taxes to the community - a direct tax ("sum") and indirect taxes ("maintenance", "clientele", etc.). The burden of payments on each Jewish head of family was very heavy, and many could not meet the demand.
In times of war taxes and duties on the Jews were doubled and redoubled. The Jews paid most of the enemy's impositions on a town under siege and the conqueror's ransom money, amounting to thousands and tens of thousands of guilders. In 1676 the Jews were required to pay 8,000 guilders for military expenses. In 1698 they contributed 4,000 guilders towards renovation of the town hall. Large sums were also demanded to finance the town's water supply and other services. Contemporary documents naturally make no mention of the sums paid to officials, to merchant guilds or to artisan guilds.
The municipal taxes had no foundation in law, since the Jews were not considered citizens of the town - but the municipality and the Christian organisations took no account of this. Nor did the appeals of the Jews to the royal court help. Thus, Jewish debt grew and grew, and for many years (until the beginning of the 19th century, after the division of Poland) not only was the community unable to repay the principal - it could not even pay the interest and compound interest to be paid to its creditors (the nobility, the church, and the non-Jewish citizens).
The community of L was considered the most important in Poland, by virtue of its reputation as a centre of Jewish Law and Culture. Almost all the celebrated rabbis of the time officiated for shorter or longer periods as rabbis of L. In 1475 R. Yaakov Matrident (died 1541) arrived in L, and his presence there brought added renown to the community.
The most eminent rabbis of Poland throughout time graced the rabbinical chair in L. First there was R. Yaakov Halevi (died 1541). His successor, R. Shalom Shachna Hacohen, who had lived in L since 1520, was not only L's spiritual Jewish head, but also a man of wealth and responsible to the State for the public finances of the community. Nearly all the renowned authorities on Halacha (Jewish Law) in Poland in the 16th century studied at the yeshiva he established - among them the Rem”a (R. Moshe Isserles). In 1541 he was appointed by the king Chief Rabbi of all "Lesser Poland". His gravestone in L has remained untouched. After his death in 1559 he was succeeded by his son, Israel, who set up another Yeshiva, headed by R. Shlomo ben Yechiel Luria (the Maharashal). R. Luria's books "Yam shel Shlomo" (Solomon's Sea) and "Chochmat Shlomo" (The Wisdom of Solomon) are cornerstones of Talmud and Halacha.
Rabbis Isserles and Luria were considered the leading exegists of their time. R. Luria was one of the founders of "Nusach Polin" (the Polish Version) of Judaism. After his death in 1574, the post of Chief Rabbi went to his son-in-law, the Principal of the Yeshiva, R. Shimon Wolf Auerbach, son of R. David Teyvele - he too renowned in his time. R. Auerbach officiated as Rabbi of Prague towards the end of his life, and died there in 1632. His successor in L was R. Mordechai Jaffe, author of the Levushim, a popular exposition of Jewish Law; he too was a renowned scholar and also the founder of the Council of the Four Lands. He died in 1612. At the turn of the century until his death in 1623 the L rabbinate was occupied by R. Yitzhak ben Nute Hacohen. Also Chief Rabbi of L was R. Yehoshua Falk, a pupil of the Maharashal. Another renowned rabbi was the Maharam of L, Meir ben Gedalia, who served as Principal of the Yeshiva and Rabbi of the town (died in 1616). Other Rabbis of L in the 17th century worthy of note are Shmuel Eliezer ben Yehuda Eidles, the Maharasha (1614-25); Yoel Jaffe Sirkes; Naftali ben Yitzhak Hacohen; Efraim Zalman Shor the Elder, author of "Tvuot Shor" (Shor's Harvest) (died 1634); Avraham Halevi Epstein (1638); and Yaakov ben Efraim Naftali Hirsh.
In the second half of the 17th century too there were many eminent rabbis, amongst them: Naftali ben Yitzhak Katz, son-in-law of the Maharal of Prague (died 1650); Heshel ( son of the former Rabbi Yaakov), whose name was a symbol of Jewish wisdom and perspicacity, and who was popularly known simply as Rabbi Heshel (died 1652); Aharon Shimon Szapira (died 1680); Moshe, son-in-law of the Maharasha and author of "Mahadura Batra" (The Last Edition), and his son Israel Isser (died 1692); Tsvi Hirsh ben Zecharia Mendel (died 1690); and Mordechai Ziskind, author of "Shu"t Hamaram Ziskind" (Responsa of R. Mordechai Ziskind).
The voices of the Rabbis of Lublin within Jewish Law and Tradition echoed throughout Poland and beyond. In 1587, by special permission of King Sigismund August, there were established in L a Yeshiva and a Bet Midrash. Their first principal was R. Yitzhak Maj, who was not subject to the authority of the town rabbinate.
In all matters relating to the internal affairs of the community its leaders and rabbis followed Hebrew Law. In 1631 the Woiwoida, Petro Tarlo, confirmed the right of the Jews of L to manage their affairs on the basis of their religious laws, and to try cases involving Jews only in a Jewish court. Only in cases needing clarification, or those where one of the participants was a non-Jew, was judgment made in the court of the Woiwoida (Governor) or the king.
L plays an important role in the annals of the Hebrew press in Poland. As early as 1547 sacred Hebrew books were printed there at the works founded by the Shachor family. The first printer in the town, Josef, bequeathed his printing works to his daughter Chana and her husband Yitzhak. In 1559 these two were granted the royal privilege of a monopoly on the publishing and distribution of Hebrew books. Despite this privilege, however, another press was set up near L, in Konskowola. Neither of these two printers survived long. In 1566 two Jews, Eliezer ben Yitzhak and Josef, were in turn given the royal privilege of starting a printing press, but this too had a brief life. In 1578 Klonimus Jaffe, son of R. Mordechai Jaffe, obtained permission from King Stefan Batory to set up a printing press. This works was passed on by Klonimus Jaffe to his descendants, and, with short intervals, was still operating at the beginning of the 19th century. Between 1550 and 1690 it published no less than 103 books. The presence of many printing works in L is evidence of the community's status as an important Jewish cultural centre in Poland.
L was the home of doctors renowned in Poland and beyond. At the beginning of the 16th century there was a Jewish doctor there called Yechezkiel who, in return for his services, was exempted by King Alexander Jagiello from all taxes. Another Jewish doctor, Yitzhak Maj, occupied a prominent position in the community. As mentioned above, in 1557 he was granted a plot of land on which to build a house of prayer and a yeshiva. One of his contemporaries in L was Dr. Moshe Doktor. His son, Tsvi Hirsz was a leader of the community and an agent at the courts of the kings Sigismund III and Wladislaw IV. At the end of the 16th century there lived in L the doctors Shlomo Luria (a relative of the Maharashal), author of the medical book "Luach Chaim" (Table of Life); Shmuel ben Matatyahu; and Moshe Montalto, the descendant of a well-known Marrano family from Portugal, bearer of the title "Medical Adviser to the King of France". He died in 1637, and his gravestone still stands in L. His father, Eliezer, returned to Judaism and served as doctor to the French kings Henri IV and Louis XIII. In the 17th century the doctor Chaim (Felix) Vitalis was renowned in L. He had studied In Padua and served as doctor to the court of King Mikael Wisnowiecki. This king invested him with the authority to test all the Jewish doctors. In the second half of the 17th century some of the members of the Jewish community of L went to study medicine in Padua. The best-known of these were Avraham Szapira and Moshe Izrael Polak ben Yitzhak.
Within the community there arose organisations and commitees concerned with welfare and mutual help, as well as with education and culture. In L, as in the other Jewish communities in Poland, the foremost among these was the Chevra Kadisha. This was a closed and privileged body, not open to everybody. In its hands, and through it the community, lay the authority to impose on the Jews discipline and moral precepts. It was enough for the Chevra to threaten an offender to be placed on its black list (i.e., when his time came they would not arrange his burial) for him to repent. The offences recorded in this connection were slander, infringement of the rights of possession, contact with non-Jewish legal instances, etc. Among its other tasks the Chevra took upon itself reception of the emissaries, expounders of the Torah, preachers, writers and contractual experts from many countries who came to the community in L; and it also administered the Hospice for the Needy. In the period 1690 to 1760 the records of the Chevra name guests from Italy, Turkey, Prague, Moravia (Mahren), Belgrade and Budapest, in addition to those who came from all parts of Poland. As well as the Chevra Kadisha, documents of the 18th century mention the institutions "Ner Tamid" (Eternal Light), "Bikur Cholim" (Visiting the Sick), "Rodfei Tsedaka" (Seekers of Charity), and " 7 Kruim (The 7 Guests)". Ner Tamid was to be found in every prayer-house.
The Jewish children were taught in the Cheder by private teachers. There was a Yeshiva in L, headed by the town rabbi and supported by the community council. The Yeshiva students, some of whom were not from L but who came from all parts of Poland, were supported by the "houseowners", lived in their houses, and ate daily at their tables - each day in a different house.
In the 16th and 17th centuries the Council of the Four Lands convened in L, but moved in 1680 to Jaroslaw. The Rabbi of L, Yehoshua Falk-Cohen, was the leader of the Council and the author of its set of rules. L was also the seat of the Jewish Rabbinical High Court in Poland, among whose duties was granting permission for the publication of Hebrew books. One of the latter was the edition of the Babylonian Talmud (1559-80), that was published to meet the needs of the Torah schools and other Jewish schools (cheders and yeshivas) in Poland.
In 1655 Lublin was attacked by the Cossack hetman, Zoltarnko, and the Muscovite Voivoda, Piotr Ivanovitch. The town was occupied after a long siege. The conquerors imposed a tribute of 10,000 guilders on the town, in return for which they promised not to inconvenience the citizens. They did not, however, honour this pledge. First of all, they burst into the Jewish quarter and slaughtered some 10,000 Jews, among them refugees from the surrounding area who had sought refuge in the fortified city, and plundered whatever they could find. A group of Jews wrapped themselves in their prayer-shawls and asked their tormentors to bury them alive in the Jewish cemetery (so that they would be sure to be interred in Jewish soil); the butchers acceded to this request. The names of the victims are engraved on the wall surrounding the cemetery. A description of these events is given in the book "Hesed Shmuel" (The Mercy of Samuel - Amsterdam 1699), written by Szmuel ben Dawid. The massacre took place during the Feast of Succot, and for many years it was the custom in L to mourn in this period.
The damage wrought on L by the Cossacks was not repaired for some time, and only at the beginning of the 19th century did the population return to its former level, before the "deluge", i.e. 4,000 souls. The economic derpression that followed in the wake of the Cossack aggression continued till the middle of the 19th century, when the town began to recuperate.
On the conclusion of the bloodbath, as was the custom of the times, the king promulgated a number of orders designed to alleviate the plight of the victims, and the Jews were included in these. A decree of 1669 allowed them to trade inside and outside the walls. Permission was likewise given for the Jews to acquire houses and building plots. In 1679 King Jan Sobieski replaced this decree with one that still allowed the Jews to do business within the walls, except on Christian Holydays. In 1675 the Satrusta Danilowicz issued a decree placing the Jews of L and the "little they possessed" under his protection. In 1696 the king renewed the right of the Jews to trade within the walls, like the Christian merchants.
However, these days of clemency did not last. During the "Catholic Reaction" in the first half of the 18th century, the non-Jewish citizens renewed their efforts to eject the Jews from business activity, and even to expel them from the town. There were again calls for rigorous measures against them. In 1720 King August II issued an ordinance accusing the Jews for economic and religious reasons, as it were, of mocking the Christian religion, and forbad them completely to engage in commerce; he further ordered them to leave the dwellings they had rented "by guile" from the Christians of the town.
The last king of the Kingdom of Poland, Stanislaw August Poniatowski, confirmed, however, in 1769, the "privileges" granted to the Jews of L in the past - only in 1780 to issue a decree forbidding them permanently to live or engage in trade in L and its suburbs. This situation prevailed until the town was occupied by the Austrians in 1795.
The period under review was also marked by a decline in the internal affairs of the Jewish community in L, which was enmeshed in debts and unable to pay the interest and compound interest on the loans taken, and certainly unable to repay the principal. The status of the community declined drastically, and individuals and groups began to act with an irresponsibility that bordered on anarchy. Many stopped paying their taxes to the community and avoided payment of sums the community had undertaken to pay to the authorities. Nor did they honour the code of conduct in business and crafts, with the result that unrestrained competition was rampant, and this seriously affected the livelihood of many of their fellows. These miscreants placed their trust in the hands of the estate owners near the town, on whose land they settled. The Community Council complained to King August III about this situation; and he empowered it to exercise force and even to impound possessions in order to collect the outstanding taxes. The Chevra Kadisha issued a proclamation warning the Jews of L that it would use all its power to combat disturbers of the peace, slanderers, and Jews having recourse to non-Jewish instances. Here too, as in the past, the Chevra threatened to blacklist their names: they would not be given a Jewish burial, and the protection of the nobility would not help them.
The second half of the 18th century heralded the spread of Chassidism. At its beginning the rabbis who officiated in L were "mitnagdim", like Yaakov Chaim (died in 1769), son of the great mentor R. Avraham ben Chaim, who was the leader of the Council of the Four Lands, and examined the learning abilities of the Baal Shem Tov. After R. Yaakov came R. Shaul Margules (died 1788), who was not a Chassid himself, but whose father, R. Meir Margules, belonged to the circle of the Baal Shem Tov. There is no doubt that only in the time of the latter was R. Yitzhak Horowitz, the "Seer of Lublin", able to fix his place of residence in L and to make it the "Jerusalem of Chassidism". Large numbers converged on hsi Bet-Midrash, and the whole following generation of holy men in Poland were his students. The "Seer" taught and inspired many renowned "Admorim" (Chassidic Rabbis) and Heads of Chassidic dynasties throughout Poland, among them the Heads of the Dinover dynasty, R. Tsvi Elimelech Szapira, and his son, R. David; R. Shalom Rokeach, Head of the Admorim of Belz; and many others.
Opposed to the Chassidim was the Rabbi of the Community, R. Azriel Horowicz, known as “der ayzerner kop" (died in 1819). The struggle between Mitnagdim and Chassidim weakened the community. With the death of the "Seer" the position of L as a centre of Chassidism declined.
In the period under review many different rulers held sway over the area which included L; but the legal and civil status of the Jews hardly changed. Neither the Austrians nor the authorities of the "Principality of Warsaw", which spoke in its constitution of equality for all its subjects, granted equal status to the Jews, or alleviated their restrictions. The period of a "decade", during which equal rights for the Jews were postponed "until they mended their ways", lasted till 1862. The regime of Congress Poland that followed made no changes in the legal status of the Jews in that kingdom, including the Jews of L. The so-called privileges granted by August II (in 1720) and Stanislaw August Poniatowski (in 1780), according to which the Jews were permitted to live permanently in the "Jewish town" of Podzamsze and in other quarters separated from the Christian sections of the city, remained in force until all restrictions on Jewish residence in Poland were annulled by the Tsarist Decree of June 1862.
During the Polish uprising of 1863 Jewish inhabitants of the town sided with the insurgents.
From 1765 until the 50s of the 19th century the Jewish population of L increased fivefold or more. Most of this was due to natural increase, though part was also explained by Jewish migration - legal and illegal - from nearby provincial towns. From the annulment decree of 1862 to the end of the 19th century the number of Jews in L grew from 8,747 (1857 figure) to 23,586 in 1897. An additional increase took place in the first two decades of the 20th century, numbering in 1921 37,337, or more than a third of the total population.
In the second half of the 19th century the Jews of L began to settle in the "old town" within the walls. In the course of time, as the Poles preferred to move outside the walls, the Jews formed a majority and the "old town" thus became a new ghetto.
During this period the Jews of L earned their living mainly by petty trade and artisanship. There were times when the number engaged in the latter surpassed that of those engaged in the former. The area around L was agricultural. Until 1864 most of the villagers were poor serfs tied to the soil, and their purchasing power was thus very limited. Most of them lived off their own produce and had little need to buy goods. One of the branches that depended on the peasants of the area was the production and sale of strong drinks, and here there was competition between the Jewish lessees and the declining nobility. The few implements needed by the peasants, mainly of iron, were not enough to warrant the establishment of industry or the development of trade.
The main agricultural product was corn, and trade in it gave a living to many Jews. They bought the produce at markets, or through the middlemen and distributors of the estate owners, and sold it in Warsaw, or shipped it on rafts to the port of Danzig (Gdansk), with a view to export abroad. Other important products traded in were hides, pig bristles (for brush-making), and wood felled in the surrounding forests. These goods too were sold in Warsaw or exported abroad.
The majority of Jewish merchants, however, were merely small shopkeepers or pedlars who wandered round the villages with their merchandise (haberdashery, i.e. needles, buttons, and the like, cheap cloth, etc.). In return they bought in the villages eggs, poultry, feathers, etc. The impoverished rural surroundings were the deciding factor in the miserable situation of the Jewish merchant in L and the extent of his business. No significant change took place in this situation after the emancipation of the serfs. The tiny plots of land given to the latter were insufficient to produce an agricultural surplus for sale.
Under these conditions no real industry developed in L, and the share of the Jews in what little manufacture there was remained small: of the 27 larger industrial plants only three were in Jewish hands. Most of these local industries were engaged in processing the agricultural produce.
In contrast, the number of Jewish artisans in L increased. Proof of this was the continued existence of craft branches begun in the preceding centuries.The most prominent, as far as numbers and organisation were concerned, were the tailors and furriers. Towards the end of the 19th century the salesmen were almost as numerous. There was considerable Jewish representation in all artisan branches; and in general non-Jews were in a minority in them.
In the last two decades of the 19th century three provident funds were established in L. In 1906 they embraced 1,200 members (artisans and small traders) and their equity capital amounted to 91,000 roubles. The clerks and petty traders set up a similar organisation, called "Igud Le'ezra Hadadit shel Pekidim Usocharim Zeirim Bnei Dat Moshe" ( The Mutual Aid Society of Clerks and Small Traders of the Mosaic Faith).
As stated, in the second half of the 18th century the situation of the Jewish Community Council in L deteriorated as a result of growing debt, and thus led to growing dependence on the local authorities, who were also the main creditors of the community. The interference of the Woiwoda and the Starusta in its activities was a frequent occurrence. The collection of community taxes was subject to the approval of the Woiwoda.
Within the community itself conflicts erupted that often involved non-Jewish mediation.
There was constant friction between the affluent merchants (who were dominant in the council) and the lesser merchants and artisans. Even the Rabbinate, which, as mentioned, was one of the most important in Poland, was not spared the animosity of these conflicts, and its incumbents were the subject of quarrels without end. The diagreements that arose out of the difficult financial situation grew even worse with the advent of Chassidism.
The propagator of Chassidism in L was, as stated, the Seer of Lublin, R. Yaakov Yitzhak Horowicz. During his tenure the community split into two: to begin with the Mitnagdim were in the ascendant, under the leadership of R. Azriel Horowicz, (der ayzerner kop) (died in 1819); but after his death the Chassidim grew stronger, and they determined the choice of the Chassid R. Yehoshua Heshel, Head of the Rabbinical Court at Tarnopol, as Rabbi of L. He was not, however, well received by the Jews of the town: three brothers, prominent members of the community, and Mitnagdim, instituted a campaign against him, and in 1826 he was forced to resign. From that year until his death in 1843 the Rabbi of L was Meshulam Zalman Ashkenazi, who was a Mitnaged, but conciliatory towards the Chassidim. On his death the struggle for the rabbinate was renewed - and this time too the mitnagdim carried the day. The new Rabbi chosen was Dov Berish Ashkenazi from the faction "Noda Beshearim" (Known in the Gates). He followed in his predecessor's path, and enjoyed general support in the town. During his term of office the new "Parnas" Bet Midrash was built and its activities recorded. Upon his death in 1852, his son, Yaakov Heshel Ashkenazi was chosen as Rabbi, and he fought a bitter war against Chassidism, which had once more established itself in L with the arrival of R. Yehuda Leib Eiger, who established a new dynasty in the town. This dynasty continued until the Holocaust through his son, R. Avraham Eiger, and his grandsons, R. Azriel Meir and R. Shlomo. The last two perished under the German occupation, the former in 1940 and the latter in 1941.
In 1868 the Chassidic Rabbi, Shneur Zalman Ladjer, author of "Torat Chesed" (Torah of Mercy), was appointed Rabbi of L. In 1892 he left for Palestine, and was replaced by a Mitnaged - R. Hillel Aryeh Lifszyc, who maintained good relations with the Chassidim. Two Chassidic candidates stood against him - R. Gershon Chanoch of Radzin and R. Meir Yechiel of Ostrowiec, but R. Lifszyc won; he was also a man with a more liberal educational background.
During this period several Admorim settled in L, among them R. Tsadok Hacohen, who inherited some of the disciples of R. Yehuda Leib Eiger and was renowned as a great Jewish thinker; R. Moshe Mordechai Twerski, author of "Maamar Mordechai" (The Sayings of Mordechai); and many others.
In 1910 R. Eliahu Klackin (the father of Professor Yaakov Klackin) was chosen Chief Rabbi. He emigrated to Palestine in 1925 and settled in Jerusalem, where he died in 1932. He wrote several important books, that are mentioned in his last work, "Dvarim Achadim" (A Few Things").
In addition to the community institutions, organisations and synagogues mentioned above, note should also be made of other institutions that arose and operated in the 19th century. In 1886 a Jewish hospital was opened, and at the end of the century it contained 90 beds. The community also had an Old Age Home and an Orphanage, and in almost every Jewish quarter there were various charitable organisations alongside the local prayer-houses.
Towards the end of the century the children of the community - 800 boys and 100 girls - were studying in 43 private cheders. The community also ran a Talmud-Torah for children of the poor. During this period non-Jewish private schools also sprang up in the town, first for girls and afterwards for boys. Their language of instruction was Russian or Polish. They also had Jewish pupils. In the 1890s a government school for Jewish children was established in the Catholic Cathedral building, and the language used here was Russian. At one time it had some 300 pupils; but it closed when the Russians withdrew from the town in 1915. In 1897/8 two elementary schools were opened, with Hebrew as the language of instruction, based on the system "Hebrew through Hebrew". One of them, the Pines School, functioned until 1907; the other until the First World War. 1913 also saw the establishment of the "Yavneh" school, which closed in 1927 for lack of money, and after the headmaster, Szmuel Rotensztajn, had emigrated to Palestine.
In addition to the above there were also government elementary schools for Jewish children, beginning with the Austrian occupation and continuing into the 1930s. They were closed on Sabbaths and Holydays, and were therefore known as "Szabsuvka".
An important many-sided cultural institution was "Hazamir" (The Nightingale), established in 1908 with the aim of fostering a love of Hebrew songs and literature among the young. Hazamir also possessed a library of Yiddish, Hebrew, Russian and Polish books - the first modern Jewish public library in L; and it also boasted an orchestra, and a drama group, that gave performances of Jewish classical plays in L and the nearby provincial towns. The rooms of Hazamir were also the setting for lectures on current and Jewish subjects, with some speakers coming from as far away as Warsaw. In 1910 the organisation "Chovevei Sfat Aver" (Lovers of the Hebrew Tongue) was founded; it held Hebrew courses and published Hebrew books. During the First World War, however, this organisation folded, and its assets, including the library, passed into the hands of the "Bund".
At the end of the 19th century the first groups of "Chovevei Zion" (Lovers of Zion) appeared; to begin with their activities were more social than political. At the beginning of the 20th century small groups of the "Bund" appeared on the L scene; in 1903 its first pamphlets were distributed; and in the following year a branch was officially established. In 1905, the year of revolution, the Bund attracted many members, who organized demonstrations and strikes. Activity also increased of the Jewish groups affiliated to the PPS, the Polish Socialist Party. Folders and booklets in Yiddish were distributed in the streets. A small group of Jewish anarchists also came on the scene. The activities of the Bund resulted in some of its members being exiled to Siberia. A Jewish police agent was murdered, and during his funeral disturbances ensued and the Cossacks were called upon to restore order.
The outbreak of the First World War brought with it clear signs of antisemitism by the Russian rulers, who accused the Jews of treachery and aiding the enemy.The Cossacks of the garrison were permitted to plunder Jewish property and to forego payment for goods acquired from Jewish merchants. Some of the town's Jews were exiled to the depths of Russia. Another affliction that affected many Jewish families was forced military conscription. Many young Jews were mobilized, and soon messages began to arrive of their dear ones being killed or wounded in battle. As the front drew near many refugees streamed to L, the economy of the town stagnated, and many Jews were left without work or livelihood.
In July 1915 the Russians withdrew from the town and gave way to the Austrians. Before the retreat the Russian commander summoned the engineer Tomorowicz, one of the leading citizens, and ordered him to organize a militia to guarantee order in the town. Tomorowicz was a known liberal, and he also saw to it that a militia was formed in the Jewish quarter ("the Sixth Commissariat"). The head of this militia was Bernard Glowinski. It numbered some 200 men aged 18 and above, and who had an unblemished record. Its members were armed with revolvers. A tribunal was also set up with judges from among reputable Jewish lawyers in the town. This militia, which consisted only of volunteers, carried out its duties impeccably and to the satisfaction of the citizens. At the end of November 1915, however, it was disbanded and replaced by professionals, but many of the Jewish militiamen joined the new body.
During the Austrian occupation the existing Jewish political organisations increased their activities, and new ones were founded, including youth movements and groups.
The Jewish community and the various organisations of the time opened public soup kitchens that provided warm meals and food to the needy, and especially to children.
With the cessation of hostilities and the proclamation of the independent state of Poland in November 1918, the Jews of L, and Poland in general, hoped for a better future in the new nation. They set about repairing the ravages of war and looked forward to a normalisation of economic, political and social life.
However, as early as 1919 events took place in the town that cast a shadow over the community. On a Thursday, which was the market day, Polish army recruits ran amok, attacked Jewish passers-by, destroyed and even looted Jewish shops. Jewish youngsters organised self-defence, and to begin with even managed to repulse the rioters; but in the afternoon there burst onto the scene in Lubartowska Street gangs of butchers and simple trouble-makers, with butchers' knives, iron bars, and other weapons, and began a pogrom that went on until evening. The police did not interfere. The leaders of the Jewish community met with the Mayor, and only then were the police ordered to stop the pogrom. The results of these disturbances were 60 injured Jews, of whom three died, and widespread damage to shops and houses. Thus was Jewish L included in the many Jewish communities in Poland that were victims of the riots of 1918-19, after Poland's resurgence.
When the disturbances were over the Jews began to reconstruct their businesses and the institutions of the community. Their first concern was the wretched economic situation following the war. In 1921, after two years of rehabilitation, there was still no renewal of activity in 57 of the 1,714 Jewish-owned workshops and businesses, some of which did not employ hired labour. The units that did begin to operate, 1,657 in number, were mostly small businesses that all in all employed 4,871 persons, half of whom (2,366 - or 48.5%) were the owners and their families. The remainder were employees (2,068 Jews and 437 non-Jews). Most of these businesses made clothing (made -to-measure and ready-made), and hats (to order and for shops); there were also furriers, shoemakers, and leather workshops. Together these employed 2,444 persons, of whom 1,031 were workshop owners, 394 were members of their families, and 997 Jews and a mere 22 non-Jews were hired workers. The next largest group were 139 food businesses, employing 804 persons, more than half of them (424 Jews and 129 non-Jews) employees. The remaining plants and workshops were engaged in a variety of manufactures - timber, building, etc., with a small number of participants compared to the leading segments of clothing and food. Most of the workers in production, particularly the hired ones, were men; a few of the hired workers were children (116 Jews and 34 non-Jews). Most businesses were only active part of the year (construction work lay dormant in the winter, and the manufacture of clothing was also seasonal). In the "dead" periods the unemployed and their would-be employers waited for "better times". In the larger plants there were few Jews employed, partly because they were not welcome, and partly because the Jews themselves did not want to work in them (since work continued on the Sabbath and Jewish Holydays). Jews were not employed in government offices or the municipality, in public transport, or even in cleaning the streets.
The most important sphere after crafts and minor industry were the various forms of trading - wholesale, retail, peddling, and market stallholding. Most of those involved were petty traders, who set up market stalls or peddled their wares in the streets of the town or in the surrounding villages. Their volume of goods and of course their turnover were limited. Their customers were the Polish peasants or the labourers, who were economically poorly off and also subject to unemployment. Most of the peasants had smallholdings that supplied nearly all their needs, though there were articles they had to buy outside, such as tobacco, salt, spirits and matches, all of which were state monopolies. Government policy was to squeeze Jewish traders out of this monopoly sector.
One branch was a kind of Jewish monopoly: the leather industry. In the years preceding the Second World War some 95% of production and tanning of hides was in Jewish hands. In 1939 150 workers, 75 of them Jews, were employed in the large tanning plant in the town. The annual turnover of this branch amounted to 20 million zloty (about 4 million dollars). Under Jewish ownership were also a brandy distillery, a brewery, brickworks, flour mills, and a cigarette and tobacco factory, established in 1860 and at its peak employing 400 workers, all of them Jews. After the war, however, this factory was taken over by the State Monopoly and its Jewish workers dismissed.
Branches employing a majority of Jews were the ones to suffer most in times of crisis. Usually it was not only Jewish apprentices and salesmen who became unemployed, but also the workshop owners, most of whom were self-employed. These latter were not entitled to unemployment benefits, nor were they registered in a sick fund, and they and their families were thus unable to receive medical treatment.
In the early years of the 20s the Jews of L, as in other places, set about restoring the mutual aid societies that had existed before the war, and establishing new ones. In the inter-war period there were in L ten provident funds affiliated to the prayer-houses and the political organisations and trade unions. The largest of them was set up immediately after the war by the "Va'ad Hahatsala" (Rescue Committee), and its equity capital amounted in the 30s to 140,000 zloty, and its annual turnover to more than 11 million zloty. This fund gave loans at a low rate of interest, and sometimes at no rate of interest, mainly to workshop owners and petty merchants. These loans were often the only way in which shopkeepers and pedlars could replenish their stocks or replace workshop equipment.
In this period too ten Jewish banks were established, the first of them, "Kupat Halvaa Uchisachon" (Loan and Savings Bank) at the end of the 19th or the beginning of the 20th century. Later there appeared "Chevra Le'ezra Hadadit Lefkidei Mischar Usocharim Ze'irim Bnei Dat Moshe" (Mutual Aid Society of Trading Clerks and Small Traders of the Mosaic Faith); "Habank Harishon Levaalei Mlacha" (First Bank for Artisans); "Bank Hasocharim" (Merchants' Bank); "Bank Baalei Batim" (Householders' Bank); and "Bank Shitufi" (Cooperative Bank). The employees too established their own mutual aid societies in conjunction with the trade unions. Other bodies were set up at the beginning of the 20th century within the framework of existing organisations. In the 20s there was widespread organized professional activity, embracing most of the Jewish workers. One of the most prominent organisations, in terms of number of members and level of activity was the Union, or Guild, of Needleworkers, founded as early as 1915. Other unions of considerable size followed, such as those of the cobblers, printing workers, tanners, carpenters, butchers, porters, and bakery workers. The largest of them, "Haigud Hameuchad shel Poalei O'r" (The United Guild of Leather Workers) counted some 500 members; while the Textile Workers' Guild numbered some 200 members.
The community of L was blessed with many institutions of welfare, charity and aid. Especially renowned was the society "Achiezer" (Brotherly Aid), which on the threshold of Sabbaths and Festivals distributed food to hundreds of the needy. Money for its activities came from contributions from members of the community (at Purim, on the Eve of Yom Kippur and at weddings). The institution also ran a kitchen for the poor. The organisation "Linat Tsedek" (Hospice for the Poor) provided the sick and destitute with medical care and drugs free of charge, and its members helped their families stand watch by the bedside of the ill. In 1919 the organisation "Zichron Nes" ( Token of Miracle) was inaugurated with the aim of helping war invalids, bereaved parents, and orphans. It was financed from the sale of the privilege of being called to the Torah ("Kearot Nedava" - Collections of Charity) on the occasion of weddings etc. Members of the "Shabta Tava" (Good Sabbath) society were wont to walk through the streets on a Friday to collect chalot (Sabbath bread) for the needy. The society "Hachnasat Orchim" (Hospice) opened a lodging for indigent travellers: each night tens of them were accommodated. In addition to all these bodies other groups of community volunteers were active, for example, in visiting the vick, supporting the poor, collecting a dowry for penniless brides, and other causes.
In 1923 a branch of "TOZ" (Polish initials for the Jewish Health Organisation of Poland) was established in L. Its activities were many and varied: in its clinics there were 22 doctors and X-ray and radiography facilities. TOZ ran an advice service for women and a child care centre, and even supported Jewish sports organisations and provided them with training areas. Each summer TOZ organised camps for school pupils. In 1924, the first year these took place, 300 children participated; in 1939 this number reached 1,200.
Another institution the community boasted was the Jewish Hospital, opened, as stated, in 1886, but not allowed to function during the Great War. Afterwards, however, it quickly resumed and expanded its activity, with the support of former residents of L in the USA. It contained 30 beds for men and 26 for women, and had an X-ray department, a bacteriological laboratory, and a clinic for quartz radiation. In the late 30s a children's department was opened, and became known for its high professional standard; and an Institute for Hydrotherapy was also inaugurated. Every week the hospital held lectures and symposia, with the participation of doctors from L and the vicinity.
The inter-war years saw increased activity by the Jewish political parties and youth movements. Prominent among the parties were the various Zionist factions. Zionist activities in L began, as stated, with the groups of "Chovevei Zion" that sprang up at the end of the preceding century. The Zionist Federation crystallised in L during the Austrian occupation (1915-18), and its activity increased following the Balfour Declaration in 1917. When the Mandate for Palestine was decided upon there was much celebration in the community, and all the Jewish shops were closed. At the same time the young people set up "Tseirei Zion" (Youth of Zion), which existed until it split into "Socialist Zionist Youth" and "Poalei Zion Smol" (Leftist Workers of Zion). In 1920 a branch of "Hechalutz" (The Pioneer) was set up. In the Zionist Federation building in L lectures and evening classes were held. The Zionists in L were active in all speheres of the political and social life, took part in elections to the Polish parliament, were represented on the Town Council, and of course in the Community Council.
1924 saw the establishment of "Haliga Lema'an Eretz-Izrael Haovedet" (The League for Labour Israel), with the participation of Socialist Poalei Zion, Hashomer Hatsair, Hechalutz Hatsair, Dror (Freedom), and Hapoel. In 1929 the organisation "Haoved" (The Worker) was launched in L, consisting of the workshop owners, and particularly those who intended to emigrate to Palestine. After the schism in "Poalei Zion" in 1921 the majority of the members of the L branch remained loyal to the left wing of the party. This party exercised much influence among students and pupils; its youth movement, "Jugent", had some 140 members in L. In the late 30s, when the atmosphere in the whole of Poland was permeated with national-fascist ideas, the party was persecuted by the authorities, who regarded members of Left Poalei Zion as clandestine communits, and in 1936-37 some of them were even arrested. Prominent among the Zionist youth movements was "Hashomer Hatsair" (The Young Watchman). The L cell was set up in 1916, and between the two world wars its membership and activity increased, and a kibbutz training farm was even established. There was also in L a large branch of "Hanoar Hazioni", the youth movement of the General Zionists. In 1927 was founded the children's organisation in the name of Borochov, called "Jungbor", which was active in the fields of education, information and scouting.
The L branch of "Hamizrachi" was founded in 1903, and was reorganized at the end of the Great War. Its activities were centred on the Mizrachi Synagogue in Novorowna Street, while for its lectures and discussions it rented the "Hazamir" hall once a week. Its members opened the "Yavneh School" in L, which turned out several graduation classes. Hamizrachi's youth movement (Tseirei Mizrachi) established several training centres outside the town. In the early 20s branches of "Hapoel Hamizrachi" and "Hechalutz Hamizrachi" were also set up.
The Revisionist Movement was active in L from 1925 on. The first branch to be set up was "Hashachar" (The Dawn), and a year later saw the arrival of the youth movement "Beitar" (Covenant of Josef Trumpeldor). The Revisionist movement in L and district expanded, and in 1934 had some 50 branches. In the same period one of its important fractions, called "Brit Hachayil" (Covenant of Strength), also developed. Beitar ran several amateur groups - drama, literature, etc., as well as a brass band. Each year it organised summer camps, where the young boys and girls received instruction with regard to emigrating to Palestine. To the congresses of the L branch of the Revisionists there came speakers from the national Polish and the world organisation (including Ze'ev Jabotinsky and Menachem Begin) and their meetings attracted a large audience.
Nevertheless, not all the Jews of L belonged to the Zionist camp. Up to 1914 the "Bund" operated clandestinely, but renewed its public activities during the Austrian occupation of 1915-18. During the war there was a shortage of food bordering on famine, and the members of the Bund therefore opened a kitchen and set up cooperatives of consumers and a bakery, which employed ten workers. Bund members were also active in the field of culture, and among other things established a library (in the name of Groser), a choir, and a drama group. In 1917 was held the L Congress, where it was decided to sever all connection with the Bund of the Russian Empire and to maintain an independent Polish section. In November 1917, after the October Revolution in Russia, a Workers' Council was set up in L, also with the participation of the Bund. At this time there were attacks on the Jews in L, and to counter them a militia of Polish and Jewish members of the Polish Socialist Party was formed. In 1920 during the Polish-Soviet War the Polish authorities arrested some of the active leaders of the Bund in L. After the war the Bund played an influential role in the Central Committee of the Jewish trade unions in L, with five representatives; and in most of the individual unions it formed a majority, while Poalei Zion and the communists usually had only one representative. The youth and children's movements of the Bund in L - "Zukunft" (The Future) and "Sakif" ( Threshold ?? ) - had large and active branches.
Some L Jews were members of the Communist Party, which operated several illegal cells in the town. These members often infiltrated the other Jewish workers' parties (Poalei Zion and Bund). They were mainly active in organising strikes and demonstration and in spreading propaganda. During the 30s some active Jewish communists were arrested and imprisoned; and the threat of imprisonment impelled others to flee abroad, particularly to France, where they continued to maintain contact and help one another.
Also present in L were "Agudat Israel", its labour faction "Poalei Agudat Israel", and its youth movement "Tseirei Agudat Israel". Most members of Aguda were to be found among the various Chassidic groups; and their field of action was within the Community Council and in religious education.
Up to 1932 the majority in the community council were religious representatives, and only a few came from among the "Neurim" (The Enlightened or Illuminati), as secular Jews were then called. The council consisted of the general body, or council, and the executive committee. In the inter-war period elections to the council were only partly democratic; women were not eligible to vote, and there were also restrictions with regard to age and economic status. From 1932 on the elections were held on the basis of party lists, and in that year all the parties that had branches in L participated, with the exception of the Bund, which boycotted the elections. Five representatives of Agudat Israel and the Chassidim were elected, together with two from the Artisan List, and one each from the General Zionists, Socialist Poalei Zion, Left Poalei Zion, Mizrachi, the "People's Party", and the "Assimilationists". At first the Chairman chosen was the lawyer M. Alten, but the Polish authorities withheld their approval, and his place was taken by Y. Zilber. As Chairman of the executive committee, the "assimilationist", the lawyer A. Levinsohn, was chosen. He held this post for only a year, when he resigned, and his place was taken by S, Halberstadt from Agudat Israel.
In 1930 R. Meir Shapira (1886-1933), one of the leaders of Agudat Israel, was elected Chief Rabbi of L. He established the largest Yeshiva in Poland, "Yeshivat Chachmei Lublin" (The Yeshiva of the Wise Men of L). R. Shapira was a brilliant speaker, and was a member of the Polish parliament (Sejm). He initiated learning of the ”Daf Hayomi" (The Daily Page) throughout the Diaspora. On his death there were no more chief rabbis in L, and the community contented itself with dayanim (judges).
The closing years of the 20s and the beginning of the 30s found the community in grave circumstances. It was weighed down with heavy debts, and its income, mainly accruing from schechita (ritual slaughtering), payment for burial plots, and direct taxes, did not cover expenditure, viz., wages in the religious sector (in the Rabbinate there were a rabbi, five dayanim, and a number of "minor" rabbis in the suburbs); allocations to various religious institutions and a Talmud-Torah, to the Yeshivat Chochmei Lublin, to the orphanage, to schools where the language was Yiddish; and so forth. Due to the economic problems these allocations were not made on time. and the institutions of the community therefore operated at a low level. The orphanage, for example, was almost without supervision, the children were neglected, and some of them became subject to bad influences, The cemetery too was neglected, and sometimes waterlogged, and there was no vacant ground for new burials.
In 1932, following election to the new council, its members set about a thorough reorganisation. Hours of work and reception times for the public were scheduled; the collection of taxes came under strict control; renovations were carried out on the synagogues, especially that of the Maharashal; and the amount and times of payment for allocations to the various institutions were laid down.
In the elections of 1939 members of the Bund were also represented. The community faced a crisis, when the authorities insisted on the shochtim (ritual slaughterers) being given functionary status. These schochtim exploited the situation by refusing to pay slaughtering fees to the community, and this seriously undermined its finances. One of the last decisions of the community before the Holocaust was that of August 7th, 1939 - to grant the Jewish Hospital an allocation of 6,000 zloty, and to issue bonds to the samount of 30,000 zloty to ensure normal operation of the council and its subsidised institutions.
The Jews of L were represented in the town council via the party lists. In the elections of 1927 16 Jews (most of them from the Bund) were elected to the council, i.e. a third of all its members. At its meetings they put forward the claims of the Jewish institutions and of the Jews of L in general, and protested against all forms of discrimination.
From earliest times there were in L cheders, where Chumesh, Mishna and Talmud were studied. Poor children went to the Talmud Torah, subsidized by the community. Older boys studied at Batei Midrash; and in the evenings, by candlelight, lessons were held in Gemara, Mishna, or the weekly passage of the Torah for adults and married men - and there were among these some veritable scholars.
In the inter-war period L, as in other parts of Poland, possessed some state elementary schools for Jewish children - the Szabasuvka. After Polish independence three additional schools of this type were opened.
* For explanations of these and other organisations and movements mentioned in this survey readers are kindly referred to more detailed reference works. Back
Yizkor Book Project JewishGen Home Page
Copyright © 1999-2013 by JewishGen, Inc.
Updated 10 Apr 2004 by LA

Lycopene Is a Rising Star of Health BenefitsLycopene Protects Skin, Heart, and More
f you plan to spend much time outdoors this summer, you might want to make sure that tomatoes figure prominently in your diet. So look forward to eating plenty of tomatoes and dishes made with tomato sauce, drinking some tomato juice, having a bowl of steaming hot tomato soup (better for you than the delicious cold tomato soup gazpacho), and topping it all off with a big wedge of watermelon. Why should you eat these specific foods? Well, for starters, they are loaded with lycopene. You already knew that lycopene is good for prostate health, but now there's a new and unexpected angle: according to a recent report by European researchers, lycopene protects your skin from damage caused by solar ultraviolet radiation.
LYCOPENE IS A POWERFUL ANTIOXIDANT
Lycopene is a natural carotenoid that has received much attention lately because of its potent antioxidant activity. Carotenoids are common in the plant world and are responsible for giving many vegetables and fruits, such as carrots and tomatoes, their characteristic colors. (You knew that a carrot is a vegetable, but did you know that a tomato is technically a fruit?) These plant compounds are important for much more than just pretty colors, however. Antioxidants such as lycopene (as well as vitamin E, vitamin C, and beta-carotene, a precursor to vitamin A) help to neutralize rogue molecules called free radicals.
Free radicals can greatly damage our bodies' tissues and have been implicated in cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cataracts, Alzheimer's disease, and others. They also figure prominently in the aging process. These pesky little molecules are hard to escape, as they are all around us and are especially prominent in cigarette smoke and air pollution. To make matters worse, we produce them in our own bodies as natural metabolic byproducts. In addition, the UV rays in sunlight can induce the formation of free radicals in the cells of our skin to generate further oxidative stress.
For many years now, we have understood the dangers of excessive sun exposure. And while it looks nice to have a good tan, exposure to solar UV that results in sunburn dramatically increases the risk of skin cancer. Fortunately, many people now routinely use sunscreen to protect themselves from the sun's harmful rays. Over your lifetime, however, much of the UV exposure you experience is likely to occur when your skin is not protected on the outside.1 For this reason, you should take proactive measures to ensure that your skin is protected from the inside. A good way to do that, it seems, is with lycopene.
TOMATOES PROTECT SKIN FROM UV DAMAGE
German and Dutch researchers have found that diets rich in tomato paste dramatically reduce UV-induced skin damage.1 In a study recently published in the Journal of Nutrition, nine volunteers consumed a diet supplemented with 40 grams (about 1.4 oz, or 3 tablespoons) of tomato paste mixed with olive oil, while ten control subjects received just olive oil (in addition to their normal diet) for ten weeks. The amount of lycopene in the tomato paste was about 16 mg. At the beginning of the study, and again four weeks and ten weeks later, all the subjects were exposed to UV radiation to induce mild erythema (or sunburn, if you prefer a less clinical term) on their shoulders. The participants, aged 26-67 years, were homogeneous in their coloring. They all had lightly pigmented skin, light-colored hair, and blue eyes, and had experienced minimal tanning.
The degree of skin damage (called the a-value) caused by the repeated UV exposures was measured in both groups at the three stages of the study. After the first exposure, both groups had similar a-values (6.0 for controls and 5.6 for those consuming tomato paste), as would be expected for a random sample of individuals. Four weeks later, the a-values caused by UV exposure were slightly lower (5.4 for controls, 5.1 for the test group) but were still not significantly different. At the tenth week, however, UV exposure caused a much lower a-value (3.8) in the tomato-paste eaters than in the controls (6.3). To put this another way, those who ate 3 tablespoons of tomato paste daily for ten weeks had 40% less UV-induced skin damage than those who did not.
LYCOPENE IS THE PROTECTIVE AGENT
One way to explain the results of the erythema study is to look at the level of lycopene in the two groups. By the tenth week, the control group showed an 8% decrease in lycopene levels in their blood, and a whopping 51% decrease in total carotenoids in their skin. Conversely, those who consumed the tomato paste increased their blood lycopene levels by 95% and their skin carotenoid content by 15%. It is likely that the increased levels of lycopene and other carotenoids in their skin cells offered a protective benefit against the UV radiation to minimize skin damage.
Additional experiments support this idea. A separate study at Tufts University revealed that lycopene levels are depleted much more than those of other carotenoids (beta-carotene, for example) in UV-damaged skin when compared to adjacent undamaged skin.2 The researchers concluded from this that lycopene is preferentially sacrificed to protect the skin when UV radiation creates free radicals in the skin cells.
DO I HAVE TO EAT MY TOMATOES?
Just about everyone loves tomatoes, but they were regarded with great suspicion in Europe when Spanish explorers first brought them back from their native South America. They were thought to be poisonous, in fact, because they were recognized as belonging to the Nightshade family of plants, many of which are deadly. But fear soon gave way to enthusiasm for the delectable red fruit, which came to be known as the "love apple" because of its supposed aphrodisiac properties. It was the Italians, God bless 'em, who took the tomato to its greatest culinary heights, without even knowing about the benefits of lycopene. Mangia!
Lycopene intake is most strongly
associated with reducing the
risk of prostate, stomach,
breast, and lung cancer.
Based on a 1999 Canadian study of dietary habits, the average daily intake of lycopene is 25 mg, an amount that falls well short of the recommended intake of 35 mg/day.3 Individuals with a tomato-poor diet are especially susceptible to lycopene deficiency, as 80-85% of dietary lycopene is typically supplied by tomatoes. We could all eat a lot more tomatoes, but not everyone wants to do that, especially not every day. An easier and more reliable way to make up the deficit is through supplementation.
But we'll still eat some tomatoes, of course, and Table 1 demonstrates that cooked, processed tomatoes are the best source of lycopene, because they have significantly higher levels than raw tomatoes. In addition, oils or fatty foods, such as cheese, eaten together with tomato products increase the amount of lycopene released into your bloodstream, making that much more of it available to the cells that need it most. Pizza, it turns out,is especially good in this regard - but don't use that as an excuse to become a pizza pig, or you'll probably die young.
LYCOPENE MAY ALSO PROTECT AGAINST CANCER AND HEART DISEASE
We've already seen that lycopene is a potent antioxidant. Thus it is surprising to find that the amount of lycopene in a particular food does not directly correlate to the antioxidizing power of that food. When the foods listed in Table 1 were analyzed for total antioxidant capacity, it was found, e.g., that tomato soup has at least twice as much antioxidant capacity as any of the other foods.4 This can be explained by considering that tomatoes contain multiple antioxidants in addition to lycopene, such as vitamin C, lutein, beta-cryptoxanthin, alpha-carotene, and beta-carotene (and possibly many more).7 These antioxidants likely tolerate the processing procedures differently, and consequently the foods in Table 1 have different antioxidant capacities than would be predicted based solely on lycopene content.
While it is true that lycopene is an important antioxidant, it may have a host of other beneficial effects on the body as well. For example, it has been proposed that lycopene may participate in improving hormonal, immune, and metabolic processes in our bodies to improve our health and reduce the risk of certain diseases.8
Several studies indicate that tomato-enriched diets promote improved health by reducing the risk of various cancers and heart disease. For example, when the dietary habits of 1271 elderly individuals in Massachusetts were examined, it was found that a tomato-rich diet reduced the cancer death rate by 50%, whereas a diet rich in carrots or beta-carotene had no protective effect.9 Additional studies support these results and indicate that lycopene intake is most strongly associated with reducing the risk of prostate, stomach, breast, and lung cancer.10
Men with the highest
concentrations of lycopene had a
48% lower risk for heart attack
than those with the lowest
There are also numerous studies indicating that a high intake of tomatoes reduces the risk of certain types of cardiovascular disease.11 But is it tomatoes in general, or lycopene in particular, that reduces the risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease?
STUDIES LARGE AND SMALL POINT TO LYCOPENE
A number of studies have recently been initiated in an effort to ascertain whether lycopene, and not some other compound in tomatoes, is responsible for improved health benefits in people who consume a tomato-rich diet. Many of these studies have not yet been completed, because it takes a long time, especially with diseases such as cancer and heart disease, to establish a link between a specific compound and a reduced risk of disease. However, the results of a few studies indicate that lycopene is the specific ingredient in tomatoes that provides improved health benefits.
One study showed that high lycopene intake reduced the risk of prostate cancer by 21%, whereas other antioxidants found in tomatoes, including beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, lutein, and beta-cryptoxanthin, had no beneficial effect with respect to this cancer.12 Importantly, this study involved 47,894 male health professionals and is the largest study of its kind completed to date.
Separate studies have been conducted to investigate the role of lycopene in cardiovascular diseases. One important study examined a group of men under the age of 70, recruited from ten European countries, who had experienced an acute myocardial infarction (death of heart cells due to lack of oxygen in the heart tissue) and compared them to an appropriate control group.13 The results indicated that men with the highest concentrations of lycopene in their adipose (fat) tissue had a 48% lower risk for myocardial infarction than those with the lowest lycopene concentrations.
A small pilot study (employing only 19 healthy adults) showed that dietary supplementation with lycopene (40-75 mg/day) at least doubled the amount of lycopene in the blood and decreased the amount of lipid peroxidation, a damaging oxidative degradation of fatty molecules or molecular complexes, such as LDL.14 Reducing lipid peroxidation is important because oxidized LDL leads to the formation of artery-clogging plaque and increases the risk of heart disease. It turns out that lycopene is carried in the blood by LDL and may help to protect it from oxidation. Thus, lycopene may help reduce the risk of heart disease. It sounds like lycopene is a good deal all around.
Whatever route you take, make sure you arm yourself with the natural substances that will ensure your general good health during your active, sun-drenched summer.
- Stahl W, Heinrich U, Wiseman, et al. Dietary tomato past protects against ultraviolet light-induced erythema in humans. J Nutr 2001;131:1449-51.
- Ribaya-Mercado JD, Garmyn M, Gilchrest BA, Russell RM. Skin lycopene is destroyed preferentially over beta-carotene during ultraviolet irradiation in humans. J Nutr 1995;125:1854-9.
- Rao AV, Waseem Z, Agarwal S. Lycopene contents of tomatoes and tomato products and their contribution to dietary lycopene. Food Res Intl 1999;31:737-41.
- Djuric Z, Powell LC. Antioxidant capacity of lycopene-containing foods. Intl J Food Sci Nutr 2001;52:143-9.
- Agricultural Research Service. USDA-NCC Carotenoid Database for US Foods - 1998. Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center, Beltsville, MD, 1998.
- Clinton SK. Lycopene: chemistry, biology and implications for human health and disease. Nutr Rev 1998;56:35-51.
- Duke JA. Handbook of Phytochemical Constituents of GRAS Herbs and Other Economic Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1992, pp 345-9.
- Rao AV, Agarwal S. Role of antioxidant lycopene in cancer and heart disease. J Am Coll Nutr 2000;19:563-9.
- Colditz GA, Branch LG, Lipnic RJ. Increased green and yellow vegetable intake and lowered cancer death in an elderly population. Am J Clin Nutr 1985;41:32-6.
- Giovannucci E. Tomatoes, tomato-based products, lycopene, and cancer: review of the epidemiologic literature. J Natl Can Inst 1999;91:317-31.
- Arab L, Steck S. Lycopene and cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71(Suppl):1691-5S.
- Giovanucci EL, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Stampfer MG, Colditz GA, Willett WC. Intake of carotenoids and retinol in relationship to risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1767-76.
- Kohlmeier L, Kark JD, Gomez-Garcia E, et al. Lycopene and myocardial infarction risk in the EURAMIC study. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:618-26.
- Agarwal S, Rao V. Tomato lycopene and low-density lipoprotein oxidation: a human dietary intervention study. Lipids 1998;33:981-4.

The North River in New Netherland
Joan Vinckeboons (1617–70) was a Dutch cartographer and engraver born into a family of artists of Flemish origin. He was employed by the Dutch West India Company and for more than 30 years produced maps for use by Dutch mercantile and military shipping. He was a business partner of Joan Blaeu, one of the most important map and atlas publishers of the day. Vinckeboons drew a series of 200 manuscript maps that were used in the production of atlases, including Blaeu’s Atlas Maior. This pen-and-ink and watercolor map ...

Biology exquisitely creates hierarchical structures, where initiated at nano scales, are exhibited in macro or physiological multifunctional materials to provide structural support, force generation, catalytic properties or energy conversion1 (see Figure 1). This is exemplified in a wide range of biological materials such as hair, skin, bone, spider silk or cells, which play important roles in providing key functions to biological systems2.
Our research focuses on studying the mechanisms of deformation and failure of biological materials by utilizing a computational materials science approach. Our goal is to elucidate nature's design principles that facilitates the formation of materials with exceptional material properties1,3, despite typically inferior building blocks4,5.
|Figure 1. Three example biological protein materials (A, intermediate filaments, B, collagenous tissues, C, amyloid proteins), revealing their hierarchical makeup. Our research focuses on the development of multiscale material models, specifically focused on their mechanical behavior at deformation and failure (figure taken from Ref. #3).
These efforts are part of a broader field of investigation referred to as materiomics. Materiomics is defined as the study of the material properties of natural and synthetic materials by examining fundamental links between processes, structures and properties at multiple scales, from nano to macro, by using systematic experimental, theoretical or computational methods6,7.
In order to provide a bottom-up description of materials behavior, our interdisciplinary team of undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs applies an experimentally validated atomistic based multi-scale simulation approach that considers the structure-process-property paradigm of materials science and the architecture of proteins from the atomistic level up to the overall structure. This novel viewpoint links chemistry and genetics to resulting functional material properties, and provides us with a powerful foundation to ask fundamental questions about the behavior of biological materials.
Moreover, the development of multi-scale, hierarchical models to explain the deformation and failure mechanisms of biological materials provides critical insight into how biological materials are made and how they derive their unique properties. This learning-from-failure-approach has already proven to be useful for engineered materials, and its application to biological materials holds the promise to transform our understanding of key material design principles that have evolved in nature8.
In the following sections we review two case studies that demonstrate the application of materiomics.
Hierarchical Structures are Crucial to Provide Multiple, Disparate Properties in a Single Material
Our work has contributed to explain some of the most remarkable properties of biological materials, specifically their ability to provide multiple functions despite severe limitations in the quality of available building blocks, and the ability to adapt to different environmental conditions (for a review, see Ref. #3).
For example, strength, robustness and adaptability are properties of fundamental importance to biological materials and structures, and are crucial to providing functional properties to living systems. Strength is defined as the maximum force (or pressure) a material can withstand before breaking. Robustness is defined as the ability of a material to tolerate flaws and defects in its structural makeup while maintaining its ability to provide functionality.
Adaptability refers to the ability of a material to cope with changing environmental conditions. These properties are crucial for materials in biology (such as skin, bone, spider silk, or cells), which either provide structural support themselves (such as the skeleton formed by bone), or need to withstand mechanical deformation under normal physiologic conditions (such as cells and tissue associated with blood vessels that are exposed to the pressure of the blood).
In engineering, strength and robustness are disparate properties (see Figure 2), and it remains challenging to create materials that combine these two features. Glass or ceramics, for example, are typically very strong materials. However, they are not very robust: Even a small crack in a glass, or an attempt to deform glass considerably will lead to catastrophic failure.
|Figure 2. Schematic of the robustness-strength domain, comparing engineered materials and biological materials. The squares represent different hierarchical structures, designed based on more than 16,000 alpha-helical protein filaments. The analysis shows that most random arrangements (98.13%) fall on the so-called banana curve, while fewer, specifically designed structures (1.98%) fall on the inverse banana curve (figure taken from Ref. #3).
In contrast, metals such as copper are very robust; however, they do typically not resist large forces. Yet, these materials allow for large deformation, and even the existence of cracks in the material does not lead to a sudden breakdown. Yet, many biological materials (such as cellular protein filaments, blood vessels, collagenous tissues such as tendon, spider silk, bone, tendon, skin) are capable of providing both properties - strength and robustness, very effectively, and are also combined with the ability to adapt to changes in the environment1,3.
The key to understand these remarkable properties is the particular structural makeup of biological materials, consisting of few distinct elements (such as alpha-helices or beta-sheet protein domains), but a great diversity in structural arrangement of these elements at multiple material levels, from nano to macro1,3. Most fibers, tissues, organs and organisms found in nature show a highly hierarchical and organized structure, where features are found at all scales, ranging from protein molecules (≈50 Å), protein assemblies (≈1 to 10 nm), fibrils and fibers (≈10 to 100 µm), to cells (≈50 µm), and to tissues and organs (≈1000s and more µm).
Most early studies have focused on investigations at single scales, or treated tissues or the cellular microenvironment as a continuum medium without heterogeneous structures (e.g. studies that examine isolated effects of material stiffness or the role of chemical cues alone on cell behavior). However, the cause and effect of biological material mechanics is more complex than a singular input at a specific scale, and thus, the examination of how a range of material scales and hierarchies contribute to certain biological function and dysfunction has emerged as a critical aspect in advancing our understanding of the role of materials in biology in both a physiological and pathological context. Specifically, the origin of how naturally occurring biological protein materials are capable of unifying disparate mechanical properties such as strength, robustness and adaptability is of significant interest for both biological and engineering science, and has attracted significant attention.
Through the development of multiscale computational models that provide a representation of multiple material hierarchy levels in a single model, we have elucidated the key role that multiscale mechanics plays in defining a material's ultimate response at failure, and how nature's structural design principles define the hierarchical makeup of biological materials9,10. This process, likely evolutionarily driven, enables biological materials to combine disparate properties such as strength, robustness and adaptability, and may explain the existence of universal structural features observed in a variety of biological materials, across species (Figure 2)11.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Brittle Bone Disease
Materiomics can also be applied to study the catastrophic breakdown of biological materials under disease conditions. Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetic disorder in collagen characterized by mechanically weakened tendon, fragile bones, skeletal deformities and in severe cases prenatal death12. Our work has shown that osteogenesis imperfecta mutations severely compromise the mechanical properties of collagenous tissues at multiple scales, from single molecules to collagen fibrils13,14.
Mutations that lead to the most severe osteogenesis imperfecta phenotype correlate with the strongest effects, leading to weakened intermolecular adhesion, increased intermolecular spacing, reduced stiffness, as well as a reduced failure strength of collagen fibrils that compromises the ability of collagen to provide strength and toughness to connective tissue. Our work has shown that the reason for this is a change in the stress distribution inside collagen fibrils, and is due to the formation of nano-cracks where stress concentrations at the corners develop (Figure 3).
|Figure 3. Effect of osteogenesis imperfecta on the stress distribution inside collagen fibrils (left), and resulting change in the stress-strain response (right)14. The formation of nanocracks at the location of mutations result in local stress concentrations (marked with red color), which reduces the overall strength of the fibril as it induces intermolecular shear at moderate applied loads.
Our findings provide insight into the multi-scale mechanisms of this disease, and lead to explanations of characteristic osteogenesis imperfecta tissue features such as reduced mechanical strength, lower cross-link density and changes in the way mineral platelets are distributed. Our results for the first time explain how single point mutations at the nanoscale can lead to catastrophic tissue failure at much larger length-scales.
The key to understand this dramatic change in material behavior is that failure must be understood as a multi-scale phenomenon, where the interplay of mechanisms at multiple scales defines the ultimate material response. Conventional models of failure and disease that consider only one level of the material's structure, do not capture the full range of relevant structures and mechanisms and as such remain limited in their ability to describe their behavior of intervene in material breakdown processes associated with disease. The understanding of failure in the context of defects and mutations could fundamentally change the way diseases are modeled and potentially treated.
Outlook to Future Research
Materiomics is a powerful tool to enhance the understanding of materials in biology, at multiple scales and in a variety of functional contexts. The long-term goal of our research is to develop a new engineering paradigm that encompasses the analysis and design of structures and materials, starting from the molecular level, in order to create new materials that mimic and exceed the properties of biological ones by utilizing material concepts discovered in biological materials.
We envision that our work can lead to the development of a new set of tools that can be applied, together with synthetic biological and self-assembly methods, to select, design, and produce a new class of materials, similar to the approaches used today in computer aided design of buildings, cars and machines. The availability of multifunctional and changeable materials reduces the necessity for the use of different materials to achieve different properties, and as such, may provide significant savings in weight and cost. The utilization of abundant natural building blocks such as organic (e.g. peptides or proteins) or inorganic (e.g. minerals) constituents, combined with novel synthesis techniques based on self-assembly, could lead to new lightweight materials for structural applications in cars, airplanes, and buildings that could reduce the overall energy consumption and ecological footprint of materials.
1. Buehler, M.J. and Y.C. Yung, Deformation and failure of protein materials in physiologically extreme conditions and disease. Nature Materials, 2009. 8(3): p. 175-188.
2. Fratzl, P. and R. Weinkamer, Nature's hierarchical materials. Progress in Materials Science, 2007. 52: p. 1263-1334.
3. Buehler, M.J. and Y.C. Yung, How protein materials balance strength, robustness and adaptability. HFSP Journal, 2010: p. doi:10.2976/1.3267779.
4. Keten, S. and M.J. Buehler, Geometric Confinement Governs the Rupture Strength of H-bond Assemblies at a Critical Length Scale. Nano Letters, 2008. 8(2): p. 743 - 748.
5. Keten, S., Z. Xu, B. Ihle, and M.J. Buehler, Nanoconfinement controls stiffness, strength and mechanical toughness of beta-sheet crystals in silk. 2010.
6. Espinosa, H.D., J.E. Rim, F. Barthelat, and M.J. Buehler, Merger of structure and material in nacre and bone - Perspectives on de novo biomimetic materials. Progress in Materials Science, 2009. 54(8): p. 1059-1100
7. Buehler, M.J., S. Keten, and T. Ackbarow, Theoretical and computational hierarchical nanomechanics of protein materials: Deformation and fracture. Progress in Materials Science, 2008 53: p. 1101-1241.
8. Buchanan, M., Learning from failure. Nature Physics, 2009. 5(10): p. 705.
9. Qin, Z., L. Kreplak, and M.J. Buehler, Hierarchical structure controls nanomechanical properties of vimentin intermediate filaments. PLoS ONE, 2009. 4(10): p. e7294.
10. Ackbarow, T., D. Sen, C. Thaulow, and M.J. Buehler, Alpha-Helical Protein Networks are Self Protective and Flaw Tolerant. PLoS ONE, 2009. 4(6): p. e6015.
11. Buehler, M.J. and S. Keten, Failure of molecules, bones, and the earth itself. Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010. in press.
12. Rauch, F. and F.H. Glorieux, Osteogenesis imperfecta. Lancet, 2004. 363(9418): p. 1377-1385.
13. Gautieri, A., S. Vesentini, A. Redaelli, and M.J. Buehler, Single molecule effects of osteogenesis imperfecta mutations in tropocollagen protein domains. Protein Sci, 2009. 18(1): p. 161-8.
14. Gautieri, A., S. Uzel, S. Vesentini, A. Redaelli, and M.J. Buehler, Molecular and mesoscale mechanisms of osteogenesis imperfecta disease in collagen fibrils. Biophys J, 2009. 97(3): p. 857-65.
Copyright AZoM.com, Professor Markus J. Buehler (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)

|Part of a series on|
|Types of creationism|
|Other religious views|
The Omphalos hypothesis states that God created the universe to appear old, but that He created the universe around 6000 years ago. The idea was first proposed in the 1800s in response to the growing popularity of modern Geology and the Theory of Evolution. The idea was poorly received, as theologians felt it made God seem deceitful.
|This article is a stub. You can help Christian Knowledgebase Wiki by.|

F. A. Hayek, “Planning, Science and Freedom”, Nature, Nov. 15, 1941, Vol. 148, pp. 580-584.
The reasons why the adoption of a system of central planning necessarily produces a totalitarian system are fairly simple. Whoever controls the means must decide which ends they are to serve. As under modern conditions control of economic activity means control of the material means for practically all our ends, it means control over nearly all our activities. The nature of the detailed scale of values which must guide the planning makes it impossible that it should be determined by anything like democratic means. The director of the planned system would have to impose his scale of values, his hierarchy of ends, which, if it is to be sufficient to determine the plan, must include a definite order of rank in which the status of each person is laid down. If the plan is to succeed or the planner to appear successful, the people must be made to believe that the objectives chosen are the right ones. Every criticism of the plan or the ideology underlying it must be treated as sabotage. There can be no freedom of thought, no freedom of the Press, where it is necessary that everything should be governed by a single system of thought. In theory Socialism may wish to enhance freedom, but in practice every kind of collectivism consistently carried through must produce the characteristic features which Fascism, Nazism and Communism have in common. Totalitarianism is nothing but consistent collectivism, the ruthless execution of the principle that ‘the whole comes before the individual’ and the direction of .all members of society by a single will supposed to represent the ‘whole’.

Early in the 14th century the Turkish tribal chieftain Othman (Osman) founded an empire in western Anatolia (Asia Minor) that was to endure for almost six centuries. As this empire grew by conquering lands of the Byzantine Empire and beyond, it came to include at the height of its power all of Asia Minor; the countries of the Balkan Peninsula; the islands of the eastern Mediterranean; parts of Hungary and Russia; Iraq, Syria, the Caucasus, Palestine, and Egypt; part of Arabia; and all of North Africa through Algeria.
The Early Empire, 1300-1481
The dynasty that Othman (1258-1326) founded was called Osmanli, meaning "sons of Osman." The name evolved in English into Ottoman. The Ottoman Empire was Islamic in religion. During the 11th century bands of nomadic Turks emerged from their home in Central Asia to raid lands to the west. The strongest of the Turkish tribes was the Seljuks. In time they established themselves in Asia Minor along with other groups of Turks.
Following the defeat of the Seljuks by the Mongols in 1293, Othman emerged as the leader of local Turks in the fight against the tottering Byzantine Empire. The final conquest of the Byzantines was not achieved until 1453 with the fall of Constantinople (now Istanbul), but by that date all the surrounding territory was in Ottoman hands.
The initial areas of expansion under Othman I and his successors Orkhan (ruled 1326-59) and Murad I (ruled 1359-89) were western Asia Minor and southeastern Europe, primarily the Balkan Peninsula. During Orkhan's reign the practice began of exacting a tribute in children from Christian subjects. The boys were trained to become soldiers and administrators. As soldiers they filled the ranks of the infantry, called the Janizaries (also spelled Janissaries), the most fearsome military force in Europe for centuries.
Murad I conquered Thrace, to the northwest of Constantinople, in 1361. He moved his capital to Adrionople (now Edirne), Thrace's capital and the second city of the Byzantine Empire. This conquest effectively cut off Constantinople from the outside world, and allowed Murad to control the principal invasion route through the Balkan Mountains, giving the Ottomans access to further expansion to the north.
During Murad I last victorious battle against Balkan allies, he was killed. His successor, Beyazid I (ruled 1389-1402), was unable to make further European conquests. He was forced to devote his attention to eastern Asia Minor to deal with a growing Turkish principality, Karaman. He attacked and defeated Karaman in 1391, put down a revolt of his Balkan subjects, and returned to consolidate his gains in Asia Minor. His successes attracted the attention of Timur Lenk (Tamerlane). Encouraged by Turkish princes who had fled to his court from Beyazid I's incursions, attacked and overwhelmed him in 1402. Taken captive by Timur Lenk, Beyazid died within a year.
Timur Lenk soon retired from Asia Minor, leaving Beyazid's sons to take up where their father had failed. The four sons fought for control until one of them, Mohammed I, killed the other three and took control. He reigned from 1413 to 1421 and his successor Murad II, from 1421 to 1451. Murad II suppressed Balkan resistance and eliminated all but two of the Turkish principalities in Asia Minor. The task of finishing the Balkan conquests and seizing all of Asia Minor fell to Murad II's successor, Mohammed II (ruled 1451-81). It was he who completed the siege of Constantinople in 1453 and made it the capital of the Ottoman Empire. The whole Balkan Peninsula south of Hungary was incorporated as well as the Crimea on the north coast of the Black Sea. Asia Minor was completely subdued.
In addition to conquering a large empire, Mohammed II worked strenuously for consolidation and an adequate administrative and tax system. He was assisted by the fact that the whole Byzantine bureaucratic structure fell into his hands. Although Islamic, Ottoman sultans were not averse to using whatever talent they could attract or sometimes, capture.
The Golden Age, 1481-1566
Three sultans ruled the empire at its height: Beyazid II (1481-1512), Selim I (1512-20), and Suleyman I the Magnificent (1520-66). Beyazid extended the empire in Europe, added outposts along the Black Sea, and put down revolts in Asia Minor. He also turned the Ottoman fleet into a major Mediterranean naval power. Late in life he became a religious mystic and was displaced on the throne by his more militant son, Selim I.
Selim I's first task was to eliminate all competition for his position. He had his brothers, their sons, and all but one of his own sons killed. He thereby established control over the army, which had wanted to raise its own candidate to power. During his short reign the Ottomans moved south-and eastward into Syria, Mesopotamia (Iraq), Arabia, and Egypt. At Mecca, the chief shrine of Islam, he took the title of caliph, ruler of all Muslims. The Ottoman sultans were thereafter the spiritual heads of Islam thereby displacing the centuries-old caliphate of Baghdad.
By acquiring the holy places of Islam, Selim I's cemented his position as the religion's most powerful ruler. This gave the Ottomans direct access to the rich cultural heritage of the Arab world. Leading Muslim intellectuals, artists, artisans, and administrators came to Constantinople from all parts of the Arab world. They made the empire much more of a traditional Islamic state than it had been.
An added benefit of Selim I's efforts was control of all Middle Eastern trade routes between Europe and the Far East. The growth of the empire had for some time been an impediment to European trade. In time this led European states to seek routes around Africa to China and India. It also impelled them to face westward and led directly to the discovery of the Americas.
Selim I's's surviving son, Suleyman, came to the throne in an enviable situation. New revenues from the expanded empire left him with wealth and power unparalleled in Ottoman history. In his early campaigns he captured Belgrade (1521) and Rhodes (1522) and broke the military power of Hungary. In 1529 he laid siege to Vienna, Austria, but was forced to withdraw for lack of supplies. He also waged three campaigns against Persia. Algiers in North Africa fell to his navy in 1529 and Tripoli (now Libya) in 1551. In more peaceful pursuits he adorned the chief cities of Islam with mosques, aqueducts, bridges, and other public works. In Constantinople he had several mosques built, among them the magnificent Suleymaniye Cami named for him.
Imperial Decline, 1566-1807
During Suleyman's long reign the Ottoman Empire was at the height of its political power and close to its maximum geographical extent. The seeds of decline, however, were already planted. As Suleyman grew tired of campaigns and retired to his harem, his viziers, or prime ministers, took more authority. After his death the army gained control of the sultanate and was able to use it for its own benefit. Few sultans after Suleyman had the ability to exercise real power when the need arose. This weakness at home was countered by a growing power in the west. The nation-states of Europe were emerging from the Middle Ages under strong monarchies. They were building armies and navies that were powerful enough to attack a decaying Ottoman military might.
In 1571 the combined fleets of Venice, Spain, and the Papal States of Italy defeated the Turks in the great naval Battle Lepanto, off the coast of Greece. This defeat, which dispelled the myth of the invincible Turk, took place during the reign of Selim II (ruled 1566-74). But the empire rebuilt its navy and continued to control the eastern Mediterranean for another century.
As the central government became weaker, large parts of the empire began to act independently, retaining only nominal loyalty to the sultan. The army was still strong enough, however, to prevent provincial rebels from asserting complete control. Under Murad III (ruled 1574-95) new campaigns were undertaken. The Caucasus was conquered, and Azerbaijan was seized. This brought the empire to the peak of its territorial extent.
Reform efforts undertaken by 17th-century sultans did little to deter the onset of decay. The Ottomans were driven out of the Caucasus and Azerbaijan in 1603 and out of Iraq in 1604. Iraq was retaken by Murad IV (ruled 1623-40) in 1638, but Iran remained a persistent military threat in the east. A war with Venice (1645-69) exposed Constantinople to an attack by the Venetian navy. In 1683 the last attempt to conquer Vienna failed. Russia and Austria fought the empire by direct military attack and by fomenting revolt by non-Muslim subjects of the sultan.
Beginning in 1683, with the attack on Vienna, the Ottomans were at war with European enemies for 41 years. As a result, the empire lost much of its Balkan territory and all the possessions on the shores of the Black Sea. In addition, the Austrians and Russians were allowed to intervene in the empire's affairs on behalf of the sultan's Christian subjects.
The weakness of the central government, as manifested by its military decline, also showed itself in a gradual loss of control over most of the provinces. Local rulers, called notables, carved for themselves permanent regions in which they ruled directly, regardless of the wishes of the sultan in Constantinople. The notables were able to build their power bases because they knew of the sultan's military weakness and because local populations preferred their rule to the corrupt administration of the faraway capital. The notables formed their own armies and collected their own taxes, sending only nominal contributions to the imperial treasury.
Selim III (ruled 1789-1807) attempted to reform the empire and its army. He failed and was overthrown. When Mahmud II (ruled 1808-39) came to the throne, the empire was in desperate straits. Control of North Africa had passed to local notables. In Egypt Muhammad Ali was laying the foundation of an independent kingdom. Had the European nations cooperated, they could have destroyed the Ottoman Empire.
In 1826, five years after Greece began its fight for independence, the Janizaries revolted to stop reforms. Warfare between the Turks and Greeks was fierce, and eventually a new military system in the style of European armies. He also reformed the administration and gained control over some of the provincial notables, with the exception of Egypt. By the time of Mahmud's death the empire was more consolidated and powerful, but it was still subject to European interference.
Mahmud's sons, Abdulmecid I (ruled 1839-61) and Abdulaziz (ruled 1861-76) carried out further reforms, especially in education and law. Nevertheless, by mid-century it was evident that the Ottoman cause was hopeless. Czar Nicholas I of Russia commented on the Ottoman Empire in 1853: "We have on our hands a sick man, a very sick man."
The "Sick Man of Europe" 1850-1922
The conflicting interests of European states propped up the Ottoman Empire until after World War I. Great Britain especially was determined to keep Russia from gaining direct access to the Mediterranean from the Black Sea. Britain, France, and Sardinia helped the Ottomans during the Crimean War (1854-56) to block the Russians.
The Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78 brought Russia almost to Constantinople. The Ottomans were forced to sign the Treaty of San Stefano, which would have ended their rule in Europe except that the European states called the Congress of Berlin. It succeeded in propping up the old empire for a few decades more.
Abdulhamid II (ruled 1876-1909) developed strong ties with Germany, and the Ottomans fought on Germany's side in World War I. Russia hoped to use the war as an excuse to gain access to the Mediterranean and perhaps capture Constantinople. This aim was frustrated by the Russian Revolution of 1917 and withdrawal from the war. Ottoman defeat in war inspired an already fervent Turkish nationalism. The postwar settlement outraged the nationalists. A new government under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal, known as Ataturk (father of the Turks), emerged at Ankara. The last sultan, Mohammed VI, fled in 1922 after the sultanate had been abolished. All members of the Ottoman Dynasty were expelled from the country two years later. Turkey was proclaimed a republic, with Ataturk as its first president.

Prehistoric mammal hair discovered in Cretaceous amberJune 16th, 2010 - 1:53 pm ICT by ANI
London, June 16 (ANI): Palaeontologists have discovered two mammal hairs encased in amber that is a 100 million years old.
The oldest 3D specimens, found alongside a fly pupa in amber uncovered in southwest France, are remarkably similar to hair found on modern mammals, implying that the shape and structure of mammal hair has remained unchanged over the years. They have a very similar cuticular structure to those in modern mammals.
“We have 2D hair imprints as early as the Middle Jurassic,” the BBC quoted Dr Romain Vullo of the University of Rennes, France, who discovered the hair, as saying.
“However, carbonised hair provides much less information about the structure than a 3D hair preserved in amber,” Vullo added.
The piece of amber, which is fossilised tree resin, was found in the Font-de-Benon quarry at Archingeay-Les Nouillers in Charente-Maritime, southwest France. Above it, the team found four teeth of a primitive marsupial called Arcantiodelphys, to which the hair seems to belong, according to the team.
The researchers have cited three possibilities as to why the hair was encased in amber - Either amber swamped part of an animal’s corpse, or a living animal that brushed past the resin lost the hair, or the hair was lost in a similar manner by a mammal that came to feed on insects trapped in the resin, which later fossilised into amber.
The details of the discovery are published in the journal Naturwissenschaften. (ANI)
- Oldest mammalian hair found in France - May 20, 2010
- Midair collision kills four in France - Oct 18, 2009
- Fossils, mineral rocks attract huge crowds at expo (With Images) - Jan 05, 2012
- Mammals running speed determines eye size - May 03, 2012
- Female mites dominated males in sex: Experts - Mar 17, 2011
- Flowering plants may have appeared 180 million years earlier than believed - Oct 05, 2009
- Dinosaur-bird 'missing link' could be egg - Jul 13, 2012
- Did Ice Age giants' ancestors originate in Tibet? - Sep 05, 2011
- 49-million years old spider now gets 3-D makeover - May 19, 2011
- Sea urchin's teeth: Key to everlasting sharp tools - Dec 26, 2010
- How snakes lost their legs - Feb 08, 2011
- Bigger brains make dogs friendlier than cats - Nov 23, 2010
- New tool shows dinosaurs lighter than thought - Jun 06, 2012
- Dino-era feathers might hold key to how dinosaurs gave rise to birds - Mar 12, 2008
- Amber Portwood is now out of hospital - Jun 20, 2011
Tags: 100 million years, amber, bbc, charente maritime, corpse, cretaceous, discovery, hairs, insects, mammal, mammals, naturwissenschaften, possibilities, pupa, quarry, rennes france, southwest france, specimens, tree resin, university of rennes

Residual Data is data that is unintentionally left behind on computer media. In forensic usage, remnant data is typically left behind after attempts have been made to delete the data, after the data has been forgotten, or after the media on which the data resides has been decomissioned.
Residual data appears at all levels of modern computer systems:
- Computer systems that are discarded.
- Partitions in hard drives that are deleted.
- Files on hard drives that are deleted but not overwritten.
- Snippets of text in Microsoft Word files.
- Heap variables that are freed with free()
- Automatic variables left on the stack of languages like C or garbage collected in languages like Java.
Byers, Simon. Scalable Exploitation of, and Responses to Information Leakage Through Hidden Data in Published Documents, AT&T Research, April 2003
Chow, J., B. Pfaff, T. Garfinkel, K. Christopher, M. Rosenblum, Understanding Data Lifetime via Whole System Simulation, Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Security Symposium, 2004.
Garfinkel, S. and Shelat, A., "Remembrance of Data Passed: A Study of Disk Sanitization Practices," IEEE Security and Privacy, January/February 2003.

Henry Gray (18251861). Anatomy of the Human Body. 1918.
and liver, and the falciform and coronary ligaments between the liver and the abdominal wall and diaphragm (Fig. 989).
FIG. 987 Diagrams to illustrate two stages in the development of the digestive tube and its mesentery. The arrow indicates the entrance to the bursa omentalis. (See enlarged image)
FIG. 988 Final disposition of the intestines and their vascular relations. (Jonnesco.) A. Aorta. H. Hepatic artery. M, Col. Branches of superior mesenteric artery. m, m. Branches of inferior mesenteric artery. S. Splenic artery. (See enlarged image)
FIG. 989 Schematic figure of the bursa omentalis, etc. Human embryo of eight weeks. (Kollmann.) (See enlarged image)
The Rectum and Anal Canal.The hind-gut is at first prolonged backward into the body-stalk as the tube of the allantois; but, with the growth and flexure of the tail-end of the embryo, the body-stalk, with its contained allantoic tube, is carried forward to the ventral aspect of the body, and consequently a bend is formed at the

You are here
The flaws in this chapter go deeper than merely deepening confusion over basic concepts and omitting references to work which address questions they raise. At critical points, EE quotes biologists in ways which misrepresent their views and distort the state of scientific and philosophical discourse about homology and related concepts. To present the discredited 19th century quibbles of Louis Agassiz as if they had never been addressed is ahistorical and absurd. Claiming that Brian Goodwin rejects evolution as a force which explains homology is plainly wrong. David Wake's concerns over the philosophical definition of homology does not reflect any objection to the use of biological similarity and difference to develop and test hypotheses about evolution. This merely reflects EE's needless focus on a single word, rather than the way that evolutionary biology is actually practiced in the 21st century.

CONTRIBUTION OF MUSLIMS SCIENTIST IN THE FIELD OF MEDICINE AND PHARMACY
In the Modern Muslim world is seen as many things , but rarely is it viewed as a source of inspiration and enlightenment . Though it is a force of enlightenment and it is not only verses of the Quran that testy to that fact, but also the great body scholarship produced during the Middle Ages. While Europe was in the midst of darkness, it was the Muslims spurred on the light of their news who picked up the torch of scholarship and science .It was the Muslims who preserved the knowledge of old days , elaborate upon it and passed it to Europe .
Islamic scientist in Medicine and Pharmacy was not known for many age due to many factors including a) Colonialism and lack of knowledge among Muslims generation in this modern world, other factors is b) lack of institution based facts how and when Islamic Scientists what contribution was . Although every people earn what they do pass on it generation after generation. So we the Islam of today learners should make important to look back over and make research topic selected on this issue and gain knowledge of, respected and Prized the contribution Islamic Civilization by early Muslim scholars
The first Muslim physician is believed to have been Muhammad himself, as a significant number of hadiths concerning medicine are attributed to him. Several Sahaba are said to have been successfully treated of certain diseases by following the medical advice of Muhammad. The three methods of healing known to have been mentioned by him were Honey, Cupping, and Cauterization, though he was generally opposed to the use of cauterization unless it “suits the ailment.” According to Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Muhammad disliked this method due to it causing “pain and menace to a patient” since there was no anesthesia in his time. Muhammad also appears to have been the first to suggest the contagious nature of leprosy, mange and sexually transmitted disease; and that there is always a cause and a cure for every disease, according to several hadiths in the Sahih al-Bukhari, Sunan Abi Dawood and Al-Muwatta attributed to Muhammad, such as:
“There is no disease that Allah has created, except that He also has created its treatment.
“Make use of medical treatment, for Allah has not made a disease without appointing a remedy for it, with the exception of one disease, namely old age.
“Allah has sent down both the disease and the cure, and He has appointed a cure for every disease, so treat you medically.
“The one who sent down the disease sent down the remedy.
The belief that there is a cure for every disease encouraged early Muslims to engage in biomedical research and seek out a cure for every disease known to them. Many early authors of Islamic medicine, however, were usually clerics rather than physicians, and were known to have advocated the traditional medical practices of prophet Muhammad’s time, such as those mentioned in the Qur’a n and Hadith. For instance, therapy did not require a patient to undergo any surgical procedures at the time.
From the 9th century, Hunayn ibn Ishaq translated a number of Galen‘s works into the Arabic language, followed by translations of the Sushruta Samhita, Charaka Samhita and Middle Persian works from Gundishapur. Muslim physicians soon began making many of their own significant advances and contributions to medicine, including the fields of
ALLERGOLOGY, ANATOMY, BACTERIOLOGY, BOTANY, DENTISTRY, EMBRYOLOGY, ENVIRONMENTALISM, ETIOLOGY, IMMUNOLOGY, MICROBIOLOGY, OBSTETRICS, OPHTHALMOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, PEDIATRICS, PERINATOLOGY, PHYSIOLOGY, PSYCHIATRY, PSYCHOLOGY, PULSOLOGY AND SPHYGMOLOGY, SURGERY, THERAPY, UROLOGY, ZOOLOGY, AND THE PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES SUCH AS PHARMACY AND PHARMACOLOGY, AMONG OTHERS.
Medicine was a central part of medieval Islamic culture. Responding to circumstances of time and place, Islamic physicians and scholars developed a large and complex medical literature exploring and synthesizing the theory and practice of medicine Islamic medicine was initially built on tradition, chiefly the theoretical and practical knowledge developed in Arabia, Persia, Greece, Rome, and India. Galen and Hippocrates were pre-eminent authorities, as well as the Indian physicians Sushruta and Charaka, and the Hellenistic scholars in Alexandria. Islamic scholars translated their voluminous writings from Greek and Sanskrit into Arabic and then produced new medical knowledge based on those texts. In order to make the Greek and Indian traditions more accessible, understandable, and teachable, Islamic scholars ordered and made more systematic the vast and sometimes inconsistent Greco-Roman and Indian medical knowledge by writing encyclopedias and summaries. It was through Arabic translations that the West learned of Hellenic medicine, including the works of Galen and Hippocrates. Of equal if not of greater influence in Western Europe were systematic and comprehensive works such as Avicenna‘s The Canon of Medicine, which were translated into Latin and then disseminated in manuscript and printed form throughout Europe. During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries alone, The Canon of Medicine was published more than thirty-five times.
Muslim physicians set up the earliest dedicated hospitals in the modern sense, known as Bimaristans, which were establishments where the ill were welcomed and cared for by qualified staff, and which were clearly distinguished from the ancient healing temples, sleep temples, hospices, assylums, lazarets and leper-houses which were more concerned with isolating the sick and the mad from society “rather than to offer them any way to a true cure. The Bimaristan hospitals later functioned as the first public hospitals, psychiatric hospitals and diploma-granting medical universities.
In the medieval Islamic world, hospitals were built in all major cities; in Cairo for example, the Qalawun Hospital could care for 8,000 patients, and a staff that included physicians, pharmacists, and nurses. One could also access a dispensary, and research facility that led to advances, which included the discovery of the contagious nature of diseases, and research into optics and the mechanisms of the eye. Muslim doctors were removing cataracts with hollow needles over 1000 years before Western physicians dared attempt such a task. Hospitals were built not only for the physically sick, but for the mentally sick also. One of the first ever psychiatric hospitals that cared for the mentally ill was built in Cairo. Hospitals later spread to Europe during the Crusades, inspired by the hospitals in the Middle East. The first hospital in Paris, Les Quinze-vingts, was founded by Louis IX after his return from the Crusade between 1254-1260.
Hospitals in the Islamic world featured competency tests for doctors, drug purity regulations, nurses and interns, and advanced surgical procedures. Hospitals were also created with separate wards for specific illnesses, so that people with contagious diseases could be kept away from other patients.
One of the features in medieval Muslim hospitals that distinguished them from their contemporaries and predecessors was their significantly higher standards of medical ethics. Hospitals in the Islamic world treated patients of all religions, ethnicities, and backgrounds, while the hospitals themselves often employed staff from Christian, Jewish and other minority backgrounds. Muslim doctors and physicians were expected to have obligations towards their patients, regardless of their wealth or backgrounds. The ethical standards of Muslim physicians was first laid down in the 9th century by Ishaq bin Ali Rahawi, who wrote the Adab al-Tabib (Conduct of a Physician), the first treatise dedicated to medical ethics. He regarded physicians as “guardians of souls and bodies”, and wrote twenty chapters on various topics related to medical ethics.
Another unique feature of medieval Muslim hospitals was the role of female staff, who were rarely employed in ancient and medieval healing temples elsewhere in the world. Medieval Muslim hospitals commonly employed female nurses, including nurses from as far as Sudan, a sign of great breakthrough. Muslim hospitals were also the first to employ female physicians, the most famous being two female physicians from the Banu Zuhr family who served the Almohad ruler Abu Yusuf Ya’qub al-Mansur in the 12th century. Later in the 15th century, female surgeons were illustrated for the first time in Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu‘s Cerrahiyyetu’l-Haniyye (Imperial Surgery)
The first encyclopedia of medicine in Arabic was Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari‘s Firdous al-Hikmah (“Paradise of Wisdom”), written in seven parts, c. 860. It was the first to deal with pediatrics and child development, as well as psychology and psychotherapy. In the fields of medicine and psychotherapy, the work was primarily influenced by Islamic thought and ancient Indian physicians such as Sushruta and Charaka. Unlike earlier physicians, however, al-Tabari emphasized strong ties between psychology and medicine, and the need of psychotherapy and counseling in the therapeutic treatment of patients
Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi (Rhazes) wrote the Comprehensive Book of Medicine in the 9th century. The Large Comprehensive was the most sought after of all his compositions, in which Rhazes recorded clinical cases of his own experience and provided very useful recordings of various diseases. The Comprehensive Book of Medicine, with its introduction of measles and smallpox, was very influential in Europe.
(HALY ABBAS)’S KITAB KAMIL AS-SINA’A AT-TIBBIYYA (“Complete Book of the Medical Art“), c. 980, became better known as the Kitab al-Maliki (“Royal Book“, Latin: Liber regalis) in honour of its royal patron ‘Adud al-Dawla. In twenty sections, ten of theory and ten of practice, it was more systematic and concise than Razi’s Hawi, but more practical than Avicenna’s Canon, by which it was superseded. With many interpolations and substitutions, it served as the basis for the Pantegni (c. 1087) of Constantinus Africanus, the founding text of the Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno
(Abulcasis), regarded as the father of modern surgery contributed greatly to the discipline of medical surgery with his Kitab al-Tasrif (“Book of Concessions“), a 30-volume medical encyclopedia published in 1000, which was later translated to Latin and used in European medical schools for centuries. He invented numerous surgical instruments and described them in his al-Tasrif.
Avicenna (Ibn Sina), a Hanbali and Mu’tazili philosopher and doctor in the early 11th century, was another influential figure. He is regarded as the father of modern medicine, and one of the greatest thinkers and medical scholars in history. His medical encyclopedia, The Canon of Medicine (c. 1020), remained a standard textbook in Europe for centuries, up until the renewal of the Muslim tradition of scientific medicine. He also wrote The Book of Healing (actually a more general encyclopedia of science and philosophy), which became another popular textbook in Europe. Among other things, Avicenna’s contributions to medicine include the introduction of systematic experimentation and quantification into the study of physiology,the discovery of the contagious nature of infectious diseases, the introduction of quarantine to limit the spread of contagious diseases, the introduction of experimental medicine, evidence-based medicine, clinical trials,randomized controlled trialsefficacy tests, clinical pharmacology, risk factor analysis, and the idea of a syndrome in the diagnosis of specific diseases,the first descriptions on bacterial and viral organisms, the distinction of mediastinitis from pleurisy, the contagious nature of phthisis and tuberculosis, the distribution of diseases by water and soil, and the first careful descriptions of skin troubles, sexually transmitted diseases, perversions, and nervous ailments, as well the use of ice to treat fevers, and the separation of medicine from pharmacology, which was important to the development of the pharmaceutical sciences.
Ibn al-Nafis (1213-1288) wrote Al-Shamil fi al-Tibb (The Comprehensive Book on Medicine), a voluminous medical encyclopedia that was originally planned to comprise 300 volumes, but he was only able to complete 80 volumes as a result of his death in 1288. However, even in its incomplete state, the book is one of the largest known medical encyclopedias in history, though only a small portion of The Comprehensive Book on Medicine has survived. During his lifetime, The Comprehensive Book on Medicine had eventually replaced Ibn Sina’s The Canon of Medicine as a medical authority in the medieval Islamic world. Arabic biographers from the 13th onwards considered Ibn al-Nafis the greatest physician in history, some referring to him as “the second Ibn Sina”, and others considering him even greater than Ibn Sina
In the 9th century
AL-KINDI (ALKINDUS), IN DE GRADIBUS Demonstrated the application of mathematics and quantification to medicine, particularly in the field of pharmacology. This includes the development of a mathematical scale to quantify the strength of drugs, and a system that would allow a doctor to determine in advance the most critical days of a patient’s illness, based on the phases of the Moon.
In the 10th century, RAZI (RHAZES) Introduced controlled experiment and clinical observation into the field of medicine, and rejected several Galenic medical theories unverified by experimentation.The earliest known medical experiment was carried out by Razi in order to find the most hygienic place to build a hospital. He hung pieces of meat in places throughout 10th century Baghdad and observed where the meat decomposed least quickly, and that was where he built the hospital. In his Comprehensive Book of Medicine, Razi recorded clinical cases of his own experience and provided very useful recordings of various diseases. In his Doubts about Galen, Razi was also the first to prove both Galen‘s theory of humorism and Aristotle‘s theory of classical elements false using experimentation He also introduced urinalysis and stool tests
AVICENNA (IBN SINA)
Is considered the father of modern medicine,for his introduction of systematic experimentation and quantification into the study of physiology, the introduction of experimental medicine, clinical trials, risk factor analysis, and the idea of a syndrome in the diagnosis of specific diseases, in his medical encyclopedia, The Canon of Medicine (c. 1020), which was also the first book dealing with evidence-based medicine, randomized controlled trials,and efficacy tests.
According to Toby Huff and A. C. Crombie, the Canon contained “a set of rules that laid down the conditions for the experimental use and testing of drugs” which were “a precise guide for practical experimentation” in the process of “discovering and proving the effectiveness of medical substances. The Canon laid out the following rules and principles for testing the effectiveness of new drugs and medications, which still form the basis of clinical pharmacologyand modern clinical trials:
- “The drug must be free from any extraneous accidental quality.”
- “It must be used on a simple, not a composite, disease.”
- “The drug must be tested with two contrary types of diseases, because sometimes a drug cures one disease by Its essential qualities and another by its accidental ones.”
- “The quality of the drug must correspond to the strength of the disease. For example, there are some drugs whose heat is less than the coldness of certain diseases, so that they would have no effect on them.”
- “The time of action must be observed, so that essence and accident are not confused.”
- “The effect of the drug must be seen to occur constantly or in many cases, for if this did not happen, it was an accidental effect.”
- “The experimentation must be done with the human body, for testing a drug on a lion or a horse might not prove anything about its effect on man.”
IBN ZUHR (AVENZOAR)
Who introduced the experimental method into surgery, for which he is considered the father of experimental surgery.Other early supporters of human dissection and autopsy include Ibn Tufail,Saladin‘s physician Ibn Jumay, Abd-el-latif,and Ibn al-Nafis
The experimental method was introduced into botany, materia medica and the agricultural sciences in the 13th century by the Andalusian-Arab botanist Abu al-Abbas al-Nabati, the teacher of Ibn al-Baitar. Al-Nabati introduced empirical techniques in the testing, description and identification of numerous material medica, and he separated unverified reports from those supported by actual tests and observations.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY: In anatomy and physiology, the first physician to refute Galen‘s theory of humorism was
MUHAMMAD IBN ZAKARĪYA RĀZI (RHAZES) In his Doubts about Galen in the 10th century. He criticized Galen’s theory that the body possessed four separate “humors” (liquid substances), whose balance are the key to health and a natural body-temperature. Razi was the first to prove this theory wrong using an experiment. He carried out an experiment which would upset this system by inserting a liquid with a different temperature into the body resulting in an increase or decrease of bodily heat, which resembled the temperature of that particular fluid. Razi noted particularly that a warm drink would heat up the body to a degree much higher than its own natural temperature, thus the drink would trigger a response from the body, rather than transferring only its own warmth or coldness to it. This line of criticism was the first comprehensive experimental refutation of Galen’s theory of humours and Aristotle‘s theory of the four classical elements on which it was grounded. Razi’s own chemical experiments suggested other qualities of matter, such as “oiliness” and “sulfurousness“, or inflammability and salinity, which were not readily explained by the traditional fire, water, earth and air division of elements.
EXPERIMENTAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The contributions of Avicenna to physiology include the introduction of systematic experimentation and quantification into the study of physiology in The Canon of Medicine (c. 1020). The contributions of Ibn al-Haytham (Alhacen) to anatomy and physiology include his correct explanation of the process of sight and visual perception for the first time in his Book of Optics, Other innovations introduced by Muslim physicians to the field of physiology by this time include the use of animal testing.
Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar) (1091-1161) was the first physician known to have carried out human dissections and postmortem autopsy. He proved that the skin disease scabies was caused by a parasite, a discovery which upset the theory of humorism supported by Hippocrates and Galen. The removal of the parasite from the patient’s body did not involve purging, bleeding, or any other traditional treatments associated with the four humours.
In the 12th century, Saladin‘s physician Ibn Jumay was also one the first to undertake human dissections, and he made an explicit appeal for other physicians to do so as well. During a famine in Egypt in 1200, Abd-el-latif observed and examined a large number of skeletons, and he discovered that Galen was incorrect regarding the formation of the bones of the lower jaw and sacrum.
Circulatory anatomy and physiology:
IBN AL-NAFIS The father of circulatory physiology was another early proponent of human dissection In 1242, he was the first to describe the pulmonary circulation, coronary circulation and capillary circulation, which form the basis of the circulatory system, for which he is considered the one of the greatest physiologists in history The first European descriptions of the pulmonary circulation came several centuries later, by Michael Servetus in 1553 and William Harvey in 1628. Ibn al-Nafis also described the earliest concept of metabolism, and developed new Nafisian systems of anatomy, physiology and psychology to replace the Avicennian and Galenic doctrines, while discrediting many of their erroneous theories on the four humours, pulsation, bones, muscles, intestines, sensory organs, bilious canals, esophagus, stomach, and the anatomy of almost every other part of the human body.
The Arab physician Ibn al-Lubudi (1210-1267), also from Damascus, wrote the Collection of discussions relative to fifty psychological and medical questions, in which he rejects the theory of four humours supported by Galen and Hippocrates, discovers that the body and its preservation depend exclusively upon blood, rejects Galen’s idea that women can produce sperm, and discovers that the movement of arteries are not dependant upon the movement of the heart, that the heart is the first organ to form in a fetus‘ body (rather than the brain as claimed by Hippocrates), and that the bones forming the skull can grow into tumors. He also advises that in cases of extreme fever, a patient should not be released from hospital.
PULSOLOGY AND SPHYGMOLOGY: Muslim physicians were pioneers in pulsology and sphygmology. In ancient times, Galen as well as Chinese physicians erroneously believed that there was a unique type of pulse for every organ of the body and for every disease. Galen also erroneously believed that “every part of an artery pulsates simultaneously” and that the motion of the pulse was due to natural motions (the arteries expanding and contracting naturally) as opposed to foced motions (the heart causing the arteries to either expand or contract). The first correct explanations of pulsation were given by Muslim physicians.
“Every beat of the pulse comprises two movements and two pauses. Thus, expansion: pause: contraction: pause. The pulse is a movement in the heart and arteries … which takes the form of alternate expansion and contraction.”
Avicenna also pioneered the modern approach of examining the pulse through the examination of the wrist, which is still practiced in modern times. His reasons for choosing the wrist as the ideal location is due to it being easily available and the patient not needing to be distressed at the exposure of his/her body. The Latin translation of his Canon also laid the foundations for the later invention of the sphygmograph.
Ibn al-Nafis, in his Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna’s Canon, completely rejected the Galenic theory of pulsation after his discovery of the pulmonary circulation. He developed his own Nafisian theory of pulsation after discovering that pulsation is a result of both natural and forced motions, and that the “forced motion must be the contraction of the arteries caused by the expansion of the heart, and the natural motion must be the expansion of the arteries.” He notes that the “arteries and the heart do not expand and contract at the same time, but rather the one contracts while the other expands” and vice versa. He also recognized that the purpose of the pulse is to help disperse the blood from the heart to the rest of the body. Ibn al-Nafis briefly summarizes his new theory of pulsation:
“The primary purpose of the expansion and contraction of the heart is to absorb the cool air and expel the wastes of the spirit and the warm air; however, the ventricle of the heart is wide. Moreover, when it expands it is not possible for it to absorb air until it is full, for that would then ruin the temperament of the spirit, its substance and texture, as well as the temperament of the heart. Thus, the heart is necessarily forced to complete its fill by absorbing the spirit.”
EPIDEMIOLOGY, ETIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY: In etiology and epidemiology, Muslim physicians were responsible for the discovery of infectious disease and the immune system, advances in pathology, and early hypotheses related to bacteriology and microbiology. Their discovery of contagious disease in particular is considered revolutionary and is one of the most important discoveries in medicine. The earliest ideas on contagion can be traced back to several hadiths attributed to Muhammad in the 7th century, who is said to have understood the contagious nature of leprosy, mange, and sexually transmitted disease. These early ideas on contagion arose from the generally sympathetic attitude of Muslim physicians towards lepers (who were often seen in a negative light in other ancient and medieval societies) which can be traced back through hadiths attributed to Muhammad and to the following advice given in the Qur’an
“There is no fault in the blind, and there is no fault in the lame, and there is no fault in the sick.”
This eventually led to the theory of contagious disease, which was fully understood by Avicenna in the 11th century. By then, the pathology of contagion had been fully understood, and as a result, hospitals were created with separate wards for specific illnesses, so that people with contagious diseases could be kept away from other patients who do not have any contagious diseases. In The Canon of Medicine (1020), Avicenna discovered the contagious nature of infectious diseases such as phthisis and tuberculosis, the distribution of diseases by water and soil, and fully understood the contagious nature of sexually transmitted diseases. In epidemiology, he introduced the method of quarantine as a means of limiting the spread of contagious diseases, and introduced the method of risk factor analysis and the idea of a syndrome in the diagnosis of specific diseases.
In order to find the most hygienic place to build a hospital, Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi (Rhazes) carried out an experiment where he hung pieces of meat in places throughout 10th century Baghdad and observed where the meat decomposed least quickly. Razi also wrote the Comprehensive Book of Medicine in the 9th century. The Large Comprehensive was the most sought after of all his compositions, in which Razi recorded clinical cases of his own experience and provided very useful recordings of various diseases, as well as the discovery of measles and smallpox. The Large Comprehensive also criticized the views of Galen, after Razi had observed many clinical cases which did not follow Galen’s descriptions of fevers. For example, he stated that Galen’s descriptions of urinary ailments were inaccurate as he had only seen three cases, while Razi had studied hundreds of such cases in hospitals of Baghdad and Rayy.The Comprehensive Book of Medicine, especially with its introduction of measles and smallpox, was very influential in Europe.
IBN ZUHR (AVENZOAR Was the first physician to provide a real scientific etiology for the inflammatory diseases of the ear, and the first to clearly discuss the causes of stridor. Through his dissections, he was also able to prove that the skin disease scabies was caused by a parasite, a discovery which upset the theory of humorism supported by Hippocrates, Galen and Avicenna. He also gave the first accurate descriptions on neurological diseases, including meningitis, intracranial thrombophlebitis, and mediastinal germ cell tumors. Averroes suggested the existence of Parkinson’s disease and attributed photoreceptor properties to the retina. Maimonides wrote about neuropsychiatric disorders and described rabies and belladonna intoxication.
ALLERGOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY: The study of allergology and immunology originate from the Islamic world.
MUHAMMAD IBN ZAKARĪYA RĀZI (RHAZES) Was responsible for discovering “allergic asthma“, and was the first physician known to have written articles on allergy and the immune system. In the Sense of Smelling, he explains the occurrence of rhinitis after smelling a rose during the Spring. In the Article on the Reason Why Abou Zayd Balkhi Suffers from Rhinitis When Smelling Roses in Spring, he dicusses seasonal rhinitis, which is the same as allergic asthma or hay fever. Al-Razi was the first to realize that fever is a natural defense mechanism, the body’s way of fighting disease.
The distinction between smallpox and measles also dates back to al-Razi. The medical procedure of inoculation was practiced in the medieval Islamic world in order to treat smallpox. This was later followed by the first smallpox vaccine in the form of cowpox, invented in Turkey in the early 18th century.
DR. ABDIRIZAK HAJI MOHAMED
Pharm-D University of Karachi-Pakistan
Contribution of Muslim scientist is far-reaching topic
So part two will be publish soon, please your comments and any suggestions send to firstname.lastname@example.org

Chondroitin sulfate consists of repeating chains of molecules called glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs). Chondroitin sulfate is a major constituent of cartilage, providing structure, holding water and
nutrients, and allowing other molecules to move through cartilage—an important property,
as there is no blood supply to cartilage.
Where is it found?
The only significant food source of chondroitin sulfate is animal cartilage.
Chondroitin sulfate has
been used in connection with the following conditions (refer to the
individual health concern for complete information):
Who is likely to be deficient?
Because the body makes chondroitin, the possibility of a dietary deficiency remains
uncertain. Nevertheless, chondroitin sulfate may be reduced in joint cartilage affected by osteoarthritis and possibly other forms of
How much is usually taken?
For atherosclerosis, researchers have
sometimes started therapy using very high amounts, such as 5 grams twice per day with meals,
lowering the amount to 500 mg three times per day after a few months. Before taking such high
amounts, people should consult a doctor. For
osteoarthritis, a typical level is 400 mg three times per day. Oral chondroitin sulfate is
rapidly absorbed in humans when it is dissolved in water prior to ingestion. Approximately 12%
of chondroitin sulfate taken by mouth becomes available to the joint tissues from the
Are there any side effects or interactions?
Nausea may occur at intakes greater than 10 grams per day. No other adverse effects have
One doctor has raised a concern that chondroitin sulfate should not be used by men with prostate cancer. This concern is based upon two
studies. In one, the concentration of chondroitin sulfate was found to be higher in cancerous
prostate tissue as compared to normal prostate tissue.2 In the other study, it was
shown that higher concentrations of chondroitin sulfate in the tissue surrounding a cancerous
prostate tumor predict a higher rate of recurrence of the cancer after surgery.3 However, no studies
to date have addressed the question of whether taking chondroitin sulfate supplements could
promote the development of prostate cancer. Simply because a substance is present in or around
cancerous tissue does not by itself suggest that that substance is causing the cancer. For
example, calcium is a component of
atherosclerotic plaques that harden the arteries; however, there is no evidence that taking
calcium supplements causes atherosclerosis. To provide meaningful information, further studies
would need to track the incidence of prostate cancer in men taking chondroitin supplements.
Until then, most nutritionally-oriented doctors remain unconcerned about this issue.
It is not known whether taking glucosamine
sulfate and chondroitin sulfate in combination is a more effective treatment for osteoarthritis than taking either one by itself.
At the time of writing, there were no well-known drug interactions
with chondroitin sulfate.
1. Ronca F, Palmieri L, Panicucci P, Ronca G. Anti-inflammatory activity
of chondroitin sulfate. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 1998;6(Supplement
2. De Klerk DP, Lee DV, Human HJ. Glycosaminoglycans of human prostatic
cancer. J Urol 1984;131:1008–12.
3. Ricciardelli C, Quinn DI, Raymond WA, et al. Elevated levels of
peritumoral chondroitin sulfate are predictive of poor prognosis in patients treated by
radical prostatectomy for early-stage prostate cancer. Cancer Res

Cambrian predator had killer eyes
View to a kill A fearsome predator that swam in the Cambrian oceans was in fact a metre-long arthropod with killer vision, say researchers.
Palaeontologist Dr John Paterson, from the University of New England, and colleagues, have discovered the fossilised remains of compound eyes from a creature called anomalocaris.
"The fact that each eye in anomalocaris would have had over 16,000 lenses, means it would have very, very good resolution," says Paterson, whose work is published today in the journal Nature.
"When you consider that a modern housefly, for example, has about 3000 lenses, it's pretty impressive that an animal half a billion years old already has remarkable vision like this."
Around 500 million years ago, during the Cambrian, large alien-like creatures began to resemble modern animals, says Paterson.
"But you still had the odd freak swimming around," he says, referring to the metre-long free-swimming anomalocaris.
"It's an animal that's on its way to becoming an arthropod from an evolutionary point of view," says Paterson.
The creature would have propelled itself through the water by moving flaps down the length of its body in a wave-like pattern, he says.
It had a soft shrimp-like exoskeleton and fierce grasping claws and would have dined on soft-bodied organisms such as worms.
But anomalocaris has presented a bit of puzzle to scientists because while it looked like it might be an arthropod, it was missing certain attributes.
Arthropods include animals with jointed legs such as insects, spiders, crustaceans and millipedes.
"But when you look at anomalocaris, it doesn't actually have any jointed legs," says Paterson.
Now, the discovery of fossilised compound eyes belonging to the animal has confirmed it is indeed an arthropod.
"Compound eyes are actually a definitive arthropod characteristic or trait," says Paterson.
The fossilised eyes were discovered alongside remains of the grasping claws and the body flaps in shale at Emu Bay on the northern coast of Kangaroo Island, off South Australia.
The soft tissue of the compound eyes were slowly replaced by a mineral called pyrite in a low oxygen sediment, says Paterson.
The discovery supports the idea that compound eyes evolved very early on in arthropod evolution, before the evolution of jointed legs or hardened exoskeletons.
The surprisingly sophisticated eyes of anomalocaris are rivalled only by modern dragonflies, which can have up to about 28,000 lenses in each eye, says Patterson.
"Dragonflies are known for their exceptional vision," he says.
Lenses in a compound eye can be likened to pixels on a computer screen and the more lenses you have the better the resolution.
The small size of the lenses in the anomalocaris eyes suggests the animal would have lived in well-lit waters and had a major advantage over its prey.
"The little that we do know about the contemporaries of anomalocaris, they either had fairly poor eyesight or they were completely blind," says Paterson.
He says the presence of anomalocaris would have driven the development of protective adaptations in prey animals, and in turn, counter adaptations in predators.
Such an escalatory 'arms race' would have seen, for example, the evolution of such adaptations in prey as shells, camouflage and burrowing into sediments.
Paterson now hopes to find the remains of even more Cambrian creatures in the Emu Bay Shale.
"It would be great to find a hybrid that looked like anomalocaris but it had walking legs. That would be a beautiful missing link," he says.

A couple of months or so ago, I began talking about SQL functions and what they're used for. This article picks up where I left off. It defines the two types of functions, and begins to explain them in great detail.
Poor Arnold; in addition to being vertically challenged, he was also beset with frequent ear infections, and never knew what his brother Willis was talking about. Fortunately for him, Mr. Drummond was looted up, and all Arnold really needed to understand was that money talks. And when Arnold wanted to count the oodles of money he would have once old man Drummond kicked the bucket, well...he could have used Aggregate functions to help with that.
An aggregate function helps summarize large volumes (or even small ones, really) of data. If you have a collection of phone numbers you've collected and want to know how many you have (let's face it, you're a programmer, so you don't) or you want to get a count on the number of days you've spent alone and eating a giant bag of Doritos, you could do just that.
(Just as a side note: the word "Doritos" is actually in the built-in spell check of Microsoft Word).
Below is a list of some aggregate functions and what they can do:
What it Does
Gives you the average value of the column
Counts the number of rows with data in a column
Counts the number of selected rows
Gives the value of the first record in a specified field
Gives the value of the last record in a specified field
Gives the maximum value in a column
Gives the minimum value in a column
Sums up the value of a column
I don't have to tell you what average means; you've been that way your entire life. I mean come on, you're no James Marsden. And if you are, please don't sue me for using your name.
The average function in SQL returns the average value of a given column. Let's say we have a table that lists a person's name, age, and salary and we want to see the average age of the employees listed in the database. Want to follow along? Okay, go ahead and create a table named Employees with the data below:
King Kong Wong
Clearly this company has an age discrimination suit waiting to happen. But never mind that for now. I think our table lists a realistic situation, don't you? Coincidentally, all names are fictitious, and any resemblance to real names is purely coincidental.
Here's the code for the average age:
Select AVG(Age) from Employees
This would result in the answer: 45.75.
Now let's say you are gearing up for that age discrimination lawsuit and need some more data to back you up. Let's say you want to see the average salary of anyone over 30 years old:
Select AVG(Salary) From Employees WHERE Age>30
Your answer would be $31,000. You might also wish to see the average salary of those under thirty. To do that, simply reverse the criteria:
Select AVG(Salary) From Employees WHERE Age<30
Which results in: $90,000. A clear case for age discrimination.

16. Granitic Intrusion, Chanaral, Chile
The light-toned circular area at the right center of the photograph is a Paleozoic granodiorite exposed near the Pacific coast of Chile at Chanaral. The Humboldt current flowing northward along the coast gives rise to cool onshore breezes. As these move overland, they warm up, and are capable of carrying more water vapor; thus they have a very drying effect and are responsible for the long thin Atacama Desert, which extends all the way along the coast of South America from Central Chile to Ecuador. The desert is one of the driest in the world, and the absence of soil or vegetation makes it ideal for investigation using satellite remote sensing techniques.
The pale tones of the intrusion contrast sharply with the darker tones of the metamorphic basement, enabling rapid mapping. A swarm of mafic dikes cuts the intrusion, and some of the larger dikes, with northeast trend, are just visible. The valley just south of the intrusion contains a stream draining from the large porphyry copper mine at El Salvador. The stream and the beach at Chanaral on which it debouches are grossly polluted with mineral residues.
STS-8, August-September 1983. Picture #8-50-1798.

It took quite a bit of convincing before Mey Som agreed to be the first Cambodian to try the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) in 2000. But in the end, Som relented and, on a small plot of land, planted rice in a way that went against all his experience and instincts.
Following the advice of the Cambodian Center for Study and Development in Agriculture, or CEDAC, Som abandoned his use of chemicals in favor of organic fertilizer. He planted fewer seeds and spaced them widely apart. He kept the soil moist—without flooding it. He transplanted the rice seedlings while they were young and took the time to weed. Halfway through that first season, Som noticed his rice plants were growing bigger and stronger.
"The same seeds used to produce plants that came up to my knees," he said. "Now they reach above my head."
Since Som's experiment, CEDAC has trained more than 60,000 Cambodian farmers to modify their farming techniques to correspond with SRI. Like farmers in Madagascar, China, and Bangladesh, they have increased their yields by 50 to 100 percent, and sometimes more.
Yang Saing Koma, the president of CEDAC, better known as "Dr. Koma," calls it the "Root Revolution," and eventually he wants the majority of Cambodia's rice farmers to have joined in.
"It's just a question of changing your attitude and thinking," he said. "Conventional agriculture just looks at the plant above ground. With SRI, you look at the roots—big, strong roots."
A new method takes off
Using grants from Oxfam America totaling about $222,000 since 2003, CEDAC has used SRI to build financial and food security in one of Southeast Asia's poorest countries. More than 70 percent of the workforce depends on agriculture to make a living—most of them, rice farmers.
Dr. Koma says it's like a metaphor for human development. If you give people enough room to grow, they flourish. If you plant seedlings far enough apart, the seedlings sprout several stalks and the stalks produce hundreds of grains of rice.
He first learned about SRI after reading a magazine article chronicling the experiences of farmers in Madagascar. Jesuit priest Father Henri de Laulanié spent 20 years working with Malagasy farmers, refining a set of practices that required less land, seed, water, and money.
At first, the Cambodian farmers who are approached by CEDAC about trying SRI had trouble believing what they were hearing. Some even ridiculed the farmers who tried the new method.
When So Tith began planting through SRI three years ago, his neighbors saw him pressing fewer seeds into the soil and pitied him, thinking he couldn't afford to buy more. "They offered to give me some of their seed," he said.
Even after Tith's new stalks began to grow, his neighbors wouldn't attribute their sturdiness to SRI. They attributed it to "trickery" instead. But Tith didn't mind, for in a couple years these same doubters would end up changing their practices, and more important, their minds.
Accustomed to using oxen and carts to take water to their fields, they now fill jugs and carry them on their shoulders to small plots of land near their homes. They plant during the wet and dry seasons, doubling their production and incomes.
"Daily life is better than before," said Sorn Ton, another rice farmer who adopted SRI. "When we used to farm, there wasn't enough rice to support the family for the whole year. We had to borrow money to buy rice from others in the village. Now my family has enough to eat."
The farmers use the extra profits to invest in more rice seed, send their children to school, and participate in the simple joys of everyday life—the religious and family ceremonies, the weddings and festivals.
All this from a little bit of creative thinking informed by the people who work the land themselves.
"Throughout Cambodia, the farmers who adopted SRI—they have more self confidence. They see what they can get from what they do," Dr. Koma said.

May 16, 2002 A region in the western tropical Pacific Ocean may help scientists understand how Venus lost all of its water and became a 900-degree inferno. The study of this local phenomenon by NASA scientists also should help researchers understand what conditions on Earth might lead to a similar fate here.
The phenomenon, called the ‘runaway greenhouse’ effect, occurs when a planet absorbs more energy from the sun than it can radiate back to space. Under these circumstances, the hotter the surface temperature gets, the faster it warms up. Scientists detect the signature of a runaway greenhouse when planetary heat loss begins to drop as surface temperature rises. Only one area on Earth – the western Pacific ‘warm pool’ just northeast of Australia – exhibits this signature. Because the warm pool covers only a small fraction of the Earth’s surface, the Earth as a whole never actually ‘runs away.’ However, scientists believe Venus did experience a global runaway greenhouse effect about 3 billion to 4 billion years ago.
"Soon after the planets were formed 4.5 billion years ago, Earth, Venus and Mars probably all had water. How did Earth manage to hold onto all of its water, while Venus apparently lost all of its water?" asked Maura Rabbette, Earth and planetary scientist at NASA Ames Research Center in California’s Silicon Valley. "We have extensive earth science data to help address that question."
Rabbette and her co-investigators from NASA Ames, Christopher McKay, Peter Pilewskie and Richard Young, used atmospheric conditions above the Pacific Ocean, including data recorded by NASA’s Earth Observing System of satellites, to create a computer model of the runaway greenhouse effect. They determined that water vapor high in the atmosphere produced the local signature of a runaway greenhouse.
At sea surface temperatures above 80 F (27 C), evaporation loads the atmosphere with a critical amount of water vapor, one of the most efficient greenhouse gases. Water vapor allows solar radiation from the sun to pass through, but it absorbs a large portion of the infrared radiation coming from the Earth. If enough water vapor enters the troposphere, the weather layer of the atmosphere, it will trap thermal energy coming from the Earth, increasing the sea surface temperature even further.
The effect should result in a chain reaction loop where sea surface temperature increases, leading to increased atmospheric water vapor that leads to more trapped thermal energy. This would cause the temperature increase to ‘run away,’ causing more and more water loss through evaporation from the ocean. Luckily for Earth, sea surface temperatures never reach more than about 87 F (30.5 C), and so the runaway phenomenon does not occur.
"It’s very intriguing. What is limiting this effect over the warm pool of the Pacific?" asked Young, a planetary scientist. He suggests that cloud cover may affect how much energy reaches or escapes Earth, or that the ocean and atmosphere may transport trapped energy away from the local hotspot. "If we can model the outgoing energy flux, then maybe we can begin to understand what limits sea surface temperature on Earth," he said. The Ames researchers are not the first to study the phenomenon, but no consensus has been reached regarding the energy turnover or the limitation of sea surface temperature.
Rabbette analyzed clear-sky data above the tropical Pacific from March 2000 to July 2001. She determined that water vapor above 5 kilometers (3 miles) altitude in the atmosphere contributes significantly to the runaway greenhouse signature. She found that at 9 kilometers (5.6 miles) above the Pacific warm pool, the relative humidity in the atmosphere can be greater than 70 percent - more than three times the normal range. In nearby regions of the Pacific where the sea surface temperature is just a few degrees cooler, the atmospheric relative humidity is only 20 percent. These drier regions of the neighboring atmosphere may contribute to stabilizing the local runaway greenhouse effect, Rabbette said.
It is important to note that the Ames team uses real climate information such as relative humidity and temperature–not hypothetical numbers–in the Moderate Resolution Atmospheric Radiative Transfer, or MODTRAN, modeling program. The program calculates how much energy escapes back to space from the top of Earth’s atmosphere. The researchers plan to experiment with the model to test the runaway greenhouse signature’s sensitivity to climate conditions. By varying the abundance of other greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and by adding clouds in the model, they will see the overall effect on the outgoing energy.
The model may help researchers uncover why Venus experienced a complete runaway greenhouse and lost its water over a period of several hundred million to a billion years. The research may also help determine which planets in the so-called ‘habitable zone’ of a solar system might lack water, an essential ingredient for life as we know it.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Since 1976, every U.S. president has designated February as Black History Month. From slavery to civil rights, and science to music, the following books for young readers honor the accomplishments of African Americans.
On the Radar: Top Picks from the Editors at Junior Library Guild: K-8 Books on African Americans Who Inspire
Show Way. DVD. 12 min. Weston Woods. 2012. ISBN 978-0-545-47811-3. 59.95. CD, ISBN 978-0-545-47810-6: $12.95; CD with hardcover book, ISBN 978-0545-47827-4: $29.95.
Gr 2-5–A Show Way was a quilt that had messages stitched into it showing the family’s journey North to freedom, offering hope and a guide for slaves in the South. That theme of “leading the way” is a thread running through Jacqueline Woodson’s carefully woven story (Putnam, 2005). Soonie’s great-grandma was only a child when she was sold away [...]
BOLDEN, Tonya. Emancipation Proclamation: Lincoln and the Dawn of Liberty. 120p. bibliog. chron. glossary. illus. index. notes. photos. reprods. Abrams. Jan. 2013. RTE $24.95. ISBN 978-1-4197-0390-4. LC 2012000845.
Gr 5-9–After a dramatic opening description of abolitionists waiting for word that the Emancipation Proclamation had been signed, this title reviews the events that led up to the Civil War, examines Lincoln’s reasons for writing it, and details the role of abolitionists. Bolden makes excellent use of primary sources; the pages are filled [...]
The Freedom Maze. By Delia Sherman. 8 CDs. 8:19 hrs. Prod. by Listening Library. Dist. by Listening Library/Books on Tape. 2012. ISBN 978-0-499-01463-9. $55.
Gr 5-8–Sophie’s mother drops her off to spend the summer at her grandmother’s house in the Louisiana Bayou. Once a prolific sugar plantation, the property is derelict and overgrown. In the garden, Sophie discovers a maze, now in ruins, much like Sophie’s life since her parents’ divorce. It’s 1960, and the stigma of the divorce, combined with [...]
Baseball season may be coming to an end, but a true fan’s enthusiasm for the sport never wanes. Reason enough to consider two new digital products for your iPad: Ryan Woodward’s Bottom of the Ninth and The Negro Leagues Baseball Museum. The first is an animated graphic novel, the second, a reference guide. Here’s what our reviewers had to say about these releases.
My Hands Sing the Blues: Romare Bearden’s Childhood Journey. By Jeanne Walker Harvey. cassette or CD. 15 min. Recorded Books. 2012. cassette: ISBN 978-1-4640-0209-0, CD: ISBN 978-1-4640-0206-9. $15.75; hardcover book, ISBN 978-0-7614-5810-4: $17.99.
K-Gr 3–In a first-person narrative that incorporates some of artist Romare Bearden’s phrases and ideas, and using his famous painting “Watching the Good Trains Go By” as her inspiration, Jeanne Walker Harvey gives voice to the history and experiences that inspired his famous collages. Born in North Carolina, [...]

Haga Palace. Drawing by Princess Eugenia (daughter of Oscar I and Queen Josefina).
Gustav III's palace building - the ruin The history of Haga differs somewhat to that of the other Royal retreats. At Drottningholm, for example, the palace was built first and then surrounded by extensive grounds.
At Haga, the original feature is the park, which over time has gradually been joined by buildings of various different characters. Gustav III's dream palace was never completed and today it is known as the ruin, with only the cellar and foundations finished.
Gustav III's Pavilion. Photo: Charless Hammarsten, IBL.
Gustav III's Pavilion Gustav III's Pavilion (originally the King's Pavilion) could be regarded as The King's private residence at Haga and was intended to complement the official palace that was never finished. Today this pavilion is an excellent example of Gustavian architecture and interiors.
Haga Palace Gustav III's Pavilion in Haga Park was often used by Gustav III's son and successor, Gustav IV Adolf.
Gustav IV Adolf ordered the construction of a second pavilion close by for his wife, Queen Fredrika, and their children. This building, which is now called Haga Palace, was erected between the years 1802 and 1805 according to plans drawn by the architect Carl Christoffer Gjörwell. Haga is slightly different in this respect as well. The palace was constructed as a home at Haga for the Queen and her children, and not as an official residence. It is also around the time of Gustav IV Adolf and his family that we get a first glimpse of family life in the modern sense.
Italian villa style In terms of its style, the palace building is most like an Italian villa, where family life is focused around the central living room. The white colouring and the temple-like design of the central part, with its temple gables and classic columns, emphasise the Italian nature of the building
Haga Palace and the Bernadotte dynasty Haga Palace has been a much-used and loved home for the Bernadotte dynasty. Oskar I and his family often stayed at Haga and for several years the palace was occupied by King Oskar's son, the 'song Prince' Gustaf. Prince Gustaf's youngest brother August and his wife Theresia lived at Haga for many years, and the first interior photographs from their home were taken during their time there in the late 19th century. These images convey a feeling of homeliness according to the ideal that was characteristic of the end of the 19th century.
The Green salon at Haga Palace. Photo: the Royal Court
The Haga princesses In 1932, heir presumptive Prince Gustaf Adolf married Princess Sibylla of Sachsen Coburg and Gotha and Haga Palace was renovated in order to function as their family home. The building underwent a transformation, which meant that the interiors reflected the more functional style of the time rather than the historical heritage of the early 19th century. Family photographs from Haga that were published in books and magazines, and perhaps even more so shown on cinema newsreels, spread the image of a royal family idyll at Haga.
Guest house for Swedish government Haga Palace functioned as the Swedish government's guest house for distinguished visitors between 1964 and 2009. In 2009, the government transferred the royal right of disposal to Haga Palace back to H.M. The King and the palace was placed at the disposal of the Crown Princess Couple for use as a home following the wedding on 19 June, 2010.
For further information about Haga Palace and Haga in general, see 'Haga: a Royal Cultural Heritage', from the book series, 'The Royal Palaces', published 2010.

This is the second part of two posts examining how North Korea fell behind South Korea. The previous part can be found here.
As the previous post found, for several decades North Korea kept up with South Korea. Then, during the mid-1970s, the country started falling behind. Ever since then the gap between the two countries has widened.
This post will explore several factors behind what caused North Korea to fall behind. There seem to be three main causes: the failed ideology of juche (self-reliance), the end of Soviet aid, and Kim Jong-Il’s incompetent rule.
If one looks at Gapminder’s graphic, North Korea and South Korea are neck-and-neck until the mid-1970s:
Then North Korea falls behind:
What caused this? Well, in 1972 North Korea adopted the ideology of juche into the constitution. Juche stands for self-reliance. There’s a lot of fancy Marxist philosophical complexity behind the idea, but in its essence it seems to be basically a fancy form of protectionism.
Juche was very harmful to the North Korean economy. Here is North Korea before the official adaptation of juche:
As is evident, North Korea was progressing during this period. This is not to say that juche wasn’t part of the state’s ideology in these years. Rather, it seems to have played less of a role.
A description on this website provides a good description of the progress during this time:
The 1954-56 three year plan repaired the massive damage caused by the war and brought industrial production back to prewar levels. This was followed by the five- year plan of 1957-61 and the seven year plan of 1961-67. These plans brought about further growth in industrial production and substantial development of state infrastructure. By the 1960s North Korea was the second most industrialized nation in East Asia, trailing only Japan. While a number of internal limitations appeared, such as in the production of consumer goods, the national standard of living was considered by many third-world nations as an alternative to the capitalist model of development sponsored by the United States. Building upon the ruins left by the Korean War, the North Korean economy by the late 1960s provided its people with medical care, universal education, adequate caloric intake, and livable housing.
Here is what happens after the official adoption of juche:
The website continues with a description of North Korea’s economic decline. I will quote the discussion in full because it’s quite comprehensive:
In the 1970s the expansion of North Korea’s economy, with the accompanying rise in living standards, came to an end and a few decades later went into reverse. A huge increase in the price of oil following the oil shock of 1974 hurt the economies of countries throughout the world, North Korea among them. North Korea has no oil of its own, and it had few export commodities of interest to the west. Compounding this was a decision to borrow foreign capital and invest simultaneously in the military and mining industries. North Korea’s desire to gain as much independence as it could from China and Russia prompted the expansion of its military power. They believed such expenditures could be covered by foreign borrowing and increased sales of its minerals in the international market. North Korea invested heavily in its mining industries and purchased a large quantity of extractive machinery and tools from abroad. However, soon after making these investments, the international prices of for many of these minerals fell, leaving North Korea with large debts and an inability to pay off the debts and provide a high level of social welfare to its people.
Adding to the above, the centrally planned economy, which emphasized heavy industry, had reached the limits of its productive potential in North Korea. Juche repeated demands that North Koreans learn to build and innovate domestically had run its course as had the ability of North Koreans to keep technological pace with other industrialized nations. By the mid to late-1970s some parts of the capitalist world, including South Korea, were advancing into new phases of technology and economic development and phasing out the coal-and-steel-based economies of the earlier period.
Kim ll-sung, trapped in an ideology that had once been highly successful, was unable to respond effectively to the challenge of an increasingly prosperous and well-armed South Korea, which undermined the legitimacy of his own regime. Having failed at their earlier attempt to turn to the market and conduct market-economy reforms such as those carried out in China by Deng Xiaoping, Kim opted for continued ideological purity. The DPRK by 1980 was faced with the choice of either repaying its international loans, or continuing its support of social welfare for its people. Given the ideals of Juche, North Korea chose to default on its loans, and by late 1980s its industrial output was declining.
One should note that the images above are models of North Korea’s economic path rather than based on North Korean statistics. Since North Korea doesn’t reveal its GDP, people have to make educated guesses. The people on Gapminder put North Korea as slightly wealthier than South Korea in 1944 and then modeled equal economic growth rates until the mid-1970s. At that point they put 0% GDP per capital growth to model North Korea’s stagnation during that period. Finally, they use slightly more accurate estimates after the fall of the Soviet Union to model North Korea’s famine and its most recent years.
Nevertheless, these models are based off what happened in real life. It’s undeniable that North Korea was stagnating during the late ’70s and ’80s. It’s also undeniable that there was a famine during the late ’90s. So while the graphic isn’t perfect, it’s a decent representation of reality.
The End of Soviet Aid
Juche seems to have been the main turning point in North Korean economic history. Nevertheless, it’s worth noting that there are in fact two “parts” of North Korean economic decline. The first part, during the late ’70s and 80s, is stagnation – when North Korea doesn’t go forward but doesn’t go backwards. The second part starts in the ’90s, when North Korea actually starts going backwards.
What caused this?
Well, for all of its economic history North Korea depended extensively on communist aid. The Soviets were determined to prove that their system was superior and, like the Americans, gave lots of aid to their allies. Eventually it turned out that their system was in fact not superior, and by the end the Soviet Union couldn’t really afford to give out that aid. In 1991 the Soviet Union collapsed and all Soviet aid withdrew.
This hit North Korea hard:
In fact, it eventually created a famine. This graphic shows North Korea after the fall of the Soviet Union. This is the second part of the country’s economic decline, when it actually starts going backwards. Soviet aid was particularly important because the Soviet Union sold North Korea oil at low prices. North Korea’s inefficient economy and agricultural system depended badly on petroleum, but it couldn’t afford to buy petroleum at market prices. When the Soviets stopped giving North Korea oil, North Korea collapsed.
Here’s a comparison with South Korea:
Kim Jong-Il’s rule was incompetent and terrible for North Korea. Let’s take a look at North Korea under his father Kim Il-sung, until his death in 1994.
We see progress throughout most of Kim Il-sung’s rule. During his final years, however, stagnation and finally decline sets in. Nevertheless, one could say that Kim Il-sung did good for North Korea.
What happens under Kim Jong-Il?
Decline. Indeed, there’s a startling coincidence between Kim Jong-Il’s path to power and North Korea’s economic decline. Kim Jong-Il began taking power during the 1980s. During that time North Korea is well into stagnation. He takes over the armed forces in 1991. North Korea then begins going backwards. His father dies in 1994, leaving him in absolute control. North Korea then suffers a famine from 1994 to 1998.
Here’s North Korea and South Korea during Kim Jong-Il’s rule:
It seems that there were three main events that caused North Korea’s economic decline: juche, the end of Soviet aid, and the incompetence of Kim Jong-Il. Juche turned economic growth into stagnation. The end of Soviet aid turned stagnation into absolute decline. This backwards path gained momentum as Kim Jong-Il gained power and ruled incompetently.
North Korea’s tale is fairly unique. It’s the story of a country which achieved a decent standard of living and high industrialization under communism. Then the strains of the system became apparent, such as the overreliance on petroleum, and it eventually collapsed. This is why one hears of a lot of North Korean factories that used to work but now don’t. One hopes that the new leader Kim Jong-un will turn things around for his people.

The mendelschen laws became in the 60's 19. Century of the scientifically interested Augustinermönch Gregor Mendel by crossing attempts at Erbsenpflanzen determines and ina first little considered publication formulated. Only over 1900 was confirmed these innovative realizations, brought with the Chromosomentheorie the transmission in connection and to the common property of the classical genetic science.
Table of contents
the mendelschen the laws or rules
the discoveries Mendels is based on statisticValues. Therefore they are called frequently also rules, with the reason that laws - differently than rules - would apply without reservation. Nevertheless they are well-known in the vernacular also as “Mendel pea equation”.
1. mendelsches law (uniformity law and/or.Reciprocity)
if two individuals of a kind (“parents “or Parentalgeneration P called) to be crossed with one another, in a characteristic, for which it pure-bend (homozygot) are, differ, then are the descendants of the first generation (“children” or first branch generation F1called) uniformly, i.e. both genotypisch and related to the phenotype directly. It is irrelevant, which represents the two individuals nut/mother or father. (Exception: The characteristic is on a Geschlechtschromosom (Gonosom). Then it can be that thoseF1 is not really uniform!)
2. mendelsches law (splitting law)
is crossed if the first descendant generation among themselves, then the individuals of the second generation (“grandchild “or second branch generation, F2) are no longer uniform, but point again thoseCharacteristics of the parents generation in certain numerical ratios up. There the uniformity is lost
- concerns it thereby dominance rezessive transmission, then three quarters form the dominant factor and a quarter the rezessive variant out (relationship of 3:1).
- of the 1 points second ) generation with intermediate transmission per a quarter of the descendants one of the two pure-curved variants and half of the individuals. Generation on (relationship by 1:2: 1).
3. mendelsches law (independence law/new combination law)
of two characteristics is separately from each other left, whereby starting from the 2. Generation (“grandchild”) new, pure-bends combinations to arise can. This law applies however then only if forthe characteristics responsible persons of genes on different Chromosomen sit (polyhybride hereditary courses). If the genes lie on the same Chromosomen, they are left in groups of couplings.
Mendel could do neither the term of the genes nor that of the Chromosomen. The actual nature of the hereditary factors was thus not well-known it. Only 1904 became by Suez clay/tone andBoveri the Chromosomentheorie of the transmission justifies. With the help of this theory the Mendelregeln can be explained without contradiction.
The Chromosomen are the units on those the hereditary factors (genes) to be passed on. (This explains the groups of couplings.) in the body cells the Chromosomen arise in pairs.Thus humans possess 23 Chromosomenpaare thus 46 Chromosomen. One speaks of a double Chromosomensatz. The Chromosomen are present in pairs in the body cell, because a Chromosom from the father and one from the nut/mother come. These two Chromosomen become also ashomologous Chromosomen designates. In a body cell the hereditary factors per characteristic are thus always doubly present.
With the formation of the sex cells the homologous Chromosomenpaare is separated. In an egg and/or one Spermium is thus only the simple Chromosomensatz. In a sex cellthe hereditary factors per characteristic are thus always once present. (The splitting rule becomes so understandable.) with fertilization thus the fusion of egg and Spermium to bring both sex cells in each case a hereditary factor per characteristic also. The body cell resulting from this fusion has thusagain the double Chromosomensatz. The hereditary factors can so again be combined. (Independence rule, free combination of the genes)
With large homogeneity of the genes of respective parents:
If A is dominance, each combination, which at least one A contains, has the appropriate characteristicthe parents AA. If AA stands for example for red blooms, and BB for blue blooms, and the gene for red blooms dominance is, have all “children” from AA and BB red blooms, but a quarter of the “grandchildren” again blue blooms.If none of the genes dominates, also mixtures develop - in this case possibly for lila blooms with the combination OFF.
If several genes on different Chromosomen result in together a characteristic, also completely new results can develop - for z. B. yellow blooms.The same applies to mutations.
The use of this recombination - thus the sexual Vermehrung - lies in the fact that more different gene combinations contribute to the evolution. Without sexual Vermehrung there would be only to a large extent identical copies from each organism. With sexual Vermehrung it givesa high range at descendants, and thus at survival strategies and - possibilities. To it comes that errors or weaknesses in hereditary property with sexual Vermehrung very much uneven on descendants distributed are - so that some descendants of clearly fewer problems have than their parents,and thus a reconciliation for errors when copying the heiress formations is created. Finally the sexual Vermehrung makes possible the assumption of the best characteristics of two occasionally separate populations into a common population and concomitantly a faster appropriation of abilities, those elsewherebefore already developed.
the mendelschen laws are used in particular in the animal and plant breeding, e.g. with the breed of hybrids. They can be used also for descending appraisals, e.g. in order to prove that did not determine humansas parents of a certain child are applicable. DNA.
which by Mendels theory not be explained could, became only understandably because of the Chromosomentheorie of the transmission. The genes for for example the stature height and fruit form of the tomatoes(A/a and/or. B/b) lie on the same Chromosom and therefore coupled to the germ cells are passed on. The germ cells can contain then only the combination OFF or off, not however off or off. 3. mendelsche rule must be limited therefore: Alleles are freely combinable, if the genes lie on different Chromosomen.
- H. Frederik Nijhout: The context macht's! Spektrum der Wissenschaft, April 2005, S. 70 - 77 (2005), ISSN 1702971
- biology book six-form high school Baden-Wuerttemberg class 9-10.
thus “everything” is written. (above in the text with reference)

The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1945
Artturi Ilmari Virtanen
Born: 15 January 1895, Helsinki, Russian Empire (now Finland)
Died: 11 November 1973, Helsinki, Finland
Affiliation at the time of the award: University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Prize motivation: "for his research and inventions in agricultural and nutrition chemistry, especially for his fodder preservation method"
Field: Agricultural chemistry
Artturi Ilmari Virtanen
was born in Helsinki on the 15th of January, 1895, as the son of
Kaarlo Virtanen and Serafiina Isotalo. He was educated at the
Classical Lyceum at Viipuri, Finland. After finishing school, he
studied chemistry, biology, and physics at the University of
Helsinki, where he took his M.Sc. in 1916 and obtained his
D.Sc. in 1919. Subsequently he studied physical chemistry in
Zurich in 1920 under G. Wiegner, bacteriology in Stockholm in
1921 under Chr. Barthel, and enzymology in Stockholm during
1923-1924 under H.
von Euler. Since 1923, his interest turned to
He was first-assistant of the Central Laboratory of Industries at Helsinki during 1916-1917, and chemist in the Laboratory of Valio, Finnish Cooperative Dairies' Association, during 1919-1920. In 1921 he became Director of this laboratory, and in 1931 of the Biochemical Research Institute at Helsinki. After having been docent in chemistry at the University of Helsinki since 1924, he was appointed Professor of Biochemistry at the Finland Institute of Technology at Helsinki in 1931, and at the University of Helsinki in 1939. Since 1948 he has been member and President of the State Academy of Science and Arts in Finland.
Professor Virtanen is a member of the Finnish, Norwegian, Swedish, Flemish, Bavarian, and Pontifical Academies of Science, and of the Swedish and Danish Academies of Engineering Sciences. He is an honorary member of learned societies in Finland, Sweden, Austria, Edinburgh, and the U.S.A., and holds honorary degrees of the Universities of Lund, Paris, Giessen, and Helsinki, the Royal Technical College at Stockholm, and the Finland Institute of Technology. Numerous medals and other distinctions have been conferred upon him from Sweden, Finland, Belgium, and Italy.
Virtanen established the indispensability of cozymase in lactic and propionic acid fermentations, as well as the phosphorylation of sugar (1924). In these works the similarity of different fermentation processes as to the first stages in the decomposition of sugar became apparent. Together with his collaborators he continued the fermentation experiments, special attention being paid to the mechanism of different bacterial fermentations. The fermentation of dioxyaceton to glycerol and glyceric acid in the presence of phosphates by the effect of Coli bacteria (1929) was the first sugar fermentation which was elucidated chemically from beginning to end. In this work attention was also paid to the adaptive formation of enzymes, which phenomenon his collaborator H. Karström treated in great detail in his doctor's thesis (constitutive and adaptive enzymes). The phenomenon of adaptation, and in connection with it the uptake of nutrients by cells, is still subjected to investigations in his laboratory. The concept that almost all proteins in bacterial cells are enzyme proteins led to investigations on the relation between the protein content and enzymic activity of cells.
Since 1925, the biological nitrogen fixation which takes place in the root nodules of leguminous plants has been subjected to many-sided investigations in his laboratory. The importance of the red pigment, leghaemoglobin, in active root nodules for the fixation of nitrogen was proved.
The formation of vitamins in plants, as well as the ability of plants to utilize organic nitrogen compounds as their nitrogen source, have been treated in many publications from his laboratory.
Since the end of the 1940's, the chemical composition of higher plants has been given special attention in his laboratory. A large number of new amino acids have been isolated from different plants, and have been characterized chemically. Numerous organic sulphur compounds, which may be of importance for the nutrition of man and domestic animals, have also been isolated from vegetables and fodder plants.
The application of biochemistry to agriculture and the dairy industry belongs to the practical activities of his laboratory. Among works performed in this field are the creation of a theoretical basis for the preservation of fresh fodder and the development of a practical method on this basis (the AIV method), with the aim to promote an effective utilization of protein-rich crops, and to produce milk of the same vitamin content in winter as that produced on summer pastures. Investigations aiming at the improvement of the quality of dairy products also have to be mentioned as belonging to the field of applied research.
Virtanen married Lilja Moisio in 1920; they have two sons, Kaarlo and Olavi.
From Nobel Lectures, Chemistry 1942-1962, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1964
This autobiography/biography was written at the time of the award and first published in the book series Les Prix Nobel. It was later edited and republished in Nobel Lectures. To cite this document, always state the source as shown above.
Artturi Virtanen died on November 11, 1973.
Copyright © The Nobel Foundation 1945
MLA style: "Artturi Virtanen - Biography". Nobelprize.org. 25 May 2013 http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1945/virtanen.html

Bronze Age use of a cave in the limits of the present village marks the earliest evidence for settlement in this area. The population appears to have flourished in Phoenician times, a fact revealed by the presence of a number of tombs found during this century at Hal-Qormi Beyond that, the history of this village remains obscure until it emerges as one of the first parishes in fifteenth century Malta.
Despite a number of adverse events, the villagers managed to build the largest parish church in the countryside at the time. Inspired by the works of Sebastiano Serlio, an as yet anonymous architect managed to design a church which has a facade that combines elegance and grace with an underlying mannerist style. In the seventeenth century the church was crowned by a dome designed by Malta's foremost architect Lorenzo Gafa. Through the years the church managed to gather a number of paintings by the islandsí leading artists namely Stefano Erardi, Francesco Zahra, Giuseppe Cali and Joseph Briffa. The titular painting is a work by Mattia Preti.
The village's population grew over the years and earlier this century the eastern part of the village was proclaimed as a new parish. A new church was built and dedicated to St. Sebastian. Imposing on the surrounding landscape, the church's interior has remarkable pieces of sculpture in local limestone.
Qormi is known for its numerous bakeries which until recently supplied most of the southern side of the island. The life in the village is punctuated by a number of events. In Holy Week, one of the largest Good Friday processions occurs at Hal-Qormi, an event which attracts a large number of maltese people and tourists .
In the summer months the Maltese celebrate a number of
traditional festas. Hal-Qormi also makes its contribution. For two
weeks the village's life rotates around celebrations dedicated to the two
patron saints. Street and church decoration ,
fireworks and brass band marches make this occasion an unforgettable
Contact author by E-Mail

Alcohol abuse affects the whole family. The health effects of alcohol abuse can include heart disease, liver disease, and even cancer. Treatment consists of medical attention, prescription medications, or treatment centers.
It's not clear why some people
abuse alcohol or become
addicted to it and others do not. Alcoholism often
runs in families (genetic), but your drinking habits also
are influenced by your environment and life situations, such as friends or

In a heartbreaking case of parental neglect, a 12-year-old girl in Scotland has been admitted to a hospital after a life-long vegan diet left her with the spine of an 80-year-old. Raised on meat- and dairy-free meals since birth, the young child is said to have developed a severe case of rickets (a degenerative bone condition) and numerous bone fractures as a result of her nutritional deficiencies. Sadly, this is not the first time a child has suffered a vegan-related health calamity.
In a similar case five years ago, a 15-month-old child was taken into foster care after a strict vegan diet left her with internal injuries, broken bones, missing teeth, and rickets. And since then, at least two vegan children have died from similar complications. In one Florida case, a 5-month-old girl was still at newborn weight when she died from malnutrition. Her siblings were severely malnourished, and at least two had developed rickets.
These grievous examples show how important it is to exercise caution when promoting vegetarian and vegan diets—especially for children. A New York Times columnist explained after a 6-week-old Atlanta vegan died last year:
A vegan diet may lack vitamin B12, found only in animal foods; usable vitamins A and D, found in meat, fish, eggs and butter; and necessary minerals like calcium and zinc. When babies are deprived of all these nutrients, they will suffer from retarded growth, rickets and nerve damage.
As animal activists tout the supposed superiority of meatless eating, it’s important to note that a vegan diet can be downright dangerous unless it’s undertaken with caution. Extra steps like vitamin supplements and careful planning are particularly crucial for kids, since their bodies are not fully developed. Yet vegan activists at PETA and the woefully misnamed Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) continue to push vegan diets without emphasizing the special needs of growing children.
That PETA aggressively markets its messages to children is nothing new. PETA activists have been instrumental in promoting the misleading idea that going vegetarian or vegan is a hip style statement, or a way to stay thin. Regardless of its (lack of) merits, that notion seems to be catching on. According to the American Dietetic Association, eleven percent of girls ages 13 to 17 identify themselves as vegetarian or vegan. But nowhere in today’s animal-rights propaganda will you find sufficient warning about the drawbacks, including protein and vitamin deficiencies.
PCRM has been particularly irresponsible in promoting vegan diets for kids. Despite ample evidence to the contrary, the group’s psychiatrist president even insists that "vegan diets are not only good for kids, it’s a preferable diet for kids."
As the recent news from Scotland so tragically illustrates, this advice is dangerously misleading. Vegan advocacy groups should stop glossing over the potentially disastrous details of their dietary agenda.

A Probabilistic Relational Model (PRM), , , is a directed probabilistic graphical model used in the field of Statistical Relational Learning (SRL). PRMs define a language that can be used to describe the relationships - structural and probabilistic - between classes and variables, and thus allows representing dependencies between sets of objects. Heckerman et al. introduced the directed acyclic probabilistic entity-relationship (DAPER) model which is based on the entity-relationship model used to design relational databases.
ProbReM is built on the DAPER specification of a PRM, thus it requires the data to be modelled with a entity-relationship diagram. The probabilistic structure defines the dependencies among the probabilistic attributes of the entity-relationship model.
The parent and the child attribute of a dependency can be associated with different entities or relationships; Getoor et al. refer to the path from child to parent attribute the slotchain whereas Heckerman et al. associate a more general constraint with the dependency instead. The traditional slotchain is the most common constraint, ProbReM makes use of both expressions depending which one is more appropriate in the context.
Relationships are either of type 1:n or m:n, therefore it is possible that attribute objects have multiple parent attribute objects for the same probabilistic dependency. Aggregation of the parent attribute objects is a common way to deal with this problem, ProbReM allows to define generic aggregation functions (avg, min, max).
Different inference methods have been implemented, all of which are based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods.
The section Using ProbReM illustrates the approach used in ProbReM, and the example model is a walkthrough with an applied example. For theoretical background, we recommend Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning by Lise Getoor & Ben Taskar for an excellent introduction to the different approaches introduced in the SRL field. For more background on using MCMC in graphical models, D. Koller & N. Friedman’s Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques is an excellent reference.
- Numpy / Scipy
- Matplotlib / Pylab
It is hard to draw a line between the core functionality of the framework and the functionality needed by a specific ProbReM project. For this reason the source code will be provided as a folder and the framework has to be added to the PYTHONPATH of the ProbReM project. In the future it might be useful to create a proper Python package. The code is available as is on github.
See Using ProbReM for how to start a new project.

Today, there’s a chance that the U.S. Senate will return to some semblance of a functioning legislative body. A majority of senators could vote to eliminate Rule XXII, which authorizes the notorious filibuster.
Article 1, Section 6 of the Constitution, which gives to both houses of Congress the determination of “the rules of its proceedings,” offers that opportunity on the first day of each new Congress.
The filibuster, which requires a supermajority to cut off debate, entered the Senate’s rules in 1807 as a courtesy to speakers. Since then, Rule XXII has metastasized into a procedural vise that threatens the democratic foundation of our government.
The filibuster lost all semblance of being an aid to discussion in the middle of the 19th century, when some senators began using the rule to hold the floor for lengthy speeches to prevent voting on bills they didn’t like.
Until 40 years ago, this partisan weapon was used sparingly — no more than 10 times in any two-year congressional session. Then, in the 1970s, frustrated by even that small number of interminable talkathons, senators introduced the concept of the “silent filibuster” which enabled members to merely indicate that they intended to filibuster to block a measure.
Since 2007, the Republican minority has expanded the use of the filibuster beyond any recognizable procedural rule. In the 110th, 111th and 112th Congress, they filibustered 380 times. Today no legislation can be introduced, no nominations considered, no votes taken without a supermajority of 60 votes.
This formidable, partisan tactic has become so common that bills like the Dream Act and the Paycheck Fairness Act have failed in the Senate despite having enough votes for passage because of the deadly filibuster.
The Founding Fathers, rebelling against monarchy, were so partial to majority rule that they specified in the Constitution only five instances requiring a supermajority. They were: to override a presidential veto, to expel a member, to approve treaties, to convict in an impeachment and to propose a constitutional amendment.
The Constitution does not require a supermajority for adopting the rules for Senate proceedings. When senators insist upon supermajority votes for rule-changes and filibusters, they are stealthily amending the Constitution.
Two years ago, Sens. Tom Udall, Jeff Merkley and Tom Harkins mounted a campaign for rules reform. They succeeded in getting rid of the anonymous filibuster, an even more egregious practice. Now, after two additional years of accelerating legislative obstruction, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid has finally called for ending the silent filibuster.
Reid’s proposal would prevent the use of the filibuster to block the introduction of new measures. More important, it would require a senator to speak if he or she wished to halt a vote, instead of effortlessly indicating an intention to demand supermajority concurrence to continue any action.
Newly elected Sens. Elizabeth Warren, Angus King, Heidi Heitkampf and Martin Heinrich have joined the filibuster’s foes, but the outcome of even Reid’s mild proposal is far from certain. Sen. Carl Levin is now assembling a bipartisan group to oppose any substantive change in the Senate’s rules.
Far more promising than Reid’s “make them talk” effort is the lawsuit filed by the public advocacy group Common Cause. Contending quite correctly that the Senate’s arcane rule is actually threatening our democratic process, their case highlights the stake that we American citizens have in the filibuster issue.
Suing on behalf of Reps. John Lewis, Michael Michaud, Hank Johnson and Keith Ellison and three young people hurt by the use of the filibuster to block the Senate from passing the Dream Act in 2010, Common Cause must demonstrate that its case does not fall under “the political question doctrine,” which posits that the judiciary can’t interfere with Congress’ procedures. Lawyers for Common Cause are arguing in the litigation that the Senate’s rule-making powers are not absolute, particularly when they violate actual constitutional law, in this case the principle of majority rule.
Resistance to changing the pernicious rule that is stifling the will of the majority rests on a historical myth and both parties’ fear of being curtailed when they are in a minority.
The myth teaches that the Senate was meant to counteract the democratic structure of the House. The opinions of the Founding Fathers tell otherwise.
The so-called Great Compromise at the Constitutional Convention of 1787, which granted each state two Senate seats regardless of its population, reflected a concession, not a principle. Because there were far more small states in the original 13 than large ones, the arrangement proved necessary to getting the delegates in Philadelphia to agree on a draft constitution.
As a consequence, Wyoming’s 180,000 registered voters have the same number of senators as California’s 18 million. Today’s filibustering senators are only furthering this imbalance.
The Founders designed the Senate to be a steadying force in Congress, with six-year terms and a requirement that members be at least 30 years old, but no Founding Father ever spoke in favor of minority rule.
James Madison, the father of the Constitution, recognized that majorities could err, but insisted persuasively that majority rule was far superior to any other mechanism for making legislative decisions. His views anticipated Winston Churchill, who noted that democracy might be considered the worst form of government except for all the others.
The rationales for the filibuster are but fig leaves to hide the fact that substantial numbers of senators in both parties want an insurance policy against minority impotence, and they are willing to curb the workings of our democracy to get it.
Now only an aroused public can get Democrats and Republicans in the Senate to see the damage that the filibuster is doing to our political order.
Majority rule is the bedrock democratic principle. When we citizens of the United States elect a majority, we want it to govern. Wisdom, experience, and the Constitution are on our side; let’s hope that enough members of the Senate move there also by Jan. 3 when the opening of the 113th Congress gives them a chance to vote with their hopes instead of their fears.
Joyce Appleby is an emeritus professor of history at UCLA and author of “The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism.” She lives in Taos, N.M., and she wrote this for the Los Angeles Times.

|The following information - excerpted from NutriBase Software - is a discussion about "desirable" body weights and "desirable" percentage body fat contents for men. (Information and body weight/fat charts for women are also available.)
In 1942, Louis Dublin, a statistician at Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, grouped some four million people who were insured with Metropolitan Life into categories based on their height, body frame (small, medium or large) and weight. He discovered that the ones who lived the longest were the ones who maintained their body weight at the level for average 25-year-olds.
These Metropolitan Life tables became widely used for determining recommended body weights. In 1942, the tables gave "ideal body weights." In 1959, they were revised and became "desirable body weights." And in 1983, they were revised once again, this time called "height and weight tables." The weights given in the 1983 tables are heavier than the 1942 tables because, in general, heavier people live longer today.
Experts have criticized the validity of these tables for several reasons:
Many experts say the 1942 tables are more accurate because they indicate lower "ideal weights." Many experts support the use of the 1983 tables, citing that these are the latest statistical sampling of such matters. The American Heart Association recommends using the 1959 tables rather than the newer tables that suggest somewhat higher weights. This Guide shows you the 1959 tables.
Some experts criticize the Metropolitan Life tables stating that they are okay for persons in their forties, but that the numbers are too heavy for younger persons and too light for older persons. For this and other reasons, NutriBase shows you recommended body weights from four sources: the 1959 Metropolitan Life Insurance chart, the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, North American Association for the Study of Obesity, and the U.S. Department of the Army. NutriBase displays the heights and weights from these charts, showing you the entries that are appropriate for your sex, height, frame size, and age.
The Metropolitan Life chart is organized by sex and body frame size (small, medium, or large frame) and all the other charts are sex and age-graded except for the North American Association for the Study of Obesity, which lists weights by sex only.
Weight Charts for Men
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1959 - Male
US National Center for Health Statistics - Male
North American Association for the Study of Obesity - Males
US Army - Males
Body Fat Content Chart for Men and Women

Worksheets and activities
If you want to support your child’s learning at primary school with some extra practice at home, TheSchoolRun has hundreds of resources for you to choose from.
Our free English worksheets cover phonics, spelling, handwriting, grammar, reading comprehension and more.
Our free maths worksheets for Reception, KS1 and KS2 offer activities and games to help with multiplication, division, fractions, decimals, times tables and all other areas covered in the national curriculum.
Our free primary science worksheets will help you revise key science concepts with hands-on experiments.
Browse through all our worksheets and filter your search by subject and year group to find the best resources for your child.
These SATs past test papers can be downloaded for free and used to help with SATs revision.
The Learning Journey is a guided revision programme for primary English and maths. Every week of the school year we suggest two activities to offer your child at-home practice; we'll also email you worksheet suggestions and teachers' tips to help you get the most from our resources.
The Learning Journey is exclusive to TheSchoolRun subscribers. Find out more by watching our introductory video.
Start your child's Learning Journey today!
Fractions? Punctuation? Telling the time? Handwriting? If there’s a specific area of learning your child needs support with, our packs offer information, advice and plenty of engaging practical activities to help you.
Written by teachers and experts and exclusively available to TheSchoolRun subscribers, learning packs (each 50+ pages long) are fun as well as practice-packed.
About TheSchoolRun: If you’re passionate about helping your children achieve their full potential with fun but educational activities, TheSchoolRun.com is the parenting website for you. TheSchoolRun aims to demystify school for parents, giving you all the tools you need to understand what and how your child is learning at primary school. Our informative articles, packed with advice from experts and practical tips from teachers, help parents get to grips with new educational techniques and feel confident about supporting their kids’ schoolwork.

Thirty years ago, a summertime rain could produce huge gullies, badly eroded slopes dotted much of the region, and on average, a Tennessee farmer was losing almost 2,000 tons of soil per year.
But that was before no-till farming.
These days, thanks to extensive work by researchers with the University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture, and educational forums like the Milan No-Till Field Day, those sights and stats are a thing of the past.
In 2009, more than 70 percent of Tennessee farmers used no-till practices, and an additional 20 percent used some type of conservation tillage. The results can be seen in better production efficiency, cleaner water and air, and drastic improvements in our soils.
When the 30th Milan No-Till Crop Production Field Day rolls around on July 22, most visitors to the AgResearch and Education Center will be familiar with no-till practices, but this event is about more than no-till education. It’s about helping farmers determine the best methods for agricultural production.
“We’re proud of our heritage as the birthplace of Tennessee No-Till,” says Blake Brown, director of the AgResearch and Education Center at Milan, Tenn. “As no-till becomes the conventional tillage method in Tennessee, we hope to continue in the footsteps of those early no-till researchers whose main goal was to help the farmers of this state produce crops more efficiently and economically.”
Visitors to Milan No-Till Field Day will have the opportunity to hear presentations on research involving every major row crop grown in Tennessee, delivered by leading crop experts from across the Mid-South.
Tours will also feature workshops on weed, insect and disease management. Plus, sessions will be offered on topics like financial planning and emerging biofuels markets.
In addition to the array of educational tours, visitors can also enjoy a large tradeshow or a walk through the West Tennessee Agricultural Museum, which features more than 20,000 agricultural antiques.
As always, the field day will be held at the AgResearch and Education Center at Milan. The Milan No-Till Field Day begins at 7 a.m. on Thursday, July 22. Admission is free and open to the public.
For more information, including directions to the AgResearch & Education Center, visit the website: http://milan.tennessee.edu or call (731) 686-7362. You can also check out the Milan No-Till page on Facebook for the latest updates.
The UT AgResearch and Education Center at Milan is one of 10 outdoor laboratories operated by the Tennessee Agricultural Experiment Station system as part of the University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture. In addition to its agricultural research programs, the UT Institute of Agriculture also provides instruction, research and public service through the UT College of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, the UT College of Veterinary Medicine, and UT Extension offices in every county in the state.

Debates about energy often get testy. That’s because the arguments are usually clouded by emotions. The number one reason people buy mileage efficient hybrid cars, for example, is that it makes them feel good about themselves; the purchase provides for a moral superiority especially over those who continue to drive gas guzzlers. The fact that the premium paid over a comparable non hybrid vehicle cannot be economically justified with gas prices at current levels is irrelevant. It’s the environment that’s important even though the ecological benefit of driving a hybrid cannot be quantified.
As with hybrid cars, most arguments about energy are devoid of facts about cost. Politicians love to spout their support for alternative environmental friendly energy development, particularly ethanol, wind, and solar. They never mention the reality that these energy sources cannot be developed without enormous government subsidies and delivery consumption prices that will be a multiple of present energy costs. Add in other development problems such as land use, delivery unreliability, other adverse environmental effects and it obvious that these energy alternatives will never supply more than a fraction of our power needs.
If energy independence and protecting the environment is truly important it is necessary to recognize that costs do matter as a conservation motivator. For example, higher gasoline prices-say $5.00 per gallon- would drive more people to hybrid and smaller more fuel efficient cars purchases than any environmental benefit factor. Of course few politicians would support a consumption tax on gasoline and oil companies and speculators would be vilified if market prices got that high. Needless to say, the public wouldn’t like it either.
But there are other area where cost rationality is making progress. One example is the planned installation by utilities of smart meters in some 10 million homes and businesses. These devices are programmed to measure a customer’s use of electricity incrementally during the day, say every ten minutes or hour. This information is automatically forwarded to the utility which will charge different prices for energy depending on peak or non peak power demand. Customers opting for lower bills could reduce energy usage during the higher cost peak period. Ultimately, smart meters could directly control a household’s appliances making the home more energy cost efficient. This is real energy smarts.

Questions for Photo 1
1. This view is looking from the area around the railroad crossover up the tracks of the Memphis & Charleston Railroad. Locate this view on the map shown in Illustration 1. Can you identify Battery Williams (to the left of the tracks) and Battery Robinett (behind the tent camp on the right) in the photo?
2. What clues can you identify in the photo to suggest why the two batteries were located where they were?
3. The tent camp is located between Battery Robinett and Battery Williams, near the tracks. Why do you think that might be the case?
4. The objects next to the tracks on the right side of the photo appear to be wheels for railroad cars. Why do you think there are so many of them? What might they be used for? How do you think they would have been transported to Corinth?
* The photo on this screen has a resolution of 72 dots per inch (dpi), and therefore will print poorly. You can obtain a larger version of Photo 1, but be aware that the file will take as much as 35 seconds to load with a 28.8K modem.

Upper Level Low - Meteorological Physical Background
by ZAMG and FMI
Upper Level Lows are closed cyclonically circulating eddies in the middle and upper troposphere. They are sometimes also called "cold drops", because the air within an Upper Level Low is colder than in its surroundings.
The development of a typical Upper Level Low goes through four stages, during which a bottom of an upper trough is detached from the main stream, until it finally fills up or merges with another trough:
- Upper level trough
- Final stage
1. Upper Level Trough stage
The prerequisite of the forming of the Upper Level Low are unstable waves within the main stream, where the temperature wave is behind the geopotential wave.
- There is cold advection within the trough and warm advection on the ridge of the geopotential wave.
- The vertical axis of the trough has a backward-oriented inclination with height.
- The amplitudes of the waves increase; the wavelenght can decrease.
Cyan: 500 hPa geopotential height, green: 500 hPa temperature
2. Tear-off stage
- The amplitudes of the waves increases further.
- The isohypses form an inverse omega-shape and the cold air flows into the middle of this omega.
- Often at the same time the ridge behind the main upper trough continues to move eastward quicklier than the trough, appearing to "fall
- In the end of this stage the cold bottom of the trough is detached from the main stream.
3. Cut-off stage
- The bottom of the upper trough is completely detached from the main stream forming a closed circulation.
- If there is a strong forward-falling ridge behind, it may also separate from the main stream and form an upper level high (a counterpart for the
upper level low). This happens in most of the ULL cases.
- The cold core of the Upper level Low warms up slowly because of the diabatic warming of the sinking clod air.
- If a cold Upper Level Low is situated over a warm surface, convection arises within the core. This occurs especially over the Atlantic Ocean
(Canarian Isles) and over the Mediterranean in summertime.
- Another location for convection is ahead of the low within the area of a thickness ridge.
4. Final stage
Within an Upper Level Low there is convection, unless the surface is very cold. The air near the surface is warm and the circulation is slowed down by the friction. The convection brings warm air and friction upwards. Consequently, the Upper Level Low weakens slowly.
- In most cases the Upper Level Low merges with the main stream before it has completely dissolved by the convection. Usually a large trough in
the main stream approaches from the rear and catches the upper level low.
- The Upper Level Low can also merge with another Upper Level Low.
For an example see Key Parameters.
If the Upper Level Low is far from the main stream, it can dissolve solely by convection. This kind of development occurs mostly in southern areas; in Europe they can be found over the Mediterranean.
Upper Level Lows can be divided into two classes according to their size and lifetime:
- small lows with a lifetime of 2-4 days
- big lows with a lifetime of 5-14 days
Big lows are slightly more common than small ones.
Note that over land an Upper Level Low can also form when a surface low of an extratropical cyclone disappears due to friction. This is just a late stage of a cyclone development and the upper low fills up relatively quickly.

There are so many ways that you can do extra research and investigate into many more aspects of Clare. Below are some ideas.
Your local library is an excellent source for all the information you may need: it may have some maps you can look at. Perhaps you could do a project about aspects of Clare.
There might be some more photographs or images related to Clare in the Media Bank.
Maybe you need some tips on how to be a researcher? Click on one of the icons below.
Ask Your Librarian or Teacher
Ask your librarian or teacher if they can help you find out about Clare.
Information you can look out for includes photos and media publications, such as old newspapers, which may provide you with interesting insights.
Not sure exactly what you can ask the librarian for? Click on the icon for some suggestions.
http://www.museum.ie has loads of artefacts and evidence from Ireland throughout the centuries, even before your grandparents were born.

DIY Industrial Art Pieces Made from Rubbings
I was in a used book store one day and I saw a book on art rubbings. Of course, I was familiar with the idea of putting a penny or leaf under a paper and running a pencil over the top to transfer the image, but this book was taking it to a whole new level. So we grabbed our art supplies and went outside to make some new art pieces from rubbings!
- Paper … and plenty of it. I found that I like using very thin paper, personally. I bought a cheap sketchpad and I really liked the texture and thinness of the paper for this project.
- Rubbing Materials. There are all sorts of rubbing materials you could use! Take a bunch with you and try them out to see what you prefer. Graphite, colored pencils, pastels, chalks, wax, you name it! Although I did not expect it, I ended up preferring crayons for larger pieces. Colored pencils were nice for more detailed/smaller items.
- A Kneeling Pad. If you’re going to be crouching on sidewalks and streets making your rubbings, it’s a little more comfortable if you have something under your knees.
- A Folder. Or something to put your finished rubbings in to prevent them from getting bent up and wrinkled.
- Masking Tape. You need for need something to hold the paper still while making a rubbing, and I found masking tape to work very well. It’s especially helpful for working on vertical surfaces, of course, but even on a flat horizontal surface, it is a good idea. Be aware, though, that depending on the kind of paper you are using, the area with the masking tape may need to be trimmed away. This is usually fine because of the nature of rubbings, often the edges are not the most attractive part, anyway, and can be cut away.
- Scissors. This is helpful to have so you can trim away the excess masking tape to prevent the papers from sticking together in the folder.
- A Tote. Or something similar to carry all these supplies!
You could do a variety of themes out of rubbings, such as a nature theme where you make rubbings of tree bark and feathers and other natural objects.
But I wanted to do a more urban and industrial theme. Of course, this works best if you live in a fairly urban area. However, even in a small town we were able to find some interesting subjects for rubbings.
Try man hole covers, engraved signs, and plaques for more definite rubbings, or try brick walls, metal plates and concrete for more textural subjects. Be aware, though, that you need to know what you are allowed to make rubbings of; it is illegal some places to make rubbings of gravestones, and, of course, you shouldn’t wander onto private property to make rubbings.
Still, it is a unique way to wander around a town, looking for interesting spots to make into rubbings – you notice all sorts of things you would not have seen before.
A few tips on making rubbings:
- Look for a subject for the rubbing that has texture or relief to it, and tape the paper over the area you want to transfer to the paper. Choose which art medium you want to use for the particular rubbing.
- Don’t use a sharp point of whatever art medium you are using, but rather use a blunt point or use it on an extreme angle as you begin to make the rubbing.
- Move your pencil, or other rubbing tool, smoothly and evenly over the surface of the paper. Start out marking lightly. If you press too hard, you’ll just be drawing on top of the surface, not really picking up the texture. But if you start lightly and gradually get to darker/harder strokes, you’ll get a better feel for what works well.
- While making the rubbing, try to keep your hand moving in the same plane. In other words, if you’re rubbing right to left, do not suddenly switch to up and down, or you will probably end up with some unattractive competing lines.
- When you are finished, gently remove the paper from the surface and trim away the masking tape. Place the rubbing your folder for safe keeping.
So try exploring your local area and think outside the box of what you can turn into rubbings!
This tutorial is brought to you by April Starr.
She likes to say that her motto is "living the amazement" She never wants to lose her sense of wonder and adventure.
April Starr is a designer, writer, creative entrepreneur of FlourishCafe, lover of spicy food, amateur explorer and worth very little in the early mornings. Her husband and four year old daughter are always up for trying a new dish she has created, or working on a project together. She is learning, laughing, and living the amazement every day!

Examining the Sustainability Journey of Walmart
Business researchers from the University of Arkansas and the University of South Carolina will be examining Walmart’s 7-year sustainability effort as a way to create a teaching tool for other businesses that hope to become more environmentally friendly.
As researchers from the University of Arkansas and the University of South begin their project of examining Walmart’s efforts of becoming more sustainable for nearly a decade, they hope to find ways to help other businesses overcome certain obstacles in order to be more environmentally conscious. The project will consist of a series of cases that focus on a single topic and a single organization over a specific amount of time.
“The strategy is to embed sustainability within the core business supporting the company’s vision for a more sustainable Walmart. Numerous initiatives, some of which are documented in the case series, are part of this strategy that led to international recognition of Walmart’s sustainability leadership,” said David Hyatt, clinical assistant professor in the Sam M. Walton College of Business.
The cases explore a set of essential questions across three levels: societal, organizational and individual. For example, at the societal level, who should set standards for sustainability – government, society, consumers, scientists or companies? At the organizational level, who evaluates and measures sustainability, who should make decisions about strategy and how should the strategy be implemented? At the individual level, what does sustainability mean to the consumer or employee? The studies ask several other questions pertaining to each level.
The first case study will look at former CEO Lee Scott’s “Leadership in the 21st Century” speech from 2005, in which he publicly announced Walmart’s sustainability goals. Other studies will include the examination of how the company planned certain goals and processes, implementing LED lights and environmentally friendly shopping bags, and other strategies that have already been used by Walmart.

Figure. No caption available.
Q My father has just been diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment. Will this eventually turn into Alzheimer's disease?
DR. RONALD PETERSEN ADVISES:
A Your father has been diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) - a condition that indicates he is more forgetful than we would expect as part of normal aging, but that does not otherwise meet the clinical criteria for dementia or Alzheimer's disease.
Despite significant forgetfulness, people with MCI retain their cognitive skills, such as reading, writing, calculating and problem-solving. And they are still quite functional in most of their daily living activities. But because they do not meet the criteria for dementia, they are in this intermediate zone characterizing MCI.
People with MCI develop Alzheimer's disease more quickly than the general population - at an annual rate of 10 percent to 15 percent, compared to only 1 percent to 2 percent for people without an MCI diagnosis. Within four or five years, half the people with MCI will have developed Alzheimer's; nevertheless, it's likely that most of the rest of them will also develop the disease at some point in the future.
There currently are no approved treatments for MCI, but several clinical trials have recently been completed. The most promising results came from a large trial studying donepezil (Aricept) and high-dose vitamin E. This study found that donepezil reduced the risk of developing Alzheimer's for up to 12 months in participants with MCI compared to those on placebo. However, by the end of the three-year study, there was no difference among people taking donepezil, vitamin E or placebo.
Mild cognitive impairment is an area of active investigation, so we hope therapies will be developed in the near future.

One of Appleton’s early founders, Eleazar Williams, claimed he was the “lost Dauphin”—the rightful heir to the French throne. Maybe it was royal blood that inspired him to devise a lofty plan to lead an empire based in Wisconsin. In the 1820s he led a host of Native Americans from New York to settle in the Fox River Valley. His plans to become their emperor kind of fell through, but he did succeed in accidentally establishing the future location of Appleton and the Fox Cities.
Local residents added a personal touch to Appleton from the very beginning. When the design for the city’s college building, Lawrence University, was sent from Boston, Wisconsin builders thought it lacked a certain je ne sais quois. To jazz it up a bit, they added a few gables—four, to be exact. According to one story, Mr. Lawrence was none too keen on their additions, but the college became a source of local pride all the same.
Many paper companies call the Fox River Valley their home. In fact, the valley boasts the world’s highest concentration of paper-related companies, with a whopping 80 plants and 90 publishing companies. This is commemorated at the Paper Industry International Hall of Fame, located in Appleton. Imagine how many paper airplanes that is!
Plenty of folks know that Houdini called Appleton home, but did you know that Appleton holds the secrets to some of his great tricks? AKA Houdini, an ongoing exhibit in the History Museum at the Castle, lets visitors get a first-hand taste of Houdini’s magic with hands-on activities. The exhibit won the 2005 American Association for State and Local History Award of Merit and has been featured on the Discovery Channel, the Learning Channel, the Arts and Entertainment Network and the BBC. How’s that for spellbinding?
The Fox Cities have bred their share of local and national heroes, and the most prominent might be John Bradley. An Appleton native and graduate of Appleton West High School, Bradley helped raise the flag at Iwo Jima and was immortalized in the famous photograph of that event. After the war he returned to Appleton and married his sweetheart, Betty Van Gorp. Today an Appleton clinic and scholarship for college-bound high school seniors bear his name and continue his legacy.
Appleton residents played a key role in preserving their city’s shocking heritage. Appleton was the home of the first commercial hydroelectric plant, as well as the first house in the world to be lit with hydroelectricity. That house, which later became known as the Hearthstone House, was set to be demolished by the city in 1986. A group of Appleton residents calling themselves “Friends of Hearthstone” raised enough money to save the house and then turned it into a museum where it continues to shed light on Appleton’s local history.
There’s no better place to go through the looking glass—or rather, to go looking for glass than the Bergstrom-Mahler Museum in Neenah. Evangeline Bergstrom bought her first antique paperweight out of the nostalgia she felt for a similar object that her grandmother owned. Her collection grew to more than 200 weights, which were displayed alternately in museums like the Art Institute of Chicago and the Neville Public Museum. When Evangeline died in 1959, she left her collection and home to the city of Appleton, and the museum was born.
The Appleton Fire Department sure has come a long way since its inception in 1854, when fire wardens were responsible for garnering volunteers any time they needed to put out a fire. In its early years, the fire department budgeted more than $800 to care for horses. Today the department operates six full-time career department districts with eight vehicles that respond to more than 3,000 calls each year—much more than the 89 calls that the department answered in 1895. Now that’s hot!
Apples? We ain’t got no apples. Contrary to the way it sounds, Appleton is not a town named for its fruit production. In fact, the city was known as Grand Chute until the construction of the local Lawrence College. The Methodist Reverend Reeder Smith, himself paramount in Lawrence College’s establishment, named the town in honor of Mr. Lawrence’s wife, Sarah Appleton. Later, Smith and Lawrence convinced Samuel Appleton, a wealthy Boston philanthropist, that the town was named for him in hope of receiving a donation for the college. They were successful, and Samuel donated $10,000 for the school’s library.
Before there were the Fox Cities, there was the fur trade. The Fox River played an important role as a channel for pioneers and fur traders alike. Today, the valley’s fur trading era is preserved in the Charles A. Grignon Mansion. Grignon built his mansion on the site of an early trading post as a gift to his Pennsylvania wife, Mary Meade. The mansion is staffed by costumed guides who transport visitors back to the time when Charles and his family lived there. Fur real!
Did you already know these facts about Appleton and the Fox Cities? Check out our round up of Green Bay trivia.

Participants in the Getting Word project recalled varied experiences with racial prejudice. For some, experiences with discrimination only motivated them to work harder to achieve their goals. For others, the Jim Crow system thwarted their efforts to receive a quality education and pursue their chosen career. Types of discrimination experienced ranged from segregated movie theaters and hostility from whites to relatives privileging lighter skinned children over those with dark complexions.
While growing up in Courtland, AL, Eliga Diggs was close with the white children who lived near him—“we were just like brothers”—but he recalls being segregated from them when they went into town together. When going to a movie, “They went downstairs. We went upstairs.” As a child, Diggs remembers not dwelling on discrimination, but realizing the injustice of the Jim Crow system as he got older. Once he began his own family, he was relieved that segregation had abated: “I'm glad my children did not have to grow up in that kind of atmosphere”
In his interview, Woodson descendant James Wiley recalled how prejudice stymied his father’s career as an engineer. “It was the American dream gone sour,” he remembered. James Wiley graduated from the University of Pittsburgh in 1940 with a degree in physics, hopeful that he could get a job as an engineer. He soon realized that, as with his father, racial discrimination precluded him from following this career path and turned instead another of his interests—aviation.
While logging flight training hours in Tallahassee, FL, Wiley experienced airplanes flown by African Americans “having all kinds of problems. Fuel leaks and things were coming apart on the airplanes. They were being sabotaged.” During a flight, Wiley saw fuel streaming out of his plane and ejected before the plane crashed. This terrifying experience left him more aware than ever that "there was a lot of Ku Klux Klan people around at that time."
Aside from overt and even violent racism from whites, Getting Word participants recalled color discrimination in their own communities, and even families. Lucille Balthazar remembered her grandmother giving preferential treatment to her blond, blue-eyed brother, Billy. “When we came to visit her she always asked ‘Billy, now what would you like Grandmother to cook for you?’ And she made the best fried apple pies that she would make for him or doughnuts or whatever he asked her to make she would make it.”
When Ann Medley was in elementary school, she experienced racial discrimination from both white and black children because of her light skin. “You’d get if from both ways,” she remembered. Medley’s daughter Patti Jo Harding experienced a similar type of discrimination: “The blacks don't like it because you're light skinned and the whites know you're black so you're just like stuck there.”
"They had a little place in the back for us"
Eliga Diggs describes how racial discrimination affected him growing up.

Below are the first 10 and last 10 pages of uncorrected machine-read text (when available) of this chapter, followed by the top 30 algorithmically extracted key phrases from the chapter as a whole.
Intended to provide our own search engines and external engines with highly rich, chapter-representative searchable text on the opening pages of each chapter. Because it is UNCORRECTED material, please consider the following text as a useful but insufficient proxy for the authoritative book pages.
Do not use for reproduction, copying, pasting, or reading; exclusively for search engines.
OCR for page 212
Desalination: A National Perspective 8 A Strategic Research Agenda for Desalination As noted in Chapter 3, desalination is likely to have a niche in the water management portfolio of the future, although the significance of this niche cannot be definitively determined at this time. The potential for desalination to meet anticipated water demands in the United States is not constrained by the source water resources or the capabilities of current technology, but instead it is constrained by financial, social, and environmental factors. Over the past 50 years the state of desalination technology has advanced substantially, and improvements in energy recovery and declining membrane material costs have made brackish water and seawater desalination a more reasonable option for some communities. However, desalination remains a higher-cost alternative for water supply in many communities, and concerns about potential environmental impacts continue to limit the application of desalination technology in the United States. For inland desalination facilities, there are few, if any, cost-effective environmentally sustainable concentrate management technologies. Meanwhile, as noted in Chapter 2, there is no integrated and strategic direction to current federal desalination research and development efforts to help address these concerns. In this chapter, long-term research goals are outlined for advancing desalination technology and improving the ability of desalination to address U.S. water supply needs. A strategic national research agenda is then presented to address these goals. This research agenda is broadly conceived and includes research that could be appropriately funded and conducted in either the public or private sectors. The committee recognizes that research cannot address all barriers to increased application of desalination technology in regions facing water scarcity concerns; therefore, practical implementation issues are discussed separately in Chapter 7. Recommendations related to implementing the proposed research agenda are also provided in this chapter.
OCR for page 213
Desalination: A National Perspective LONG-TERM RESEARCH GOALS Based on the committee’s analyses of the state of desalination technology, potential environmental impacts, desalination costs, and implementation issues in the United States (see Chapters 4-7), the committee developed two overarching long-term goals for further research in desalination: Understand the environmental impacts of desalination and develop approaches to minimize these impacts relative to other water supply alternatives, and Develop approaches to lower the financial costs of desalination so that it is an attractive option relative to other alternatives in locations where traditional sources of water are inadequate. Understanding the potential environmental impacts of desalination in both inland and coastal communities and developing approaches to mitigate these impacts relative to other alternatives are essential to the future of desalination in the United States. The environmental impacts of both source water intakes and concentrate discharge remain poorly understood. Although the impacts of coastal desalination are suspected to be less than those of other water supply alternatives, the uncertainty about potential site-specific impacts and their mitigation are large barriers to the application of coastal desalination in the United States. This uncertainty leads to stakeholder disagreements and a lengthy and costly planning and permitting process. For inland desalination, uncertainties remain about the sustainability of brackish groundwater resources and the environmental impacts from concentrate discharge to surface waters. Without rigorous scientific research to identify specific potential environmental impacts (or a lack of impacts), planners cannot assess the feasibility of desalination at a site or determine what additional mitigation steps are needed. Once potential impacts are clearly understood, research can be focused on developing approaches to minimize these impacts. The second goal focuses on the cost of desalination relative to the cost of other water supply alternatives. At present, costs are already low enough to make desalination an attractive option for some communities, especially where concentrate management costs are modest. In fact, desalination plants are being studied or implemented in at least 30 municipalities nationwide (GWI, 2007). The economic costs of desalination, however, as well as the costs of water supply alternatives, are locally variable. Costs are influenced by factors such as source water quality, siting considerations, potential environmental impacts, local regulations and permitting requirements, and available concentrate management op-
OCR for page 214
Desalination: A National Perspective tions. Desalination remains a higher-cost alternative for many locations, and increasing awareness of potential environmental impacts is raising the costs of permitting and intake and outfall configurations in the United States. Inland communities considering brackish groundwater desalination may soon face more restrictions on surface water discharge and, therefore, will have fewer low-cost alternatives for concentrate management. Meanwhile, the future costs of energy are uncertain. If the total costs of desalination (including environmental costs) were reduced relative to other alternatives, desalination technology would become an attractive alternative to help address local water supply needs. STRATEGIC DESALINATION RESEARCH AGENDA The committee identified research topics as part of a strategic agenda to address the two long-term research goals articulated earlier. This agenda is driven by determination of what is necessary to make desalination a competitive option among other water supply alternatives. The agenda is broadly conceived, including research topics of clear interest to the public sector—and therefore of interest for federal funding—and research that might be most appropriately funded by private industry. The suggested research areas are described in detail below and are summarized in Box 8-1. Specific recommendations on the roles of federal and nonfederal organizations in funding the agenda are described in an upcoming section. BOX 8-1 Priority Research Areas The committee has identified priority research areas to help make desalination a competitive option among water supply alternatives for communities facing water shortages. These research areas, which are described in more detail in the body of the chapter, are summarized here. The highest priority topics are shown in bold. Some of this research may be most appropriately supported by the private sector. The research topics for which the federal government should have an interest—where the benefits are widespread and where no private-sector entities are willing to make the investments and assume the risk—are marked with asterisks. GOAL 1. Understand the environmental impacts of desalination and develop approaches to minimize these impacts relative to other water supply alternatives Assess environmental impacts of desalination intake and concentrate management approaches**
OCR for page 215
Desalination: A National Perspective Conduct field studies to assess environmental impacts of brackish groundwater development** Develop protocols and conduct field studies to assess the impacts of concentrate management approaches in inland and coastal settings** Develop laboratory protocols for long-term toxicity testing of whole effluent to assess long-term impacts of concentrate on aquatic life** Assess the environmental fate and bioaccumulation potential of desalination-related contaminants** Develop improved intake methods at coastal facilities to minimize impingement of larger organisms and entrainment of smaller ones** Assess the quantity and distribution of brackish water resources nationwide** Analyze the human health impacts of boron, considering other sources of boron exposure, to expedite water-quality guidance for desalination process design** GOAL 2. Develop approaches to lower the financial costs of desalination so that it is an attractive option relative to other alternatives in locations where traditional sources of water are inadequate Improve pretreatment for membrane desalination Develop more robust, cost-effective pretreatment processes Reduce chemical requirements for pretreatment Improve membrane system performance Develop high-permeability, fouling-resistant, high-rejection, oxidant-resistant membranes Optimize membrane system design Develop lower-cost, corrosion-resistant materials of construction Develop ion-selective processes for brackish water Develop hybrid desalination processes to increase recovery Improve existing desalination approaches to reduce primary energy use Develop improved energy recovery technologies and techniques for desalination Research configurations and applications for desalination to utilize low-grade or waste heat** Understand the impact of energy pricing on desalination technology over time** Investigate approaches for integrating renewable energy with desalination** Develop novel approaches or processes to desalinate water in a way that reduces primary energy use** GOAL 1 and 2 Crosscuts Develop cost-effective approaches for concentrate management that minimize potential environmental impacts**
OCR for page 216
Desalination: A National Perspective Research on Environmental Impacts The following research topics address Goal 1 to understand the environmental impacts of desalination and develop approaches to minimize those impacts relative to other water supply alternatives. Assess environmental impacts of desalination intake and concentrate management approaches As discussed in Chapter 5, the environmental impacts of desalination source water intake and concentrate management approaches are not well understood. Source water intakes for coastal desalination can create entrainment concerns with small organisms and impingement issues for larger organisms. For inland groundwater desalination, there are potential concerns regarding overpumping, water quality changes, and subsidence. The possible environmental impacts of concentrate management approaches range from effects on aquatic life in surface water discharges to the contamination of drinking water aquifers in poorly designed injection wells or ponds. Both site-specific studies and broad analyses of relative impacts would help communities weigh the alternatives for meeting water supply needs. The specific research needs are described as follows. 1a. Conduct field studies to assess environmental impacts of seawater intakes. Measurements and modeling of the extent of mortality of aquatic or marine organisms due to impingement and entrainment are needed. There have been numerous studies on such impacts of power plants, and extrapolation of such effects to desalination facilities should be performed. 1b. Conduct field studies to assess environmental impacts of brackish groundwater development. The general environmental interactions between wetlands, freshwater, and brackish aquifers for inland sources have not been documented under likely brackish water development scenarios. While site-specific evaluation of any location will be necessary for developing a brackish water resource, the lack of synthesized information is an impediment to the use of this resource for smaller communities with limited resources. 1c. Develop protocols and conduct field studies to assess the impacts of concentrate management approaches in inland and coastal settings. Comprehensive studies analyzing impacts of concentrate discharge at marine, estuarine, and inland desalination locations are needed.
OCR for page 217
Desalination: A National Perspective Adequate site-specific baseline studies on potential biological and ecological effects are necessary prior to the development of desalination facilities because biological communities in different geographic areas will have differential sensitivity, but a comprehensive synthesis would be valuable once several in-depth studies have been conducted. Protocols should be developed to define the baseline and operational monitoring, reference sites, lengths of transects, and sampling frequencies. Planners would benefit from clear guidance on appropriate monitoring and assessment protocols. Environmental data should be collected for at least 1 year in the area of the proposed facility before a desalination plant with surface water concentrate discharge comes online so that sufficient baseline data on the ecosystem are available with which to compare postoperating conditions. Once a plant is in operation, monitoring of the ecological communities (especially the benthic community) receiving the concentrate should be performed periodically for at least 2 years at multiple distances from the outflow pipe and compared to reference sites. For inland settings, additional regional hydrogeology research is needed on the distribution, thickness, and hydraulic properties of formations that could be used for disposal of concentrate via deep-well injection. Much information is already available about the potential for deep-well injection in states such as Florida and Texas, although suitable geologic conditions may exist in other states as well. Inventories of industrial and commercial brine-disposal wells and producing and abandoned oil fields should be synthesized and used to develop a suitable protocol for further hydrogeological investigations, as appropriate. This research would provide valuable assistance to small communities that typically do not have the resources available to support extensive hydrogeological investigations. 1d. Develop laboratory protocols for long-term toxicity testing of whole effluent to assess long-term impacts of concentrate on aquatic life. Standard acute toxicity tests as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are generally 96 hours in duration and use larval or juvenile stages of certain fish and invertebrate species with a series of effluent dilutions and a control. The end point is whether the test organisms survive or not. Chronic tests, according to EPA, are typically 7 days in duration when using larval stages of fish and invertebrate species, and the end points of the tests are sublethal, such as growth reduction. Typical chronic toxicity protocols were designed for testing municipal or industrial wastewater treatment plant effluent, which typically contains higher levels of toxic chemicals than the concentrate from desalination plants. To assess the impacts of desalination effluent, a protocol should be developed to analyze the longer-term effects (over whole life cycles) on organisms that live in the vicinity of desalination plants (as opposed
OCR for page 218
Desalination: A National Perspective to the standard species used in EPA-required toxicity testing). These laboratory-based tests should then be used to examine the impacts of whole effluent (and various dilutions) from different desalination plants on a variety of different taxa at numerous representative sites from key ecological regions. 1e. Assess the environmental fate and bioaccumulation potential of desalination-related contaminants. Desalination concentrate contains more than just salts and may include various chemicals that are used in pretreatment and membrane cleaning, antiscaling and antifoulant additives, and metals that may leach from corrosion. Some of these chemicals (e.g., antifoulants, copper leached from older thermal desalination plants) or chemical by-products (e.g., trihalomethanes produced as a result of pretreatment with chlorine) are likely to bioaccumulate in organisms. Investigations into the loading and environmental fate of desalination-related chemicals should be included in modeling and monitoring programs. The degree to which various chemicals biodegrade or accumulate in sediments should also be investigated. High priority should be given to polymer antiscalants, such as polycarbonic acids and polyphosphate, which may increase primary productivity. Corrosion-related metals and disinfection by-products should also be investigated. In conjunction with the field studies described earlier, representative species, preferably benthic infauna along the transects and from the reference (control) site, should be analyzed for bioaccumulative contaminants. Because little is known about the potential of some other desalination chemicals that can be discharged in concentrate to bioaccumulate (e.g., polyphosphate, polycarbonic acid, polyacrylic acid, polymaleic acid), research should be conducted into their toxicity and bioaccumulation potential. Develop improved intake methods at coastal facilities to minimize impingement of larger organisms and entrainment of smaller ones Although intake and screen technology is rapidly developing, continued research and development is needed in the area of seawater intakes to develop cost-effective approaches that minimize the impacts of impingement and entrainment for coastal desalination facilities. Current technology development has focused on subsurface intakes and advanced screens or curtains, and these recent developments should be assessed to determine the costs and benefits of the various approaches. Other innovative concepts could also be considered that might deter marine life from entering intakes.
OCR for page 219
Desalination: A National Perspective Assess the quantity and distribution of brackish water resources nationwide Sustainable development of inland brackish water resources requires maps and synthesized information on total dissolved solids of the groundwater, types of dominant solutes (e.g., NaCl, CaSO4), thickness, and depth to brackish water. The only national map of brackish water resources available (Feth, 1965; Figure 1-1) simply shows depth to saline water. Newer and better solute chemistry data collected over the past 40 years exist in the files of private, state, and federal offices but are not generally organized for use in brackish water resources investigations. Using the aforementioned information, basin analyses, analogous to the U.S. Geological Survey Regional Aquifer System Analysis program for freshwater, could be developed, emphasizing regions facing near-term water scarcity concerns. These brackish water resource investigations could also be conducted at the state level. The data, once synthesized, could be utilized for desalination planning as well as for other water resources and commercial development scenarios. Analyze the human health impacts of boron, considering other sources of boron exposure, to expedite water-quality guidance for desalination process design Typical single-pass reverse osmosis (RO) desalination processes do not remove all the boron in seawater; thus, boron can be found at milligram-per-liter levels in the finished water. Boron can be controlled through treatment optimization, but that treatment has an impact on the cost of desalination. A range of water quality levels (0.5 to 1.4 mg/L) have been proposed as protective of public health based on different assumptions in the calculations. Because of the low occurrence of boron in most groundwater and surface water, the EPA has decided not to develop a maximum contaminant level for boron and has encouraged affected states to issue guidance or regulations as appropriate (see Chapter 5). Additional analysis of existing boron toxicity data is needed, considering other possible sources of boron exposure in the United States, to support guidance for desalination process design that will be suitably protective of human health.
OCR for page 220
Desalination: A National Perspective Research to Lower the Costs of Desalination The following research topics address Goal 2 to develop approaches to lower the costs of desalination so that it is an attractive option relative to other alternatives in locations where traditional sources of water are inadequate. As a broadly conceived agenda, some of this research may be most appropriately supported by the private sector. The appropriate roles of governmental and nongovernmental entities to fund the research agenda are discussed later in the chapter. Improve pretreatment for membrane desalination Pretreatment is necessary to remove potential foulants from the source water, thereby ensuring sustainable operation of the RO membranes at high product water flux and salt rejection. Research to improve the pretreatment process is needed that would develop alternative, cost-effective approaches. 5a. Develop more robust, cost-effective pretreatment processes. Membrane fouling is one of the most problematic issues facing seawater desalination. Forms of fouling common with RO membranes are organic fouling, scaling, colloidal fouling, and biofouling. All forms of fouling are caused by interactions between the foulant and the membrane surface. Improved pretreatment that minimizes these interactions will reduce irreversible membrane fouling. Alteration of solution characteristics can improve the solubility of the foulants, preventing their precipitation or interaction with the membrane surface. Such alteration could be chemical, electrochemical, or physical in nature. Membranes such as microfiltration (MF) and ultrafiltration (UF) have several advantages over traditional pretreatment (e.g., conventional sand filtration) because they have a smaller footprint, are more efficient in removing smaller foulants, and provide a more stable influent to the RO membranes. Additional potential benefits of MF or UF pretreatment are increased flux, increased recovery, longer membrane life, and decreased cleaning frequency. More research is necessary in order to optimize the pretreatment membranes for more effective removal of foulants to the RO system, to reduce the fouling of the pretreatment membranes, and to improve configuration of the pretreatment membranes to maximize cost reduction. 5b. Reduce chemical requirements for pretreatment. Antiscalants, coagulants, and oxidants (such as chlorine) are common chemicals
OCR for page 221
Desalination: A National Perspective applied in the pretreatment steps for RO membranes. Although these chemicals are added to reduce fouling, they add to the operational costs, can reduce the operating life of membranes, and have to be disposed of properly or they can adversely impact aquatic life (see Chapter 5). Antiscalants may also enhance biofouling, so alternative formulations or approaches should be examined. Research is needed on alternative formulations or approaches (including membrane pretreatment) to reduce the chemical requirements of the pretreatment process, both to reduce overall cost and to decrease the environmental impacts of desalination. Improve membrane system performance Sustainable operation of the RO membranes at the designed product water flux and salt rejection is a key to the reduction of desalination process costs. In addition to effective pretreatment, research to optimize the sustained performance of the RO membrane system is needed. 6a. Develop high-permeability, fouling-resistant, high-rejection, oxidant-resistant membranes. New membrane designs could reduce the treatment costs of desalination by improving membrane permeability and salt rejection while increasing resistance to fouling and membrane oxidation. Current membrane research to reduce fouling includes altering the surface charge, increasing hydrophilicity, adding polymers as a barrier to fouling, and decreasing surface roughness. Oxidant-resistant membranes enable feedwater to maintain an oxidant residual that will reduce membrane fouling due to biological growth. Current state-of-the-art thin-film composite desalination membranes are polyamide based and therefore are vulnerable to damage by chlorine or other oxidants. Thus, when an oxidant such as chlorine is added to reduce biofouling, dechlorination is necessary to prevent structural damage. Additionally, trace concentrations of chlorine may be present in some feedwaters. Cellulose-derivative RO membranes have much higher chlorine tolerance; however, these membranes have a much lower permeability than thin-film composite membranes and operate under a narrower pH range. Therefore, there is a need to increase the oxidant tolerance of the higher-permeability membranes. Lower risk of premature membrane replacement equates to overall lower operating costs. Past efforts to synthesize RO membranes with high permeability often resulted in reduced rejection and selectivity. There is a need to develop RO membranes with high permeability without sacrificing selectivity or rejection efficiency. Recent research on utilizing nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes, as a separation barrier suggest the possibility
OCR for page 222
Desalination: A National Perspective of obtaining water fluxes much higher than that of traditional polymeric membranes. The development of membranes that are more resistant to degradation from exposure to cleaning chemicals will extend the useful life of a membrane module. The ability to clean membranes more frequently can also decrease energy usage because membrane fouling results in higher differential pressure loss through the modules. By extending the life of membrane modules, the operating and maintenance cost will be reduced by the associated reduction in membrane replacements required. 6b. Optimize membrane system design. With the development of high-flux membranes and larger-diameter membrane modules, new approaches for optimal RO system design are needed to avoid operation under thermodynamic restriction (see Chapter 4) and to ensure equal distribution of flux between the leading and tail elements of the RO system. The key variables for the system design will involve the choice of optimal pressure, the number of stages, and number and size of membrane elements at each stage. An optimal system configuration may also involve hybrid designs where one type of membrane (e.g., intermediate flux, highly fouling-resistant) is used in the leading elements followed by high-flux membranes in the subsequent elements. Fouling can be mitigated by maintaining high crossflow velocity; thus, fouling-resistant membranes may be better served in the downstream positions where lower crossflow velocity is incurred. Thus, additional engineering research on membrane system design is needed to optimize performance with the objective of reducing costs. 6c. Develop lower-cost, corrosion-resistant materials of construction. The duration of equipment life in a desalination plant directly relates to the total costs of the project. Saline and brackish water plants are considered to be a corrosive environment due to the high levels of salts in the raw water. The development and utilization of corrosion-resistant materials will minimize the frequency of equipment or appurtenance replacement, which can significantly reduce the total project costs. 6d. Develop ion-selective processes for brackish water. Some slightly brackish waters could be made potable simply though specific removal of certain contaminants, such as nitrate or arsenite, while removing other ions such as sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate at a lower rate. High removal rates of all salts are not necessary for such waters. Ion-specific separation processes, such as an ion-selective membrane or a selective ion-exchange resin, should be able to produce potable water at much lower energy costs than those processes that fully desalinate the
OCR for page 223
Desalination: A National Perspective source water. Ion-selective removal would also create fewer waste materials requiring disposal. Ion-selective processes would be useful for mildly brackish groundwater sources with high levels of nitrate, uranium, radium, or arsenic. Such an ion-selective process could also be used to optimize boron removal following RO desalination of seawater. 6e. Develop hybrid desalination processes to increase recovery. Overall product water recovery in a desalination plant can be increased through the serial application of more than one desalination process. For example, an RO process could be preceded by a “tight” nanofiltration process, allowing the RO to operate at a higher recovery than it could with less aggressive pretreatment. Other options could be devised, including hybrid thermal and membrane processes to increase the overall recovery of the process. As noted in Chapter 4, the possible hybrid combinations of desalination processes are limited only by ingenuity and identification of economically viable applications. Hybridization also offers opportunities for reducing desalination production costs and expanding the flexibility of operations, especially when co-located with power plants, but hybridization also increases plant complexity and raises challenges in operation and automation. Improve existing desalination approaches to reduce primary energy use Energy is one of the largest annual costs in the desalination process. Thus, research to improve the energy efficiency of desalination technologies could make a significant contribution to reducing costs. 7a. Develop improved energy recovery technologies and techniques for desalination. Membrane desalination is an energy-intensive process compared to treatment of freshwater sources. Modern energy recovery devices operate at up to 96 percent energy recovery (see Chapter 4), although these efficiencies are lower at average operating conditions. The energy recovery method in most common use today is the energy recovery (or Pelton) turbine, which achieves about 87 percent efficiency. Many modern plants still use Pelton wheels because of the higher capital cost of isobaric devices. Thus, opportunities exist to improve recovery of energy from the desalination concentrate over a wide operating range and reduce overall energy costs. 7b. Research configurations and applications for desalination to utilize low-grade or waste heat. Industrial processes that produce waste or low-grade heat may offer opportunities to lower the operating cost of
OCR for page 224
Desalination: A National Perspective the desalination process if these heat sources are co-located with desalination facilities (see Box 4-8). Low-grade heat can be used as an energy source for desalination via commercially available thermal desalination processes. Hybrid membrane-thermal desalination approaches offer additional operational flexibility and opportunities for water-production cost savings. Research is needed to examine configurations and applications of current technologies to utilize low-grade or waste heat for desalination. 7c. Understand the impact of energy pricing on existing desalination technology over time. Energy is one of the largest components of cost for desalination, and future changes in energy pricing could significantly affect the affordability of desalination. Research is needed to examine to what extent the economic and financial feasibility of desalination may be threatened by the uncertain prospect of energy price increases in the future for typical desalination plants in the United States. This research should also examine the costs and benefits of capital investments in renewable energy sources. 7d. Investigate approaches for integrating renewable energy with desalination. Renewable energy sources could help mitigate future increases in energy costs by providing a means to stabilize energy costs for desalination facilities while also reducing the environmental impacts of water production. Research is needed to optimize the potential for coupling various renewable energy applications with desalination. Develop novel approaches or processes to desalinate water in a way that reduces primary energy use Because the energy of RO is only twice the minimum energy of desalination, even novel technologies are unlikely to create step change (>25 percent) reductions in absolute energy consumption compared to the best current technology (see, e.g., Appendix A). Instead, substantial reductions in the energy costs of desalination are more likely to come through the development of novel approaches or processes that optimize the use of low-grade heat. Several innovative desalination technologies that are the focus of ongoing research, such as forward osmosis, dewvaporation, and membrane distillation, have the capacity to use low-grade heat as an energy source. Research into the specific incorporation of waste or low-grade heat into these or other innovative processes could greatly reduce the amount of primary energy required for desalination and, thus, overall desalination costs.
OCR for page 225
Desalination: A National Perspective Crosscutting Research Research topics in this category benefit both Goal 1, for environmental impacts, and Goal 2, for lowering the cost of desalination. Develop cost-effective approaches for concentrate management that minimize potential environmental impacts Research objectives related to concentrate management are crosscutting, because they address both the need to understand and minimize environmental impacts and the need to reduce the total cost of desalination. For coastal concentrate management, research is needed to develop improved diffuser technologies and subsurface injection approaches and to examine their costs and benefits relative to current disposal alternatives. The high cost of inland concentrate management inhibits inland brackish water desalination. Low- to moderate-cost concentrate management alternatives (i.e., subsurface injection, land application, sewer discharge, and surface water discharge) can be limited by the salinity of the concentrate and by location and climate factors; in some scenarios all of these options may be restricted by site-specific conditions, leaving zero liquid discharge (ZLD) as the only alternative for consideration. ZLD options currently include evaporation ponds and energy-intensive processes, such as brine concentrators or crystallizers, followed by landfilling. These options have high capital or operating costs. Research to improve recovery in the desalination process and thereby minimize the initial volume of concentrate could enhance the practical viability of several concentrate management options for inland desalination. This is particularly true for the concentrate management options that are characterized by high costs per unit volume of the concentrate flow treated and for approaches that are not applicable to large concentrate flows, such as thermal evaporation or evaporation ponds. Advancements are also needed that reduce the capital costs and improve the energy efficiency of thermal evaporation processes. Conventional concentrate management options that involve simple equipment are not likely to see significant cost reductions through additional research. The reuse of high-salinity concentrates and minerals extracted from them should be further explored and developed to help mitigate environmental impacts while generating revenues that can help offset concentrate management costs. Possibilities include selective precipitation of marketable salts, irrigation of salt-tolerant crops, supplements for animal dietary needs, dust suppressants, stabilizers for road base construction, or manufacture of lightweight fire-proof building materials. Studies are
OCR for page 226
Desalination: A National Perspective necessary to determine the most feasible uses and to develop ways to prepare the appropriate product for various types of reuse. For all possible uses, site-specific limitations and local and state regulations will need to be considered. Because the transportation costs greatly affect the economics of reuse, a market analysis would also be needed to identify areas in the United States that could reasonably utilize products from desalination concentrate. Highest Priority Research Topics All of the topics identified are considered important, although three topics (1, 2, and 9 above) were deemed to be the highest priority research topics: (1) assessing the environmental impacts of desalination intake and concentrate management approaches, (2) developing improved intake methods to minimize impingement and entrainment, and (3) developing cost-effective approaches for concentrate management that minimize environmental impacts. These three research areas are considered the highest priorities because this research can help address the largest barriers (or showstoppers) to more widespread use of desalination in the United States. Uncertainties about potential environmental impacts will need to be resolved and cost-effective mitigation approaches developed if desalination is to be more widely accepted. Research to develop cost-effective approaches for concentrate management is critical to enable more widespread use of desalination technologies for inland communities. As noted in Chapter 4, the cost of concentrate management can double or triple the cost of the desalination for some inland communities. Research may also reduce the costs of desalination. Any cost improvement will help make desalination an attractive option for communities addressing water shortages. However, the committee does not view these process cost issues as the major limitation to the application of desalination in the United States today. IMPLEMENTING THE RESEARCH AGENDA In the previous section, the committee proposed a broad research agenda that, if implemented, should improve the capacity of desalination to meet future water needs in the United States by further examining and addressing its environmental impacts and reducing its costs relative to other water supply alternatives. Implementing this agenda requires federal leadership, but its success depends on participation from a range of entities, including federal, state, and local governments, nonprofit or-
OCR for page 227
Desalination: A National Perspective ganizations, and the private sector. A strategy for implementing the research agenda is suggested in the following section. This section also includes suggestions for funding the agenda and the appropriate roles of government and nongovernmental entities. Supporting the Desalination Research Agenda A federal role is appropriate for research that provides a “public good.” Specifically, the federal government should have an interest in funding research where the benefits are widespread but where no private-sector entities are willing to make the investment and assume the risks. Thus, for example, research that results in significant environmental benefits should be in the federal interest because these benefits are shared by the public at large and cannot be fully captured by any entrepreneur. Federal investment is also important where it has “national significance”—where the issues are of large-scale concern; they are more than locally, state-, or regionally specific; and the benefits accrue to a large swath of the public. Based on the aforementioned criteria, the proposed research agenda contains many topic items that should be in the federal interest (see topics marked with asterisks in Box 8-1). The research topics in support of Goal 1 (see Box 8-1) are directed at environmental issues that are largely “public good” issues. Some of the needed environmental research will, by nature, be site-specific, and purely site-specific research is not of great federal interest. Thus, there is a clear role for state and local agencies to support site-specific research. The federal government, however, should have an interest in partnering with local communities to conduct more extensive field research from which broader conclusions of environmental impacts can be drawn or which would significantly contribute to a broader meta-analysis. This meta-analysis could especially benefit small water supply systems. Also, there should be federal interest in establishing general protocols for field evaluations and chronic bioassays that could then be adapted for site-specific studies. The research needed to support the attainment of Goal 2 includes several topics that are clearly in the federal interest, as defined earlier. These include efforts to reduce prime energy use, to integrate renewable energy resources within the total energy picture and increase reliance upon them, and to understand the impacts of energy pricing on the future of desalination (see highlighted topics in Box 8-1). However, Goal 2 also includes a number of research topics that may be more appropriately funded by the private sector or nongovernmental organizations, assuming that these entities are willing to assume the risks of the research investment. Indeed, private industry already spends far more on research and
OCR for page 228
Desalination: A National Perspective development for desalination than the federal government (see Chapter 2) and is already making substantial progress in the improvement of existing membrane performance, developing better pretreatment alternatives, and developing improved energy recovery devices. To avoid duplication and to optimize available research funding, government programs should focus instead on research and development with widespread possible benefits that would otherwise go unfunded because private industry is unwilling to make the investment. Finally, the crosscutting topic to develop cost-effective methods of managing concentrates for inland communities, which impacts Goals 1 and 2, is also in the federal interest. Federal Research Funding The optimal level of federal investment in desalination research is inherently a question of public policy. Although the decision should be informed by science, it is not—at its heart—a scientific decision. However, several conclusions emerged from the committee’s analysis of current research and development funding (see Chapter 2) that suggest the importance of strategic integration of the research program. The committee concluded that there is no integrated and strategic direction to the federal desalination research and development efforts. Continuation of a federal program of research dominated by congressional earmarks and beset by competition between funding for research and funding for construction will not serve the nation well and will require the expenditure of more funds than necessary to achieve specified goals. To ensure that future federal investments in desalination research are integrated and prioritized so as to address the two major goals identified in this report, the federal government will need to develop a coordinated strategic plan that utilizes the recommendations of this report as a basis. It is beyond the committee’s scope to recommend specific plans for improving coordination among the many federal agencies that support desalination research. Instead, responsibility for developing the plan should rest with the Office of Science and Technology Policy’s (OSTP’s) National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) because “this Cabinet-level Council is the principal means within the executive branch to coordinate science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the Federal research and development enterprise.”1 For example, the NSTC’s Subcommittee on Water Availability and Quality has member-ship representing more than 20 federal agencies and recently released “A Strategy for Federal Science and Technology to Support Water Avail- 1 For more information, see http://www.ostp.gov/nstc/index.html.
OCR for page 229
Desalination: A National Perspective ability and Quality in the United States” (SWAQ, 2007). Representatives of the National Science Foundation, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, the Office of Naval Research, and the Department of Energy should participate fully in the development of the strategic federal plan for desalination research and development. Five years into the implementation of this plan, the OSTP should evaluate the status of the plan, whether goals have been met, and the need for further funding. A coordinated strategic plan governing desalination research at the federal level along with effective implementation of the research plan will be the major determinants of federal research productivity in this endeavor. The committee cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance of a well-organized, well-articulated strategically directed effort. In the absence of any or all of these preconditions, federal investment will yield less than it could. Therefore, a well-developed and clearly articulated strategic research plan, as called for above, should be a precondition for any new federal appropriations. Initial federal appropriations on the order of recent spending on desalination research (total appropriations of about $25 million annually, as in fiscal years 2005 and 2006) should be sufficient to make good progress toward the overall research goals if the funding is strategically directed toward the proposed research topics as recommended in this report. Annual federal appropriations of $25 million, properly allocated, should be sufficient to have an impact in the identified priority research areas, given the context of expected state and private-sector funding. This level of federal funding is also consistent with NRC (2004a), which recommended annual appropriations of $700 million for research supporting the nation’s entire water resources research agenda. Reallocation of current spending will be necessary to address topics that are currently underfunded. If current research funding is not reallocated, the overall desalination research and development budget will need to be enhanced. Nevertheless, support for the research agenda stated here should not come at the expense of other high-priority water resource research topics, such as those identified in Confronting the Nation’s Water Problems: The Role of Research (NRC, 2004a). Environmental research should be emphasized up front in the research agenda. At least 50 percent of the federal funding for desalination research should initially be directed toward environmental research. Environmental research, including Goal 1 and the Goal 1 and 2 crosscuts, should be addressed, because these have the potential for the greatest impact in overcoming current roadblocks for desalination and making desalination an attractive water supply alternative. Research funding in support of Goal 2 should be directed strategically toward research topics that are likely to make improvements against benchmarks set by the best
OCR for page 230
Desalination: A National Perspective current technologies for desalination. The best available technologies for desalination at the time of this writing are benchmarked in Chapter 4. Research proposals should make the case as to how and to what degree the proposed research can advance the state of the art in desalination. An emphasis should be placed on energy benchmarks because reductions in energy result in overall cost savings and have environmental benefits. The majority of the federal funding directed toward Goal 2 should support projects that are in the public interest and would not otherwise be privately funded (see Box 8-1), such as some high-risk and long-term research initiatives (e.g., developing novel desalination processes that sharply reduce the primary energy use). Although private industry does make modest investments in high-risk research, it is frequently reluctant to invest in research in the earliest stage of technology creation, when there is extremely low likelihood of success even though there are large potential benefits. The effectiveness with which federal funds are spent will also depend on certain critical implementation steps, which are outlined in the following section. Proposal Announcement and Selection Based on available funding, the opportunity to announce requests for proposals exists for federal agencies, such as the Bureau of Reclamation or the National Science Foundation, or other research institutions that explicitly target one or more research objectives. The principal funding agency should announce a request for proposals as widely as possible to scientists and engineers in municipal and federal government, academia, and private industry. At present, the desalination community is relatively small, but collectively there is a great deal of expertise across the world. International desalination experts and others from related areas of research should be encouraged and given the opportunity to offer innovative research ideas that have the potential to significantly advance the field. Thus, the request for proposals should extend to federal agencies, national laboratories, other research institutions, utilities, and the private sector. Since innovation cannot be preassigned, broad solicitations for proposals should include a provision for unsolicited investigator-initiated research proposals. To achieve the objectives of the research agenda, proposals should be selected through a rigorous independent peer-review process (NRC, 2002b) irrespective of the agency issuing the request for proposals. A rotating panel of independent, qualified reviewers should be appointed based on their relevant expertise in the focal areas. The process should
OCR for page 231
Desalination: A National Perspective allow for the consideration and review of unsolicited proposals, as long as their research goals meet the overall research goals. Proposal funding should be based on the quality of the proposed work, the degree to which the proposed research can advance the state of the art in desalination or otherwise contribute toward the research goals, prior evidence of successful research, and the potential for effective publication or dissemination of the research findings. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS A strategic national research agenda has been conceived that centers around two overarching strategic goals for further research in desalination: (1) to understand the environmental impacts of desalination and develop approaches to minimize these impacts relative to other water supply alternatives and (2) to develop approaches to lower the financial costs of desalination so that it is an attractive option relative to other alternatives in locations where traditional sources of water are inadequate. A research agenda is proposed in this chapter in support of these two goals (see Box 8-1). Several recommendations for implementing the proposed research agenda follow. A coordinated strategic plan should be developed to ensure that future federal investments in desalination research are integrated and prioritized and address the two major goals identified in this report. The strategic application of federal funding for desalination research can advance the implementation of desalination technologies in areas where traditional sources of water are inadequate. Responsibility for developing the plan should rest with the OSTP, which should use the recommendations of this report as a basis for plan development. Initial federal appropriations on the order of recent spending on desalination research (total appropriations of about $25 million annually) should be sufficient to make good progress toward these goals, when complemented by ongoing nonfederal and private-sector desalination research, if the funding is directed toward the proposed research topics as recommended in this chapter. Reallocation of current federal spending will be necessary to address currently underfunded topics. If current federal research and development funding is not reallocated, new appropriations will be necessary. However, support for the research agenda stated here should not come at the expense of other high-priority water resource research topics. Five years into the implementation of this plan, the OSTP should evaluate the status of the plan, whether goals have been met, and the need for further funding.
OCR for page 232
Desalination: A National Perspective Environmental research should be emphasized up front when implementing the research agenda. Uncertainties regarding environmental impacts and ways to mitigate these impacts are one of the largest hurdles to implementation of desalination in the United States, and research in these areas has the greatest potential for enabling desalination to help meet future water needs in communities facing water shortages. This environmental research includes work to understand environmental impacts of desalination intakes and concentrate management, the development of improved intake methods to minimize impingement and entrainment, and cost-effective concentrate management technologies. Research funding in support of reducing the costs of desalination (Goal 2) should be directed strategically toward research topics that are likely to make improvements against benchmarks set by the best current technologies for desalination. Because the private sector is already making impressive strides toward Goal 2, federal research funding should emphasize the long-term and high-risk research that may not be attempted by the private sector and that is in the public interest, such as research on novel technologies that significantly reduce prime energy use. Wide dissemination of requests for proposals to meet the goals of the research agenda will benefit the quality of research achieved. Requests for proposals should extend to federal agencies, national laboratories, research institutions, utilities, other countries, and the private sector. Investigator-driven research through unsolicited proposals should be permitted throughout the proposal process. Proposals should be peer-reviewed and based on quality of research proposed, the potential contribution, prior evidence of successful research, and effective dissemination.

Water is driven to find the shortest and quickest course from source to mouth and the Mississippi River is no exception. The river is fighting against modern engineering as it continues to crest. If it were allowed to flow freely, New Orlean's Atchafalaya River would capture the main flow of the Mississippi. However, thanks to a feat of modern engineering, the great river is forced to follow its current path through Baton Rouge and New Orleans. Some researchers believe the likelihood of major flooding increases each year due to this tension between water and engineering.
Craig Colten is Carl O. Sauer professor of Geography at Louisiana State University and author of "An Unnatural Metropolis: Wresting New Orleans from Nature."

Florida, in the United States of America. It includes a widely diverse area from quiet, unpopulated central areas with "Old Florida" feel to vibrant resort cities.
The climate of South Florida, due to its situation just above the Tropic of Cancer, is subtropical. During most of the year, there is substantial warmth and humidity, due to the common rainfall in the area. However, winter is much drier, and is prone to cold snaps that could bring the temperature as low as the 20sF. In the wintertime, weather is generally around 75F and nights are around 57F, with low humidity, and occasional very cold temperatures (as mentioned above) that kills tropical foliage, like coconut palms, and animals. The water temperature at this time is about 70F. Spring sees higher humidity and some more rain, with temperatures around 80F and nighttime lows in the 60s, with water temperatures of 75F. Summer is the most humid time of year due to frequent rainstorms, and sees temperatures around 90F, with water temperatures of 85F and nighttime lows of 80F. Fall has slightly less humidity, with water temperatures of around 80F, and similar weather to springtime ,though nights tend to be warmer, in the 70sF. However, fall is more likely to be affected by hurricanes and tropical storms, thus, still being pretty muggy.
Some of the major cities in South Florida are:
 Other destinations
South Florida has a subtropical wet-and-dry climate, which essentially means cold fronts from November through March are to be expected, and most of the year is warm and humid. The dry season begins in October and lasts through the third week in May, with famously mild winters. The hurricane season officially runs from June 1 through November 30, with the most likely time for South Florida to be hit being mid August through early October.
A wide variety of languages are commonly spoken throughout South Florida with increasing diversity near the major cities. The City of Miami for example has three official languages: English, Spanish, and Haitian Creole. English, however, dominates and is the preferred language in South Florida.
Even in areas where English is not the native language, most people will be bilingual in the other language (although generally not the other way around for native English speakers). The simplest way to get treated in English is to use the "approach rule." Most locals will respond only in the language they were summoned in unless they are not able to speak it. This rule can be used on anyone whether or not they were originally speaking Spanish, English, or any other language. In general the more south you go in South Florida (for instance, Miami-Dade), the more Spanish speakers there will be.
Occasionally, you may run into someone who is not fluent in English. If this happens, simply speak slowly and use only simple English. In a few places, especially near Miami, you may find someone that cannot speak any English. Even when encountering a local who does not speak English, one could easily find another local to help with translation if needed without much effort, since most of the population is fluently bilingual.
 Get in
 By plane
Miami International Airport, one of the busiest international airports in the world, is the main airport serving the Miami metropolitan area. Fort Lauderdale and Fort Myers, West Palm Beach, and Sarasota also have large airports.
 By train
Amtrak provides inter-city rail service through all the major cities in South Florida. Two trains provide daily service, starting in Miami, making stops in Hollywood, Fort Lauderdale, Deerfield Beach, and West Palm Beach, continuing north to Tampa, Orlando, Jacksonville, and eventually Washington D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, with both trains terminating at New York City's Penn Station. All of South Florida's Amtrak stations (except Miami) share platforms with the regional commuter rail service, Tri-Rail. The Miami Amtrak Station is located in the industrial suburb of Hialeah on NW 32nd Ave, just north of NW 72nd St.
 By boat
Coastal cities have excellent year-round marina facilities, often serving some of the largest and most luxurious yachts in the world. Miami is home to the Port of Miami, the largest cruise ship port in the world. Fort Lauderdale also has a cruise port.
 By bus
Greyhound, America's major inter-city bus service provider, has stations at all the major cities in South Florida. At the West Palm Beach and Miami North (Golden Glades) stations, direct connections are available to South Florida's commuter rail service, Tri-Rail. The Miami Greyhound station is located on Le Juene Road (NW 42nd Ave), directly across from Miami International Airport. Service continues further south from Miami, all the way to Key West at the end of US Route 1.
 By car
 Get around
Public transportation - Local public transportation includes Metrobus, Metromover, and Metrorail—an elevated rapid transit system—each operated by Miami-Dade Transit. There is also an commuter rail system named Tri-Rail, that runs north to south, from MIA all the way to West Palm Beach, making a stop at all three of the Gold Coast's international airports.
Hire a car to explore the unique countryside areas.
[add listing] See
[add listing] Do
[add listing] Eat
Enjoy such meals such as a Cuban dish of ropa vieja (shredded flank steak in a tomato sauce base), black beans, yellow rice, plantains and fried yuca with beer.
 Get out

A tip or gratuity is an amount of money that is given to a worker such as a waiter or
waitress who performs a service for you. A common tip amount is 15% of the cost of
the meal or other service. Generally a tip is determined based on the total bill
which includes the cost of the meal and sales tax.
If a meal costs $10.00 and sales tax is 5% the bill is $10.50. A 15% tip based
on the $10.50 cost would be $1.58. The total would be $10.50 + $1.58 = $12.08. In
the next lesson we will find how to quickly estimate the amount of a tip.

Nathan Lewis, Contributor
I write about monetary and tax policy for the 21st century.
For a number of years now, people have asked me whether I prefer a “flat tax” or a “fair tax.” Both are problematic.
The “flat tax” is typically conceived as a replacement for the existing personal income tax. This is fine, but it ignores the payroll tax, which is really just another form of income tax. So, it is only half of an income tax reform. In practice, quite a few countries have gone this route, beginning especially with Russia in 2001, and the results have been very good. These countries have generally replaced their income tax systems, but have kept what amounts to relatively high payroll taxes.
I would like to see a top-to-bottom income tax reform, which includes payroll taxes. Or, I should say, which does not include payroll taxes: I would like to see the payroll tax system eliminated entirely and integrated into a single income tax system. Neither Hong Kong nor Singapore, which are models of what can be achieved with a flat tax system (or nearly so in Singapore), have a payroll tax. The result is that taxation on the lowest incomes is very low, and the overall system has a high degree of progressivity despite modest top rates.
Hong Kong’s flat tax system, with no payroll or sales/VAT taxes, generates about 13% of GDP in revenue per year, with a top tax rate of 16%. This is quite good, and shows excellent efficiency and high compliance. However, 13% of GDP is still rather short of the 18.5% of GDP that the U.S. Federal tax system has generated over the past several decades. So, we would have to decide either to reduce spending considerably — which might be nice, but is a separate discussion — or generate more revenue somehow.
Now we come to the “Fair Tax,” a rather horrible name for a system which aims to generate all revenue from a single national VAT or sales tax. This would be equivalent to a 30% sales tax rate, as normally calculated (exclusive method).
There are a lot of positive things to be said about the Fair Tax, especially the elimination of the IRS and all of the intrusive bookkeeping involved with the income tax. By maximizing the taxation on consumption, we would be theoretically minimizing the taxation on investment, capital, and employment, with potentially excellent results.
The problems are that many states already have a sales tax (9.6% average rate in 2010), which means that the combined rate would either be 39.6% or that states would have to generate income by some other means. States also have income taxes, which presumably would be eliminated along with the federal income tax, thus generating another revenue issue.
We end up with a rather impressively high sales tax rate, which raises the question of tax evasion — the higher the rate, the greater the incentive for evasion — and also the problem of regressivity, putting the largest burdens on the lowest incomes.
I have argued in the past that conservatives should adopt the principle of progressivity as much as possible. The problem of “what to do with the poor” is as old as government itself. Instead of pretending the problem doesn’t exist, conservatives would do well to have their own, conservative-themed solution. Democrats promise government services and welfare, and we should recognize that that has had some success. So what should the conservative solution be? Even the most libertarian thinker can agree that, if you have no better solution – don’t take their money!
I conclude that the problem with the Fair Tax is much the same as the problem with the Flat Tax — by itself, it can’t generate enough revenue without becoming a caricature of the original principle.

This volume is an invaluable reference for all those engaged in the areas of genetics, dysmorphology, pediatrics, and internal medicine.
Dr Jones should be congratulated for perpetuating this great book initiated by one of the outstanding clinical geneticists, David Smith, MD, who may be considered the father of dysmorphology.
The fifth edition of this book has been expanded, with updated references and superb illustrations. Chapter 1 includes information about the following topics: chromosomal abnormalities, small stature, senile and overgrowth syndromes, brain and neuromuscular abnormality syndromes, facial and limb defects, camptomelic syndrome, craniosynostosis, storage disorders, connective tissue and hamartomatous syndromes, ectodermal dysplasias, syndromes due to environmental agents, miscellaneous syndromes, and sequences and associations. An alphabetical listing of syndromes is also included in this chapter. Chapter 2 contains approaches to the categorical problems of growth deficiency, mental deficiency, arthrogryposis, and ambiguous external genitalia. Chapter 3 provides information about morphogenesis and dysmorphogenesis. Chapter 4 addresses the topics of genetics, genetic counseling, and prevention. Chapter 5 stresses that minor anomalies can be clues to more serious problems; they can lead to the recognition of malformation syndromes. Chapter 6 contains information about normal standards. Finally, a 74-page appendix is devoted to patterns of malformations and the differential diagnosis of anomalies.

Updates and changes to codes and standards that affect the way you design and install telecommunications systems
Because bonding and grounding systems within a building are intended to have one electrical potential, coordination between electrical and telecommunications bonding and grounding systems is essential during design and installation. One way to coordinate these efforts is to follow industry-established codes and standards. But how do you know which ones to follow? This article presents a brief history and overview of the relevant codes and standards you should be familiar with as well as discusses recent developments that affect all designers and installers.
Of course, the first relevant code is the National Electrical Code (NEC), which addresses bonding and grounding as minimum requirements for life safety. While ensuring public safety is the highest priority, the industry began to realize in the late 1980s and early 1990s that the electrical grounding requirements, while protecting end-users, were not protecting the end-user’s expensive electronic (IT) equipment.
The industry addressed this concern by developing standards. While similar to a code, which is adopted by local states and municipalities into law, the use of a standard is voluntary. However, it may become a requirement for any given project, if the owner or designer/engineer lists it as such in the construction documents.
One of the first standards to address bonding and grounding was IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems (the Green Book) when Chapter 5 was added in the 1991 edition – Electronic Equipment Grounding. This addition primarily featured improved bonding and grounding practices for the power systems serving information technology (IT) equipment.
The IEEE followed up with IEEE Standard 1100, Recommended Practice for Powering and Grounding Electronic Equipment (the Emerald Book) in 1992. IEEE 1100 expanded on the Green Book, explaining the issues with poor power quality, lightning, and other surges and different ground potentials on metallic data cabling.
In 1994, the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) published ANSI/TIA/EIA-607, Commercial Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications, which established the need for a dedicated telecommunications grounding and bonding system (see Main Components of a Telecommunications Grounding and Bonding System on page C27). This standard specified requirements for a ground reference (ground busbar) in each telecommunications space, including the telecommunications entrance room(s), telecommunications closets, and IT equipment rooms. It also established the bonding of telecommunications system pathways within the telecommunications spaces to the ground reference.
The ANSI/TIA/EIA standard was revised in 2002 to become ANSI-J-STD-607-A, Commercial Building Grounding (Earthing) and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications. The standard was developed jointly by TIA/EIA Working Group 41.7.2 in close coordination with the Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) T1E1.5 and T1E1.7. The term “earthing” was used as the internationally accepted term for “grounding.” The major changes from ANSI/TIA/EIA-607 were greater grounding busbar detail, the addition of tower and antenna bonding and grounding recommendations, work area and personal operator-type equipment position grounding and bonding recommendations, and harmonized international terminology (although terminology from the NEC was retained). Nevertheless, the standard only addressed the connections from the electrical ground to the busbar in each telecommunications space — the connection from the busbar to the equipment was still missing.
One of the glaring omissions from the standard was ensuring a quality installation. To address this issue, NECA and BICSI developed a joint standard, ANSI/NECA/BICSI-607, Standard for Telecommunications Bonding and Grounding Planning and Installation Methods for Commercial Buildings. Published in 2011, this standard provides limited planning information, but excels in eliciting installation requirements. For example, it clearly states how to ensure a bond to the busbar by using an antioxidant compound to the connection point using compression 2-hole lugs. From a planning perspective, the standard specifies bonding to a telecommunications rack and includes bonding and grounding information for data centers. However, one of the drawbacks is it was based upon ANSI-J-STD-607-A while the updated ANSI/TIA-607-B standard was in development and nearing publication.
ANSI/TIA-607-B, Generic Telecommunications Bonding and Grounding (Earthing) for Customer Premises is by far the most encompassing telecommunications standard for bonding and grounding. Its requirements are for “generic” premises rather than for just a commercial building, and its purpose is to enable and encourage the planning, design, and installation of generic telecommunications bonding and grounding systems within premises. This is to address the basic grounding and bonding requirements without prior knowledge of the specific telecommunication or IT system that will be installed. While primarily intended to provide direction for the design of new buildings, this standard may be used for existing building renovations or retrofits. Design requirements and choices are provided to enable the designer to make informed design decisions.
The ANSI/TIA-607-B standard covers regulatory requirements, an overview of a bonding and grounding system, the components involved, and design requirements. Additionally, performance and test requirements are covered, although simplistically. The TR-42.16 Subcommittee recognized this shortfall, and is already developing an addendum to this standard on:
- soil resistivity testing using a 4-point method,
- grounding electrode system design,
- grounding electrode system resistance testing including the fall of potential method and use of the clamp-on test meter.
Through these updates, there have been many changes to the components of a telecommunications bonding and grounding system. Busbar requirements were modified to be made of copper or copper alloys having a minimum of 95% conductivity when annealed, as specified by the International Annealed Copper Standard (IACS). While some manufacturers are offering a less expensive product made of other metals, copper is still the preferred material. Regardless of the material, the busbars must still be listed, and the dimensions of the telecommunications main grounding busbar (TMGB) and the telecommunications grounding busbar (TGB) have not changed. As for the connectors to these busbars, the surface of all bonding and grounding connectors used on a TMGB and TGB shall be of a material that provides an electrochemical potential of less than 300mV between connector and grounding busbar. Essentially, with these requirements, the standard is ensuring a well-performing bonding and grounding system.
Conductor sizing is still 2kcmil per linear foot of conductor length, but the maximum size is now 750kcmil (Table). The previous edition of this standard sized the TBB conductor up to 3/0 AWG. The standard also states that the grounding conductors shall not decrease in size as the grounding path moves closer to earth, and the size of the conductor is not intended to account for the reduction or control of electromagnetic interference (EMI). The sizing of this conductor affects the:
- BCT (bonding conductor for telecommunications)
- TBB (telecommunications bonding backbone)
- GE (ground equalizer)
- Supplementary bonding network (found in computer rooms)
- TEBC (telecommunications equipment bonding conductor)
- UBC (unit bonding conductor)
Design requirements for this standard include the entire system from the entrance point to the equipment in the rack within the telecommunications room. It also specifies that ANSI/NECA/BICSI-607 is to be used for bonding and grounding installation information. In order to limit the potential difference between telecommunications conduits or between telecommunications conduits and power conduits, the standard specifies that the telecommunications conduits shall be bonded to the TMGB/TGB.
Additionally, to achieve the objectives of potential equalization, ensure that cable runway/ladder sections are bonded together to the TMGB/TGB. When the electric panelboard serving that telecommunications room is located in the same room or space as the TMGB/TGB, that panelboard’s alternating current equipment ground (ACEG) bus (when equipped) or the panelboard enclosure shall be bonded to the TMGB/TGB. A qualified electrician should install this bond.
Informative annexes included with this standard have information on grounding electrodes, towers and antennas, telecommunications electrical protection, electrical protection for operator-type equipment positions, and a cross reference of more commonly used terms.
For a designer of telecommunications bonding and grounding systems, the ANSI/TIA-607-B standard is the most encompassing standard to follow for premises buildings. Although there are many other guides (see Resources at a Glance below), standards are developed so that a consensus must be reached among industry expert volunteers. Although best practices may have valuable information, they typically have not been vetted among a large subset of industry experts.
What does this mean for the electrical contractor? For anyone with a telecom division, it’s important to stay current on the telecommunications grounding standards. A well-designed system would include a telecommunications grounding detail and riser diagram (click here to see Figure), and specifications would list the most recent edition of the applicable standards.
For drawings and specifications that are silent — or that may reference outdated standards or conflicting guidelines — the contractor should ask the design team for clarification (during the bid window, if possible) as to what sizing to follow for the TBB, because a change in conductor size may greatly affect cost.
For electrical contractors subcontracting out the telecommunications work, the demarcation point for work between electrical and telecommunications contractors should be carefully coordinated. A recommended practice is for the electrical contractor to provide the grounding conductor and connection from the main electrical ground to the TMGB, as well as from an electrical panel in a telecommunications room to the grounding busbar in that room. The telecommunications contractor would then provide all of the grounding busbars and bonding conductors within and between the telecommunications rooms, as well as make all final connections to the TMGB, TGBs, and telecommunications infrastructure/equipment.
Peterworth works in the Information Technology Services - Networking & Telecommunications department at the University of Texas at Austin in Austin, Texas. He can be reached at: firstname.lastname@example.org.
SIDEBAR: Main Components of a Telecommunication Grounding and Bonding System
The Telecommunications Main Grounding Busbar (TMGB) is typically located in the telecommunications entrance facility — where the telecommunications cables enter the building and need to transition to indoor-rated cables per Sec. 800.48 of the NEC, which limits unlisted cables to 50 ft or less. This busbar is pre-drilled and made of copper with a minimum of 4-in.-wide by ¼-in. -hick material of varying length. It is to be connected to the main electrical ground with an appropriately sized copper conductor. The entrance protectors from the outside cables and conduits are to be connected to this TMGB, as well as any other telecommunications equipment co-located in the entrance facility. (It is common practice for the entrance facility to also be the main network room for IT equipment.)
In all other telecommunications rooms, there is to be a telecommunications grounding busbar (TGB), to be made of copper with pre-drilled holes and minimum dimensions of 2-in.-wide by ¼-in.-thick material of varying length. These are to be connected back to the TMGB through appropriately sized copper conductors that form the telecommunications bonding backbone (TBB), as shown in the Figure (click here to see Figure).
In each telecommunications room, the ladder rack, equipment rack, entrance (lightning) protectors for the telecommunications lines, and even IT equipment are connected back to the TMGB or TGB with a bonding conductor. If either building steel or the electrical panel is available in the telecommunications room, they need to be connected back to the TMGB or TGB as well, with a minimum of 6 AWG copper conductor or larger.
SIDEBAR: Resources at a Glance
There are many standards and guidelines a designer may choose to specify. Here are a list of several that may be referenced for more specific project and installation applications:
- ANSI/ATIS-0600334, Electrical Protection of Communications Towers and Associated Structures
- ATIS 0600318, Electrical Protection Applied to Telecommunications Network Plant at Entrances to Customer Structures or Buildings
- ATIS 0600321, Telecommunications – Electrical Protection for Network Operator-Type Equipment Positions
- ATIS-0600313, Electrical Protection for Telecommunications Central Offices and Similar Type Facilities
- EN 50310, Application of Equipotential Bonding and Earthing in Buildings with Information Technology Equipment
- MIL-HDBK-419A, Grounding, Bonding, and Shielding for Electronic Equipments and Facilities Basic Theory
- ANSI/IEEE 1100, 2005, Recommended Practice for Powering and Grounding Electronic Equipment
- ANSI/IEEE C2, 2007, National Electrical Safety Code (NESC)
- ANSI/ATIS 0600333, Grounding and Bonding of Telecommunications Equipment
- ANSI/ATIS 0600334, 2008, Electrical Protection of Communications Towers and Associated Structures
- ANSI/TIA/EIA-606-A, 2007, Administration Standard for the Telecommunications Infrastructure of Commercial Buildings
- FIPS PUBS 94, 1983, Guideline on Electrical Power for ADP Installations, 1983 (USA Federal Information Processing Standards Publications)
- ITU-T K.27, 1996, Bonding Configuration and Earthing Inside a Telecommunication Building

Oct. 10, 2008 Toxins in food often have a bad, bitter taste that makes people want to spit them out. New UC Irvine research finds that bitterness also slows the digestive process, keeping bad food in the stomach longer and increasing the chances that it will be expelled.
This second line of defense in the gut against dietary toxins also triggers the production of a hormone that makes people feel full, presumably to keep them from eating more of the toxic food.
This discovery has the potential to help scientists develop better therapies for ailments ranging from cancer to diabetes, and it may explain why certain isolated populations around the world have adapted to eat and enjoy local foods that taste bad to outsiders and make them sick.
The study, appearing online Oct. 9 in the Journal of Clinical Investigation, was performed with mice, and the results probably translate to humans, said Timothy Osborne, molecular biology and biochemistry professor and study senior author.
"We have evolved mechanisms to combat the ingestion of toxins in our food," Osborne said. "This provides a framework for an entirely new area of research on how our bodies respond to what is present in our diets."
Mammals have evolved to dislike the bitter taste of toxins in food. This response is particularly important when they eat a lot of plant material, which tends to contain more bitter-tasting, potentially toxic ingredients than meat.
Examples of bitter-tasting toxins include phenylthiourea, a compound that destroys the thyroid gland, and quinine, found in tonic water, which can be deadly in large doses.
If toxins are swallowed, bitter-taste receptors in the gut sense them and trigger the production of a hormone called cholecystokinin that both suppresses appetite and slows the movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine.
Interestingly, the UCI scientists found that cholesterol regulates the activity of bitter-taste receptors in the intestine, and diets high in plant material and potential toxins naturally are low in cholesterol, compared to low-toxin, high-cholesterol, meat-based diets.
In small intestine cell cultures, low levels of cholesterol triggered a stronger receptor response – meaning they worked better – while high levels caused a weaker response.
The same response was observed in mice that were given drugs to stop the production and absorption of cholesterol. Not only were their receptors more active, their small intestine cells produced two to three times the amount of the appetite-suppressing hormone in the presence of bitter food, compared to normal mice.
Scientists say that regulation of taste receptors by dietary constituents likely explains why groups of people taste certain foods differently.
"One group of people may think something tastes great and can metabolize it just fine, but a group from the outside may think it tastes horrible and get sick," Osborne said. "The first group likely adapted to the food through a change in the expression and pattern of their dietary sensing molecules."
With this knowledge, scientists could make medicines less bitter, which in turn would allow for increased palatability and quicker absorption. Drugs used to treat cancer sometimes include molecules that taste bitter. Also, changing the patient's eating habits could improve the effectiveness of such drugs.
In addition to the appetite-suppressing hormone, bitter-taste receptors in the gut activate the production of glucagon-like peptide 1, a protein that stimulates insulin secretion in the pancreas. Drugs currently are on the market that attempt to stabilize this protein in people with diabetes, and therapies aimed at increased production are attractive therapeutic targets.
"Because bitter-taste receptors are expressed in the gut, a new avenue exists to identify ways to stimulate production of GLP-1," Osborne said. "It could be very beneficial for the treatment of diabetes and possibly other diseases."
UCI scientists Tae-Il Jeon, Bing Zhu and Jarrod Larson also worked on this study, which was funded by the National Institutes of Health.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

By Bill Gregware
President Obama's long-touted plan to put 1 million electric cars on the road by 2015 is hitting some bumps in road. The "bumps" are American consumers who are not convinced it's a good idea to plunk down an exorbitant amount of money on cars with multiple problems, including short driving ranges. Moreover, some energy experts claim electric cars do not make a net reduction in pollution or decrease overall use of fossil fuels because the electricity they need comes largely from fossil-fuel plants.
Others claim electric cars are even counterproductive because there are several energy-wasting steps required to go from the original energy source to the car. For example, first is transferring the electricity from the power plant through transmission lines to a distant charging station (a home or other location), then transferring the energy to a battery and finally to the car. In contrast, gasoline goes directly into a car.
Historians tell us that various EVs (electric vehicles) — tricycles, bicycles, carts, etc. — first appeared during the 1830s, with practical electric automobiles being developed around 1890. Electric cars were setting speed and distance records by the late 1890s. The 100- km per hour (62 mph) record was set by an electric car in 1899. Despite impressive speed records, the average electric cars were slow, mostly in the 20-mph range. Competitive vehicles on the market in those days included steam-driven cars, e.g., the Stanley Steamer, which took up to 45 minutes to get up a head of steam and then needed frequent water replenishing stops if driven for any distance. Primitive gasoline-driven cars were noisy (as were steam cars), dirty and hard to start, especially on cold mornings. Many drivers experienced broken arms when cars "backfired" while being cranked.
Read more of this story and more!
7-Day Subscribers have FREE access to everything on rep-am.com and our E-Edition.CLICK HERE
to register and activate your access,.
Not a subscriber?
You can purchase a single-day subscription for only $0.75 to read this and access all of our content and our E-Edition. CLICK HERE purchase a single day subscription.
Become an electronic subscriber to the Republican-American for only $8 a month. CLICK HERE.

Professor Keith Sagar gives Blake seminar
Professor Keith Sagar, a legendary figure from the world of literary criticism, gave a seminar to A2 literature students on William Blake recently.
His provocative and thought-provoking readings of Songs of Innocence and Experience gave students an idea of how literary criticism can be an act of creativity as well as analysis.
What, for example, is the symbolism of a rose? After listening to students’ first thoughts, Professor Sagar steered the discussion into an exploration of an impressive range of possible meanings, all of which he rooted in examples from the history of literature. Rejecting modish nomenclature - “intertextuality” - Professor Sagar explained how writers had always read and been influenced by other writers (“of course writers actually read as well as wrote”).
His no-nonsense approach did not, however, exclude complex theoretical frameworks. Having first convinced students of the way that particular symbols – the rose, tiger and worm, for example – may be found everywhere and at all periods of history, Professor Sagar expatiated on Jung’s theory of archetypes: how such symbols articulate human psychology and, in turn, shape human society.
It is around such archetypal images, he argued, that Blake’s poetry revolves. But whilst Blake is a poet whose images have universal and timeless resonance, he is also a man of his time. Professor Sagar’s Blake is a visionary poet engaged in a mental fight against eighteenth-century dualistic thinking, raging against his age’s obsession with measurement and calculation (which Blake felt to be personified in the figure of Newton).
As Professor Sagar gave his exposition of Blake’s “fourfold vision,” students quickly saw that Blake offered “a complete vision of reality in which there is a place for tigers and lambs,” a universe charged with imaginative energy, limitless potentiality and deep spirituality, and in which “innocence” can be “recovered at the far side of experience” – the opposite, in other words, of a mechanistic universe.
Again the issue of the value of poetry arose. Professor Sagar’s answer was typically Blakean: “poetry has the task of having to re-spiritualise the world”.
Students clearly enjoyed the seminar, and bought a number of his books. Professor Sagar was also the guest of the members of the Senior Essay Society, to whom he spoke in March of his literary friendship with Ted Hughes, whose letters to him (well over a hundred) are soon to be published by the British Library.
Dr Paul Ellis, Head of English.

Each May, the alpacas that graze the hills of Springside Farm in the town of Pompey are sheared of fleece that is spun into baby blankets, mittens and hats.
Breeder Paulie Drexler has gathered 50 pounds of fiber remnants she didn’t use last year to send to volunteers who have been working to protect the Gulf Coast and its waters since the April 20 spill.
The clippings will be stuffed into nylon stockings and tied together to make booms that help surround, contain and soak up the oil that is leaking into the ocean.
Alpaca fleece has long been revered as warmer and lighter than wool, said Drexler, whose 55 alpacas can each produce up to 10 pounds of fiber a year. Prime fiber is spun into fine knits and woven garments; slightly less soft fibers are used for heavy blankets and jackets.
The remnants — known as thirds — are too short or hairy to be used in garments, but can be processed to make rugs and for industrial uses such as oil spill remediation.
The Alpaca Fiber Cooperative of North America has already sent 10,000 pounds of the material for the effort. Drexler hopes to send more after shearing her herd at the end of the month.
She sees her alpacas as a renewable resource. “These animals eat something we can’t and turn it into something we can use,” she said. “That is about as green as you can get. There’s a use for everything.”
The fiber recycling program also is being supported by hair salons across the country that can collect up to one pound each of human hair a day.
Contact Alaina Potrikus at email@example.com or 470-3252.

A unique study at the U of A.
"Back, about 1993, we started studying methanogens as possible life forms on Mars," Kral says.
Microorganisms, living in a test tube.
But can they live on another planet?
Professor Kral is trying to answer that question.
"Well, this is our Pegasus chamber, it's a vaccuum chamber and we're able to take the pressure down to what we see on the surface of mars," Kral says standing next to the piece of machinery.
"We could also cool this down to the temperatures on Mars."
Kral recently received a grant from NASA, worth nearly $400,000.
"This specific grant, I've been trying to get for about 15 years," Kral says.
Which he, along with his team of researchers, and students can use to curb their curiosity and further their findings.
"The bottom line would be to find out if our methanogens, or if some mutant of our methanogens, that might be resistant to radiation, could exist on mars," Kral adds.
New York native Rebecca Mickol always knew she wanted to study astrobiology, and teaming up with Professor Kral truly allows her to go above and beyond.
"Whenever, I go home and people ask what I'm studying, I'm like 'Life on Mars!" says second-year grad student Rebecca Mickol.
Kral describes the challenge: "To me, looking for life out there. I can't imagine anything more exciting."
Professor Kral plans to continue this type of research for the rest of his career.
Research that is quite literally -- out of this world.

Why is it that farmers competing in state and national soybean yield contests routinely grow 60 or even 85 bu. per acre yields when the national average is closer to 44?
That’s the question that motivated some ground-breaking research by Fred Below, a crop physiologist at the University of Illinois. The wise-cracking, caffeinated professor presented his top-line results to a standing-room-only audience of farmers at last week’s 2013 Commodity Classic.
There’s a lot more at stake in the answer to this question than a simple scientific inquiry. To feed an extra 2 billion mouths over the next 40 years, "we need to double the production of all grains," says Below. But at current rates of productivity gains, it will take 100 years to reach 85 bu. per acre.
"Fortunately, there’s a lot of low-hanging fruit," says Below. In fact, nearly every tactic Below tried – whether it was adding more nitrogen or planting in denser rows – improved yields. The best course of action, he says, is "intelligent intensification," academic-speak for putting more of the right stuff in the ground at the right time.
Before diving into his secrets, Below listed some "pre-requisites." He assumes that farmers are draining their fields properly, that they engage in early weed control – "no matter how satisfying it may be to let them grow then go out in the field and kill them with glyphosate" – and are maintaining proper pH levels for soils.
Here’s a rundown on the six "secrets" Below revealed, one at a time.
Because he figures everyone could guess weather was among the secrets, he lists it first. But it may belong at the top, since according to his studies it has a greater influence on yields than anything else. That’s unfortunate because it can’t be controlled.
Fluctuating weather conditions in Below’s home state of Illinois have resulted deviations from trend-line yields of 0.7 bu. per acre over the past 20 years.
Good weather, of course, influences early planting, which can create opportunities for early vegetative growth and node formation. "I think we need to plant earlier, but it’s the weather that determines the planting date," Below says.
Even if you plant early, the professor says, you need to plant the right seed and protect it. The impact of heat and drought can be mitigated by management practices that promote strong root development, such as fertility, enhanced seed emergence, and disease control. Ethylene blocking compounds that alleviate corn stress may work on soybeans as well, he adds.
But there’s nothing like a good rain in August. That’s what saved Below’s test crops last year. "When any of my agronomic schemes don’t work," he says, "I just blame the weather, and I’m usually right."
Soil fertility, Below says, may be the most overlooked component of soybean management. "I don’t think we’re adequately fertilizing soybeans, or we’re losing a lot from corn," Below says. The popular approach of adding nitrogen during the growing season may backfire as well. "If you put in too much, in late June or early July, you can shut down the nodules. Then you wind up with worse performance."
Soybeans obtain between 25 and 75% of plant nitrogen from the soil, with the balance supplied from symbiotic fixation. "When we get to 85 bu. per acre, we’re mining 100 pounds out of the soil," he says.
Some growers, Below said, incorrectly believe that because they applied adequate fertilizer to their corn crop the preceding year that phosphorous (P) and potassium (K) fertility are less critical for soybean production.
A typical fertilizer program for soybeans, for instance, might involve fertilizing the previous year’s corn crop with an equivalent of two years of fertilizer. A 230-bu. corn yield, however, removes nearly 100 pounds of P2O5 from every acre. This doesn’t leave much for the soybean crop in the second year.
Many people think potassium is the key nutrient for soybeans, Below says. While it is important, corn stover could provide half the potassium that soybeans need. Phosphorus, he says, "is the biggest problem, and it’s probably due to the way we fertilize corn." Phosphorus is quickly immobilized in soil and may not be available in sufficient quantity.
Below grew an additional 4.3 bu. per acre through better fertilization. Besides the weather, fertility is the most important variable he tested.
Below believes that farmers don’t spend enough time researching soybean varieties. He found big differences in yield, even among varieties of the same maturity. Yields varied by as much as 20 bu. per acre when grown at the same location.
Some variation was due to differences in susceptibility to diseases like white mold. But he also noted big differences between seeds with varying insect resistance. All told, Below attributes an additional 3.2 bu. per acre upside to selecting the right seed.
4. Enhance seed emergence and vigor
Through the use of fungicidal, insecticidal and plant growth regulator seed treatments, early season growth and vigor will be protected from yield robbing stresses such as disease and insects. The professor says healthier leaves result in bigger seeds, which can dramatically improve yields. "It has a huge impact," he said.
Below argues that insect and disease control is especially critical with soybeans because so many pests can limit yield or reduce grain quality.
5. Seed treatment
Soybean seeds have their highest yield potential, of course, when first planted. After that, the basic idea is to relieve as much stress on the plants as possible. Seed treatments that promote seed germination, seedling establishment, and early vigor, help in this respect.
Some fungicides and insecticides may also promote "physiological vigor," he says. "At my research site, when I had seed with a complete treatment, I saw an enormous improvement in yield." All told, the researcher attributes an increase of 2.6 bu. per acre to seed treatment.
6. Use narrow rows
Below’s research turned up a distinct advantage to planting soybeans in narrow rows of 20 inches, rather than 30 inches. This allows more space between plants within a row and increased branching. That in turn creates more opportunities for precision fertilizer placement in a corn-soybean rotation. Twenty-inch rows also improve light interception, though reduced air circulation may create more pressure for disease.
Though 15-inch soybean rows have gained in popularity in recent years, Below believes that there’s an advantage to planting both corn and soybeans in 20-inch rows. Farmers could use the same equipment for precision fertilizer placement. And by alternating crops, soybeans could take advantage of the residual fertility from the previous band.
Unfortunately, farmers who employed all these secrets wouldn’t get a yield increase equal to the combined value of doing them individually. The whole, in other words, isn’t equal to a sum of the parts. But you do get some added benefit by combining approaches.
For instance, in Below’s research, applying fungicide at the R3 growth stage improved yields by 2.1%. Applying insecticide at R3 resulted in a 3.7% yield increase. But doing both only improved yields by 3.8%.
Soybean Yield Secrets
In terms of yield percentage improvements
|Fertility (extra N,P,S and Zn)
|Variety (fuller maturity for region)
|Foliar protection (fungicide and insecticide)
|Seed treatment (fungicide, insecticide, and nematicide)
|Row width (20-inch versus 30-inch)
Read more information about Below and his research.
For More Information

Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) | Situation
Avian influenza is
a viral disease transmitted by birds usually through feces or saliva. It is
not usually passed on to humans, although it has been contracted by people who
have handled infected birds or touched surfaces contaminated by the birds. In
fact, avian (or H5N1) flu normally infects only birds and pigs.
There are many different types of viruses and of these viruses, there are 15
subtypes. These form various combinations that are constantly changing. Our
bodies develop immunity to these viruses and when we receive our annual flu
shot, this boosts our immunity. But when a virus such as H5N1 comes along, it
may merge with a flu that a human body already has and develop (or mutate) into
a whole other subtype for which our body has not built immunity. This, then,
is what has prompted the concerns of the public health community.
The H5N1 virus is particularly contagious among birds and some strains are resistant
to antiviral drugs. It has developed into an outbreak in domestic birds
in many Asian countries. Among the humans
who have been diagnosed with the disease, the mortality rate is almost 50%.
The first sign of this flu is sudden, unexplained fever. What follows is slightly
different for each person: For some, its body aches, cough and runny nose.
For others, its diarrhea and vomiting. Several days after the first symptoms,
respiratory problems will develop.
There are currently no vaccines on the market to combat avian influenza. Two
antiviral medications are used to treat the symptoms, but their effectiveness
is uncertain. These medications are Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza).
The Florida Department of Health has prepared a plan for protecting the citizens
of our state in the event there is an actual pandemic (worldwide flu epidemic).
Portions of this plan include working with county health departments to provide
local assistance; participating in the national stockpile initiative so that
Tamiflu and Relenza are ready and waiting for distribution prior to an emergency;
and ensuring our emergency communications system is up and running so public
health officials and first responders will get real-time information they can
For the latest, most trustworthy information about avian influenza, stay tuned
to this Bureau of Epidemiology website, and these related links:

Mexico is one of the Latin America's richest sources for minerals and its mining industry has experienced a period of sustained growth. In 2010, Mexico exported $15.47 billion in minerals and growth is forecast to continue at least until 2015. Though the benefits have been enormous for Mexico's economy, the rise has in some cases been a burden thanks to the attention mining has garnered from crime syndicates. Cartels have begun targeting the industry more in recent years, kidnapping workers for ransom, extorting up to $37,000 a month in “security fees” from businesses, and stealing resources to sell on the black market.
In recent cases, cartels have even been found to operate their own mines. For example, in May it was announced that the federal government had discovered several illegal coal mines in the northeastern state of Coahuila being run by criminal gangs.
The amounts earned by gangs from exploiting the mining sector are considerable. In 2010, steel producers reported that $240 million worth of steel was stolen while an estimated $3 million in gold was lost to theft between 2008 and 2012 in Mexico. The rising number of cases has forced some companies, like Canada’s Goldcorp, to switch to aerial rather than ground transportation to avoid robberies. Others, like Torex Gold Resources, have ceased operations altogether in areas of Mexico that are deemed too risky.
Once stolen, gangs can either sell the resources on the black market or attempt to integrate it into the legitimate commodity trade through the use of corrupt companies. In an example of the latter, Ignacio Lopez, a money launderer for the Familia Michoacana was arrested in October 2010 for allegedly selling illegally extracted iron ore·in the southwestern state of Michoacan. Lopez is believed to have worked with three companies to export iron ore to China. Combined, the companies reportedly exported over a million tons of illegally obtained iron ore that year, amounting to some $42 million.
In addition to the profitability of mining, the industry has a particular allure for gangs as a way of laundering their money, as the Familia case indicates. Dirty cash can be converted into valuable minerals, which can then be moved and sold throughout the world.
Illegally obtained minerals are also harder to trace than other, illicit commodities -- narcotics, trafficked humans -- which are typically moved via land, sea and air. The Mexican and US governments invest billions of dollars, including $1.4 billion for the US Border Patrol·alone, to police trafficking routes. Tracking the entry of illegally obtained minerals into the market and the complex relationship between cartels and legal mineral companies requires a far different level of investigation, though, than the simple inspection of vehicles for smuggled goods at the US-Mexico border.
Adding to the complexity of the issue is the willing collaboration of some companies. In an interview with Reuters, Jesus del Campo, an official at the Ministry of Economy, explained that some foreign mining companies encourage illegal mining so they can operate in Mexico without having to obtain permits.
The illegal mining phenomenon is by no means isolated to Mexico, but rather represents a dynamic of criminals diversifying their portfolios that has been seen elsewhere in the region. Colombia is perhaps the most notorious country for illegal mining operations with left-wing guerrillas and drug traffickers known to extort from, and operate their own mines. This well established practice prompted Colombia’s former national police chief Oscar Naranjo to label illegal mining Colombia’s greatest challenge.·
Given the intense focus of Mexican and US authorities on drug interdiction, it is unlikely that organized crime will leave mining anytime soon, especially in light of the numerous financial benefits and difficulty in tracing these activities. As long as the demand and price for mineral resources stays high, mining will simply be too lucrative a prospect for gangs in Mexico to ignore.

Table of Contents
PC-style floppy disks work mostly like other disk devices like hard disks, except that you need to low-level format them first. To use an common 1440 KB floppy in the first floppy drive, first (as root) format it:
#fdformat -f /dev/rfd0a
Then create a single partition on the disk using disklabel(8):
#disklabel -rw /dev/rfd0a floppy3
Creating a small filesystem optimized for space:
#newfs -m 0 -o space -i 16384 -c 80 /dev/rfd0a
Now the floppy disk can be mounted like any other disk. Or if you already have a floppy disk with an MS-DOS filesystem on it that you just want to access from NetBSD, you can just do something like this:
#mount -t msdos /dev/fd0a /mnt
However, rather than using floppies like normal (bigger) disks, it is often more convenient to bypass the filesystem altogether and just splat an archive of files directly to the raw device. E.g.:
#tar cvfz /dev/rfd0a file1 file2 ...
A variation of this can also be done with MS-DOS floppies using
sysutils/mtools package which
has the benefit of not going through the kernel buffer cache
and thus not being exposed to the danger of the floppy being
removed while a filesystem is mounted on it.
See if your system has a ZIP drive:
dmesg | grep -i zipsd0 at atapibus0 drive 1: <IOMEGA ZIP 100 ATAPI, , 14.A> type 0 direct removable
Seems it has one, and it's recognized as sd0, just like any SCSI disk. The fact that the ZIP here is an ATAPI one doesn't matter - a SCSI ZIP will show up here, too. The ZIP is marked as "removable", which means you can eject it with:
Insert ZIP disk
Check out what partitions are on the ZIP:
#/dev/rsd0d: type: ATAPI ... 8 partitions:
#size offset fstype [fsize bsize cpg] d: 196608 0 unused 0 0 # (Cyl. 0 - 95) h: 196576 32 MSDOS # (Cyl. 0*- 95) disklabel: boot block size 0 disklabel: super block size 0
is the whole disk, as usual on i386.
is what you want, and you can see it's a msdos filesystem even.
Hence, use /dev/sd0h to access the zip's partition.
mount -t msdos /dev/sd0h /mnt
Access your files:
ls -la /mnttotal 40809 drwxr-xr-x 1 root wheel 16384 Dec 31 1979 . drwxr-xr-x 28 root wheel 1024 Aug 2 22:06 .. -rwxr-xr-x 1 root wheel 1474560 Feb 23 1999 boot1.fs -rwxr-xr-x 1 root wheel 1474560 Feb 23 1999 boot2.fs -rwxr-xr-x 1 root wheel 548864 Feb 23 1999 boot3.fs -rwxr-xr-x 1 root wheel 38271173 Feb 23 1999 netbsd19990223.tar.gz
Unmount the ZIP:
Eject the ZIP:
Data CDs can contain anything from programs, sound files (MP3, wav), movies (MP3, QuickTime) to source code, text files, etc. Before accessing these files, a CD must be mounted on a directory, much like hard disks are. Just as hard disks can use different filesystems (ffs, lfs, ext2fs, ...), CDs have their own filesystem, "cd9660". The NetBSD cd9660 filesystem can handle filesystems without and with Rockridge and Joliet extensions.
CD devices are named /dev/cd0a for both SCSI and IDE (ATAPI).
With this information, we can start:
See if your system has some CD drive:
dmesg | grep ^cdcd0 at atapibus0 drive 0: <CD-R/RW RW8040A, , 1.12> type 5 cdrom removable cd0: 32-bit data port cd0: drive supports PIO mode 4, DMA mode 0 cd0(pciide0:1:0): using PIO mode 0, DMA mode 0 (using DMA data transfers)
We have one drive here, "cd0". It is an IDE/ATAPI drive, as it is found on atapibus0. Of course the drive (rather, its medium) is removable, i.e., you can eject it. See below.
Insert a CD
Mount the CD manually:
mount -t cd9660 /dev/cd0a /mnt
This command shouldn't print anything. It instructs the system to mount the CD found on /dev/cd0a on /mnt, using the "cd9660" filesystem. The mountpoint "/mnt" must be an existing directory.
Check the contents of the CD:
ls /mntINSTALL.html INSTALL.ps TRANS.TBL boot.catalog INSTALL.more INSTALL.txt binary installation
Everything looks fine! This is a NetBSD CD, of course. :)
Unmount the CD:
If the CD is still accessed (e.g. some other shell's still "cd"'d into it), this will not work. If you shut down the system, the CD will be unmounted automatically for you, there's nothing to worry about there.
Making an entry in /etc/fstab:
If you don't want to type the full "mount" command each time, you can put most of the values into a line in /etc/fstab:
# Device mountpoint filesystem mount options /dev/cd0a /cdrom cd9660 ro,noauto
Make sure that the mountpoint,
/cdrom in our
Now you can mount the cd with the following command:
Access and unmount as before.
The CD is not mounted at boot time due to the "noauto" mount option - this is useful as you'll probably not have a CD in the drive all the time. See mount(8) and mount_cd9660(8) for some other useful options.
Eject the CD:
If the CD is still mounted, it will be unmounted if possible, before being ejected.
Use mscdlabel(8) to add all sessions to the CDs
then use the appropriate device node to mount the session you want.
You might have to create the corresponding device nodes in
mscdlabel cd1track (ctl=4) at sector 142312 adding as 'a' track (ctl=4) at sector 0 adding as 'b'
ls -l /dev/cd1bls: /dev/cd1b: No such file or directory
ls -l cd1*brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 8 Mar 18 21:55 cd1a brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 11 Mar 18 21:55 cd1d
mknod cd1b b 6 9
Make sure you fix the permissions of any new device
nodes you create:
ls -l cd1*brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 8 Mar 18 21:55 cd1a brw-r--r-- 1 root wheel 6, 9 Mar 18 22:23 cd1b brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 11 Mar 18 21:55 cd1d
chgrp operator cd1b
chmod 640 cd1b
ls -l cd1*brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 8 Mar 18 21:55 cd1a brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 9 Mar 18 22:24 cd1b brw-r----- 1 root operator 6, 11 Mar 18 21:55 cd1d
Now you should be able to mount it.
mount /dev/cd1b /mnt
By default, NetBSD only allows "root" to mount a filesystem. If you want any user to be able to do this, perform the following steps:
Give groups and other the access rights to the device.
#chmod go+rw /dev/cd0a
Ask NetBSD to let users mounting filesystems.
#sysctl -w vfs.generic.usermount=1
Note that this works for any filesystem and device, not only for CDs with a ISO 9660 filesystem.
To perform the mount operation after these commands, the user must own the mount point. So, for example:
$mount -t cd9660 -o nodev,nosuid /dev/cd0a `pwd`/cdrom
The mount options
nosuid are mandatory from NetBSD 4.0 on. They are
not necessary on NetBSD 3.x systems.
Sometimes, it is interesting to mount an ISO9660 image file before you burn the CD; this way, you can examine its contents or even copy files to the outside. If you are a Linux user, you should know that this is done with the special loop filesystem. NetBSD does it another way, using the vnode pseudo-disk.
We will illustrate how to do this with an example. Suppose you have an ISO image in your home directory, called "mycd.iso":
Start by setting up a new vnode, "pointing" to the ISO file:
vnconfig -c vnd0 ~/mycd.iso
Now, mount the vnode:
mount -t cd9660 /dev/vnd0a /mnt
Yeah, image contents appear under
Go to that
directory and explore the image.
When you are happy, you have to umount the image:
And at last, deconfigure the vnode:
vnconfig -u vnd0
Note that these steps can also be used for any kind of file that contains a filesystem, not just ISO images.
To play MPEG Video streams as many DVD players can play them
under NetBSD, mount the CD as you would do with any normal (data)
CD (see Section 13.3, “Reading data CDs with NetBSD”), then use the
package to play the mpeg files stored on the CD.
There are two ways to handle audio CDs:
Tell the CD drive to play to the headphone or to a
soundcard, to which CDROMs are usually connected
internally. Use programs like cdplay(1),
multimedia/kdemultimedia3 package, mixer
programs like mixerctl(1),
the Curses based
or kmix, which is part of
This usually works well on both SCSI and IDE (ATAPI) CDROMs, CDRW and DVD drives.
To read ("rip") audio tracks in binary form without going through digital->analog conversion and back. There are several programs available to do this:
For most ATAPI, SCSI and several proprietary
CDROM drives, the
audio/cdparanoia package can be
used. With cdparanoia the data can be saved to a file or
directed to standard output in WAV, AIFF, AIFF-C or raw
format. Currently the -g option is required by the NetBSD
version of cdparanoia. A hypothetical example of how to save
track 2 as a WAV file is as follows:
cdparanoia -g /dev/rcd0d 2 track-02.wav
If you want to grab all files from a CD, cdparanoia's batch mode is useful:
cdparanoia -g /dev/rcd0d -B
For ATAPI or SCSI CD-ROMs the
audio/cdd package can be
used. To extract track 2 with cdd, type:
cdd -t 2 `pwd`
This will put a file called
in the current directory.
For SCSI CD-ROMS the
audio/tosha package can be used.
To extract track 2 with tosha, you should be able to type:
tosha -d-t 2 -o track-02.cda
The data can then be post-processed e.g. by encoding it into MP3 streams (see Section 13.9, “Creating an MP3 (MPEG layer 3) file from an audio CD”) or by writing them to CD-Rs (see Section 13.11, “Using a CD-R writer to create audio CDs”).
The basic steps in creating an MPEG layer 3 (MP3) file from an audio CD (using software from the NetBSD packages collection) are:
Extract (rip) the audio data of the CD as shown in Section 13.8, “Using audio CDs with NetBSD”.
Convert the CD audio format file to WAV format. You only need to perform this job if your ripping program (e.g. tosha, cdd) didn't already do the job for you!
$sox -s -w -c 2 -r 44100 -t cdr track-02.cda track-02.wav
This will convert
in raw CD format to
track-02.wav in WAV format,
using signed 16-bit
words with 2
channels at a sampling
Encode the WAV file into MP3 format.
$bladeenc -128 -QUIT track-02.wav
This will encode
MP3 format, using a bit rate if
for bladeenc describes bit-rates in more detail.
$lame -p -o -v -V 5 -h track-02.wav track-02.mp3
You may wish to use a lower quality, depending on your taste and hardware.
The process of writing a CD consists of two steps: First, a "image" of the data must be generated, which can then be written to CD-R in a second step.
Reading an pre-existing ISO image
dd if=/dev/rcd0a of=filename.iso bs=2k
Alternatively, you can create a new ISO image yourself:
Generating the ISO image
Put all the data you want to put on CD into one directory. Next you need to generate a disk-like ISO image of your data. The image stores the data in the same form as they're later put on CD, using the ISO 9660 format. The basic ISO9660 format only understands 8+3 filenames (max. eight letters for filename, plus three more for an extension). As this is not practical for Unix filenames, a so-called "Rockridge Extension" needs to be employed to get longer filenames. (A different set of such extension exists in the Microsoft world, to get their long filenames right; that's what's known as Joliet filesystem).
The ISO image is created using the mkisofs command,
which is part
Example: if you have your data in /usr/tmp/data, you can generate a ISO image file in /usr/tmp/data.iso with the following command:
$mkisofs -o data.iso -r data Using NETBS000.GZ;1 for data/binary/kernel/netbsd.INSTALL.gz (netbsd.INSTALL_TINY.gz) Using NETBS001.GZ;1 for data/binary/kernel/netbsd.GENERIC.gz (netbsd.GENERIC_TINY.gz) 5.92% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:28:11 2000 11.83% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:28:03 2000 17.74% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:28:00 2000 23.64% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:28:03 2000 ... 88.64% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:27:55 2000 94.53% done, estimate finish Wed Sep 13 21:27:55 2000 Total translation table size: 0 Total rockridge attributes bytes: 5395 Total directory bytes: 16384 Path table size(bytes): 110 Max brk space used 153c4 84625 extents written (165 Mb)
Please see the mkisofs(8) man page for other options like noting publisher and preparer. The Bootable CD ROM How-To explains how to generate a bootable CD.
Writing the ISO image to CD-R
When you have the ISO image file,
you just need to write it on a
CD. This is done with the "cdrecord" command from the
Insert a blank CD-R, and off we go:
cdrecord -v dev=/dev/rcd0d data.iso...
After starting the command, 'cdrecord' shows you a lot of information about your drive, the disk and the image you're about to write. It then does a 10 seconds countdown, which is your last chance to stop things - type ^C if you want to abort. If you don't abort, the process will write the whole image to the CD and return with a shell prompt.
Note that cdrecord(8) works on both SCSI and IDE (ATAPI) drives.
Mount the just-written CD and test it as you would do with any "normal" CD, see Section 13.3, “Reading data CDs with NetBSD”.
If you want to make a backup copy of one of your audio CDs, you can do so by extracting ("ripping") the audio tracks from the CD, and then writing them back to a blank CD. Of course this also works fine if you only extract single tracks from various CDs, creating your very own mix CD!
The steps involved are:
If you have converted all your audio CDs to MP3 and now want to make a mixed CD for your (e.g.) your car, you can do so by first converting the .mp3 files back to .wav format, then write them as a normal audio CD.
The steps involved here are:
Create .wav files from your .mp3 files:
mpg123 -w foo.wav foo.mp3
Do this for all of the MP3 files that you want to have on your audio CD. The .wav filenames you use don't matter.
Write the .wav files to CD as described under Section 13.11, “Using a CD-R writer to create audio CDs”.
To copy an audio CD while not introducing any pauses as mandated by the CDDA standard, you can use cdrdao for that:
cdrdao read-cd --device /dev/rcd0d data.toc
cdrdao write --device /dev/rcd1d data.toc
If you have both a CD-R and a CD-ROM drive in your machine, you can copy a data CD with the following command:
cdrecord dev=/dev/rcd1d /dev/rcd0d
Here the CD-ROM (cd0) contains the CD you want to copy, and the CD-R
(cd1) contains the blank disk. Note that this only works with computer
disks that contain some sort of data, it does
not work with
audio CDs! In practice you'll also want to add something like
speed=8" to make things a bit
You can treat a CD-RW drive like a CD-R drive (see Section 13.10, “Using a CD-R writer with data CDs”) in NetBSD, creating images with mkisofs(8) and writing them on a CD-RW medium with cdrecord(8).
If you want to blank a CD-RW, you can do this with cdrecord's
cdrecord dev=/dev/rcd0d blank=fast
There are several other ways to blank the CD-RW,
call cdrecord(8) with
blank=help" for a list. See the cdrecord(8)
man page for more information.
Currently, NetBSD supports DVD media through the ISO 9660
also used for CD-ROMs. The new UDF filesystem also present on DVDs
has been supported since NetBSD 4.0. Information about mounting ISO 9660
and UDF filesystems can be found in the mount_cd9660(8) and
mount_udf(8) manual pages respectively.
DVDs, DivX and many avi files be played with
For some hints on creating DVDs, see this postings about growisofs and this article about recording CDs and DVDs with NetBSD.
To create an ISO image and save the checksum do this:
readcd dev=/dev/cd0d f=/tmp/cd.iso
Here is an alternative using dd(1):
dd if=/dev/cd0d of=/tmp/cd.iso bs=2048
If the CD has errors you can recover the rest with this:
dd if=/dev/cd0d of=/tmp/cd.iso bs=2048 conv=noerror
To create an ISO image from a mounted data CD first, mount the CD disk by:
mount -t cd9660 -r /dev/cd0d /mnt/cdrom
Second, get the image:
mkhybrid -v -l -J -R -o /tmp/my_cd.iso /mnt/cdrom/
You can read the volume data from an unmounted CD with this command:
file -s /dev/cd0d
You can read the volume data from an ISO image with this command:
isoinfo -d -i /tmp/my_cd.iso
You can get the unique disk number from an unmounted CD with this:
You can read the table of contents of an unmounted CD with this command:
cdrecord -v dev=/dev/cd0d -toc

|This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in the German Wikipedia. (January 2012)|
||This article needs additional citations for verification. (February 2007)|
||This article needs attention from an expert in Psychology. (October 2009)|
Gestalt psychology or gestaltism (German: Gestalt – "essence or shape of an entity's complete form") is a theory of mind and brain of the Berlin School; the operational principle of gestalt psychology is that the brain is holistic, parallel, and analog, with self-organizing tendencies. The principle maintains that the human eye sees objects in their entirety before perceiving their individual parts, suggesting the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Gestalt psychology tries to understand the laws of our ability to acquire and maintain stable percepts in a noisy world. Gestalt psychologists stipulate that perception is the product of complex interactions among various stimuli. Contrary to the behaviorist approach to understanding the elements of cognitive processes, gestalt psychologists sought to understand their organization (Carlson and Heth, 2010). The gestalt effect is the form-generating capability of our senses, particularly with respect to the visual recognition of figures and whole forms instead of just a collection of simple lines and curves. In psychology, gestaltism is often opposed to structuralism. The phrase "The whole is greater than the sum of the parts" is often used when explaining gestalt theory, though this is a mistranslation of Kurt Koffka's original phrase, "The whole is other than the sum of the parts". Gestalt theory allows for the breakup of elements from the whole situation into what it really is.
The concept of gestalt was first introduced in contemporary philosophy and psychology by Christian von Ehrenfels (a member of the School of Brentano). The idea of gestalt has its roots in theories by David Hume, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Immanuel Kant, David Hartley, and Ernst Mach. Max Wertheimer's unique contribution was to insist that the "gestalt" is perceptually primary, defining the parts it was composed from, rather than being a secondary quality that emerges from those parts, as von Ehrenfels's earlier Gestalt-Qualität had been.
Both von Ehrenfels and Edmund Husserl seem to have been inspired by Mach's work Beiträge zur Analyse der Empfindungen (Contributions to the Analysis of Sensations, 1886), in formulating their very similar concepts of gestalt and figural moment, respectively. On the philosophical foundations of these ideas see Foundations of Gestalt Theory (Smith, ed., 1988).
Early 20th century theorists, such as Kurt Koffka, Max Wertheimer, and Wolfgang Köhler (students of Carl Stumpf) saw objects as perceived within an environment according to all of their elements taken together as a global construct. This 'gestalt' or 'whole form' approach sought to define principles of perception—seemingly innate mental laws that determined the way objects were perceived. It is based on the here and now, and in the way things are seen. Images can be divided into figure or ground. The question is what is perceived at first glance: the figure in front, or the background.
These laws took several forms, such as the grouping of similar, or proximate, objects together, within this global process. Although gestalt has been criticized for being merely descriptive, it has formed the basis of much further research into the perception of patterns and objects (Carlson et al. 2000), and of research into behavior, thinking, problem solving and psychopathology.
Gestalt therapy 
The founders of Gestalt therapy, Fritz and Laura Perls, had worked with Kurt Goldstein, a neurologist who had applied principles of Gestalt psychology to the functioning of the organism. Laura Perls had been a Gestalt psychologist before she became a psychoanalyst and before she began developing Gestalt therapy together with Fritz Perls. The extent to which Gestalt psychology influenced Gestalt therapy is disputed, however. In any case it is not identical with Gestalt psychology. On the one hand, Laura Perls preferred not to use the term "Gestalt" to name the emerging new therapy, because she thought that the gestalt psychologists would object to it; on the other hand Fritz and Laura Perls clearly adopted some of Goldstein's work. Thus, though recognizing the historical connection and the influence, most gestalt psychologists emphasize that gestalt therapy is not a form of gestalt psychology.
Theoretical framework and methodology 
The investigations developed at the beginning of the 20th century, based on traditional scientific methodology, divided the object of study into a set of elements that could be analyzed separately with the objective of reducing the complexity of this object. Contrary to this methodology, the school of gestalt practiced a series of theoretical and methodological principles that attempted to redefine the approach to psychological research.
The theoretical principles are the following:
- Principle of Totality—The conscious experience must be considered globally (by taking into account all the physical and mental aspects of the individual simultaneously) because the nature of the mind demands that each component be considered as part of a system of dynamic relationships.
- Principle of psychophysical isomorphism – A correlation exists between conscious experience and cerebral activity.
Based on the principles above the following methodological principles are defined:
- Phenomenon experimental analysis—In relation to the Totality Principle any psychological research should take as a starting point phenomena and not be solely focused on sensory qualities.
- Biotic experiment—The school of gestalt established a need to conduct real experiments that sharply contrasted with and opposed classic laboratory experiments. This signified experimenting in natural situations, developed in real conditions, in which it would be possible to reproduce, with higher fidelity, what would be habitual for a subject.
Support from cybernetics and neurology 
In the 1940s and 1950s, laboratory research in neurology and what became known as cybernetics on the mechanism of frogs' eyes indicate that perception of 'gestalts' (in particular gestalts in motion) is perhaps more primitive and fundamental than 'seeing' as such:
- A frog hunts on land by vision... He has no fovea, or region of greatest acuity in vision, upon which he must center a part of the image... The frog does not seem to see or, at any rate, is not concerned with the detail of stationary parts of the world around him. He will starve to death surrounded by food if it is not moving. His choice of food is determined only by size and movement. He will leap to capture any object the size of an insect or worm, providing it moves like one. He can be fooled easily not only by a piece of dangled meat but by any moving small object... He does remember a moving thing provided it stays within his field of vision and he is not distracted. Cyberneticist Valentin Turchin points out that the gestalts observed in what we usually imagine are 'still images' are exactly the kind of 'moving objects' that make the frog's retina respond:
- The lowest-level concepts related to visual perception for a human being probably differ little from the concepts of a frog. In any case, the structure of the retina in mammals and in human beings is the same as in amphibians. The phenomenon of distortion of perception of an image stabilized on the retina gives some idea of the concepts of the subsequent levels of the hierarchy. This is a very interesting phenomenon. When a person looks at an immobile object, "fixes" it with his eyes, the eyeballs do not remain absolutely immobile; they make small involuntary movements. As a result the image of the object on the retina is constantly in motion, slowly drifting and jumping back to the point of maximum sensitivity. The image "marks time" in the vicinity of this point.
Emergence is the process of complex pattern formation from simpler rules. It is demonstrated by the perception of the dog picture, which depicts a Dalmatian dog sniffing the ground in the shade of overhanging trees. The dog is not recognized by first identifying its parts (feet, ears, nose, tail, etc.), and then inferring the dog from those component parts. Instead, the dog is perceived as a whole, all at once. However, this is a description of what occurs in vision and not an explanation. Gestalt theory does not explain how the percept of a dog emerges.
Reification is the constructive or generative aspect of perception, by which the experienced percept contains more explicit spatial information than the sensory stimulus on which it is based.
For instance, a triangle is perceived in picture A, though no triangle is there. In pictures B and D the eye recognizes disparate shapes as "belonging" to a single shape, in C a complete three-dimensional shape is seen, where in actuality no such thing is drawn.
Reification can be explained by progress in the study of illusory contours, which are treated by the visual system as "real" contours.
Multistability (or multistable perception) is the tendency of ambiguous perceptual experiences to pop back and forth unstably between two or more alternative interpretations. This is seen for example in the Necker cube, and in Rubin's Figure/Vase illusion shown here. Other examples include the Three-legged blivet and artist M. C. Escher's artwork and the appearance of flashing marquee lights moving first one direction and then suddenly the other. Again, gestalt does not explain how images appear multistable, only that they do.
Invariance is the property of perception whereby simple geometrical objects are recognized independent of rotation, translation, and scale; as well as several other variations such as elastic deformations, different lighting, and different component features. For example, the objects in A in the figure are all immediately recognized as the same basic shape, which are immediately distinguishable from the forms in B. They are even recognized despite perspective and elastic deformations as in C, and when depicted using different graphic elements as in D. Computational theories of vision, such as those by David Marr, have had more success in explaining how objects are classified.
Emergence, reification, multistability, and invariance are not necessarily separable modules to model individually, but they could be different aspects of a single unified dynamic mechanism.
The fundamental principle of gestalt perception is the law of prägnanz (in the German language, pithiness), which says that we tend to order our experience in a manner that is regular, orderly, symmetric, and simple. Gestalt psychologists attempt to discover refinements of the law of prägnanz, and this involves writing down laws that, hypothetically, allow us to predict the interpretation of sensation, what are often called "gestalt laws". These include:
Gestalt laws of grouping 
A major aspect of Gestalt psychology is that it implies that the mind understands external stimuli as whole rather than the sum of their parts. The wholes are structured and organized using grouping laws. The various laws are called laws or principles, depending on the paper where they appear—but for simplicity sake, this article uses the term laws. These laws deal with the sensory modality vision however there are analogous laws for other sensory modalities including auditory, tactile, gustatory and olfactory (Bregman – GP). The visual Gestalt principles of grouping were introduced in Wertheimer (1923). Through the 1930s and '40s Wertheimer, Kohler and Koffka formulated many of the laws of grouping through the study of visual perception.
Law of Proximity—The law of proximity states that when an individual perceives an assortment of objects they perceive objects that are close to each other as forming a group. For example, in the figure that illustrates the Law of proximity, there are 72 circles, but we perceive the collection of circles in groups. Specifically, we perceive there is a group of 36 circles on the left side of the image, and three groups of 12 circles on the right side of the image. This law is often used in advertising logos to emphasize which aspects of events are associated.
Law of Similarity—The law of similarity states that elements within an assortment of objects are perceptually grouped together if they are similar to each other. This similarity can occur in the form of shape, colour, shading or other qualities. For example, the figure illustrating the law of similarity portrays 36 circles all equal distance apart from one another forming a square. In this depiction, 18 of the circles are shaded dark and 18 of the circles are shaded light. We perceive the dark circles as grouped together, and the light circles as grouped together forming six horizontal lines within the square of circles. This perception of lines is due to the law of similarity.
Law of Closure—The law of closure states that individuals perceive objects such as shapes, letters, pictures, etc., as being whole when they are not complete. Specifically, when parts of a whole picture are missing, our perception fills in the visual gap. Research shows that the reason the mind completes a regular figure that is not perceived through sensation is to increase the regularity of surrounding stimuli. For example, the figure that depicts the law of closure portrays what we perceive as a circle on the left side of the image and a rectangle on the right side of the image. However, gaps are missing from the shapes. If the law of closure did not exist, the image would depict an assortment of different lines with different lengths, rotations, and curvatures—but with the law of closure, we perceptually combine the lines into whole shapes.
Law of Symmetry—The law of symmetry states that the mind perceives objects as being symmetrical and forming around a center point. It is perceptually pleasing to divide objects into an even number of symmetrical parts. Therefore, when two symmetrical elements are unconnected the mind perceptually connects them to form a coherent shape. Similarities between symmetrical objects increase the likelihood that objects are grouped to form a combined symmetrical object. For example, the figure depicting the law of symmetry shows a configuration of square and curled brackets. When the image is perceived, we tend to observe three pairs of symmetrical brackets rather than six individual brackets.
Law of Common Fate—The law of common fate states that objects are perceived as lines that move along the smoothest path. Experiments using the visual sensory modality found that movement of elements of an object produce paths that individuals perceive that the objects are on. We perceive elements of objects to have trends of motion, which indicate the path that the object is on. The law of continuity implies the grouping together of objects that have the same trend of motion and are therefore on the same path. For example, if there are an array of dots and half the dots are moving upward while the other half are moving downward, we would perceive the upward moving dots and the downward moving dots as two distinct units.
Law of Continuity—The law of continuity states that elements of objects tend to be grouped together, and therefore integrated into perceptual wholes if they are aligned within an object. In cases where there is an intersection between objects, individuals tend to perceive the two objects as two single uninterrupted entities. Stimuli remain distinct even with overlap. We are less likely to group elements with sharp abrupt directional changes as being one object.
Law of Good Gestalt—The law of good gestalt explains that elements of objects tend to be perceptually grouped together if they form a pattern that is regular, simple, and orderly. This law implies that as individuals perceive the world, they eliminate complexity and unfamiliarity so they can observe a reality in its most simplistic form. Eliminating extraneous stimuli helps the mind create meaning. This meaning created by perception implies a global regularity, which is often mentally prioritized over spatial relations. The law of good gestalt focuses on the idea of conciseness, which is what all of gestalt theory is based on. This law has also been called the law of Prägnanz. Prägnanz is a German word that directly translates to mean "pithiness" and implies the ideas of salience, conciseness and orderliness.
Law of Past Experience—The law of past experience implies that under some circumstances visual stimuli are categorized according to past experience. If two objects tend to be observed within close proximity, or small temporal intervals, the objects are more likely to be perceived together. For example, the English language contains 26 letters that are grouped to form words using a set of rules. If an individual reads an English word they have never seen, they use the law of past experience to interpret the letters "L" and "I" as two letters beside each other, rather than using the law of closure to combine the letters and interpret the object as an uppercase U.
The gestalt laws of grouping have recently been subjected to modern methods of scientific evaluation by examining the visual cortex using cortical algorithms. Current Gestalt psychologists have described their findings, which showed correlations between physical visual representations of objects and self-report perception as the laws of seeing.
Gestalt views in psychology 
Gestalt psychologists find it is important to think of problems as a whole. Max Wertheimer considered thinking to happen in two ways: productive and reproductive.
Productive thinking is solving a problem with insight.
This is a quick insightful unplanned response to situations and environmental interaction.
Reproductive thinking is solving a problem with previous experiences and what is already known. (1945/1959).
This is a very common thinking. For example, when a person is given several segments of information, he/she deliberately examines the relationships among its parts, analyzes their purpose, concept, and totality, he/she reaches the "aha!" moment, using what is already known. Understanding in this case happens intentionally by reproductive thinking.
Another gestalt psychologist, Perkins, believes insight deals with three processes:
- Unconscious leap in thinking.
- The increased amount of speed in mental processing.
- The amount of short-circuiting that occurs in normal reasoning.
Views going against the gestalt psychology are:
- Nothing-special view
- Neo-gestalt view
- The Three-Process View
Gestalt psychology should not be confused with the gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls, which is only peripherally linked to gestalt psychology. A strictly gestalt psychology-based therapeutic method is Gestalt Theoretical Psychotherapy, developed by the German gestalt psychologist and psychotherapist Hans-Jürgen Walter.
Fuzzy-trace theory 
Fuzzy-trace theory, a dual process model of memory and reasoning, was also derived from Gestalt Psychology. Fuzzy-trace theory posits that we encode information into two separate traces: verbatim and gist. Information stored in verbatim is exact memory for detail (the individual parts of a pattern, for example) while information stored in gist is semantic and conceptual (what we perceive the pattern to be). The effects seen in Gestalt psychology can be attributed to the way we encode information as gist.
Uses in human–computer interaction 
The gestalt laws are used in user interface design. The laws of similarity and proximity can, for example, be used as guides for placing radio buttons. They may also be used in designing computers and software for more intuitive human use. Examples include the design and layout of a desktop's shortcuts in rows and columns. Gestalt psychology also has applications in computer vision for trying to make computers "see" the same things as humans do.
Quantum cognition modeling 
Similarities between Gestalt phenomena and quantum mechanics have been pointed out by, among others, chemist Anton Amann, who commented that "similarities between Gestalt perception and quantum mechanics are on a level of a parable" yet may give useful insight nonetheless. Physicist Elio Conte and co-workers have proposed abstract, mathematical models to describe the time dynamics of cognitive associations with mathematical tools borrowed from quantum mechanics and has discussed psychology experiments in this context. A similar approach has been suggested by physicists David Bohm, Basil Hiley and philosopher Paavo Pylkkänen with the notion that mind and matter both emerge from an "implicate order". The models involve non-commutative mathematics; such models account for situations in which the outcome of two measurements performed one after the other can depend on the order in which they are performed—a pertinent feature for psychological processes, as it is obvious that an experiment performed on a conscious person may influencing the outcome of a subsequent experiment by changing the state of mind of that person.
In some scholarly communities, such as cognitive psychology and computational neuroscience, gestalt theories of perception are criticized for being descriptive rather than explanatory in nature. For this reason, they are viewed by some as redundant or uninformative. For example, Bruce, Green & Georgeson conclude the following regarding gestalt theory's influence on the study of visual perception:
- The physiological theory of the gestaltists has fallen by the wayside, leaving us with a set of descriptive principles, but without a model of perceptual processing. Indeed, some of their "laws" of perceptual organisation today sound vague and inadequate. What is meant by a "good" or "simple" shape, for example?
See also 
- Gestalt therapy—often mistaken for gestalt psychology
- Structural information theory
- Rudolf Arnheim
- Wolfgang Metzger
- Kurt Goldstein
- Pál Schiller Harkai
- Solomon Asch
- Hermann Friedmann
- James J. Gibson
- James Tenney
- Graz School
- Important publications in gestalt psychology
- Optical illusion
- Pattern recognition (psychology)
- Pattern recognition (machine learning)
- Amodal perception
- Topological data analysis
- Fuzzy-trace theory
- Laws of Association
- David Hothersall: History of Psychology, chapter seven,(2004)
- Tuck, Michael. "Gestalt Principles Applied in Design (Aug 17 2010)". Retrieved 11/12/11.
- Humphrey, G. (1924). The psychology of the gestalt. Journal of Educational Psychology, 15(7), 401–412. doi:10.1037/h0070207
- Bernd Bocian:Fritz Perls in Berlin 1893–1933. Expressionism – Psychonalysis – Judaism, 2010, p. 190, EHP Verlag Andreas Kohlhage, Bergisch Gladbach.
- Joe Wysong/Edward Rosenfeld (eds): An Oral History of Gestalt Therapy, Highland, New York 1982, The Gestalt Journal Press, p. 12.
- Allen R. Barlow, "Gestalt-Antecedent Influence or Historical Accident", The Gestalt Journal, Volume IV, Number 2, (Fall, 1981)
- Mary Henle noted in her presidential address to Division 24 at the meeting of the American Psychological Association (1975): "What Perls has done has been to take a few terms from Gestalt psychology, stretch their meaning beyond recognition, mix them with notions—often unclear and often incompatible —– from the depth psychologies, existentialism, and common sense, and he has called the whole mixture gestalt therapy. His work has no substantive relation to scientific Gestalt psychology. To use his own language, Fritz Perls has done 'his thing'; whatever it is, it is not Gestalt psychology". Gestalt theory. However she restricts herself explicitly to only three of Perls' books from 1969 and 1972, leaving out Perls' earlier work, and Gestalt therapy in general. See Barlow criticizing Henle: Allen R. Barlow: Gestalt Therapy and Gestalt Psychology. Gestalt – Antecedent Influence or Historical Accident, in: The Gestalt Journal, Volume IV, Number 2, Fall, 1981.
- William Ray Woodward, Robert Sonné Cohen – World views and scientific discipline formation: science studies in the German Democratic Republic : papers from a German-American summer institute, 1988
- Lettvin, J.Y., Maturana, H.R., Pitts, W.H., and McCulloch, W.S. (1961). Two Remarks on the Visual System of the Frog. In Sensory Communication edited by Walter Rosenblith, MIT Press and John Wiley and Sons: New York
- Valentin Fedorovich Turchin – The phenomenon of science – a cybernetic approach to human evolution – Columbia University Press, 1977
- "Gestalt Isomorphism". Sharp.bu.edu. Retrieved 2012-04-06.
- Sternberg, Robert, Cognitive Psychology Third Edition, Thomson Wadsworth© 2003.
- Stevenson, Herb. "Emergence: The Gestalt Approach to Change". Unleashing Executive and Orzanizational Potential. Retrieved 7 April 2012. Text "noedit" ignored (help)
- Soegaard, Mads. "Gestalt Principles of form Perception". Interaction Design. Retrieved 8 April 2012. Text "noedit" ignored (help)
- Todorovic, Dejan. "Gestalt Principles". scholarpedia. Retrieved 5 April 2012. Text "noedit" ignored (help)
- Langley& associates, 1987; Perkins, 1981; Weisberg, 1986,1995">
- Reyna, Valerie (2012). "A new institutionism: Meaning, memory, and development in Fuzzy-Trace Theory". Judgment and Decision Making 7 (3): 332–359.
- Soegaard, Mads. "Gestalt principles of form perception". Interaction-design.org. Retrieved 2012-04-06.
- Elio Conte, Orlando Todarello, Antonio Federici, Francesco Vitiello, Michele Lopane, Andrei Khrennikov, Joseph P. Zbilut: Some remarks on an experiment suggesting quantum-like behavior of cognitive entities and formulation of an abstract quantum mechanical formalism to describe cognitive entity and its dynamics, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, vol. 31, no. 5, March 2007, pp. 1076–1088 doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2005.09.061, arXiv:0710.5092 (submitted 26 October 2007)
- Elio Conte, Orlando Todarello, Antonio Federici, Francesco Vitiello, Michele Lopane, Andrei Khrennikov: A Preliminar Evidence of Quantum Like Behavior in Measurements of Mental States, arXiv:quant-ph/0307201 (submitted 28 July 2003)
- B.J. Hiley: Particles, fields, and observers, Volume I The Origins of Life, Part 1 Origin and Evolution of Life, Section II The Physical and Chemical Basis of Life, pp. 87–106 (PDF)
- Basil J. Hiley, Paavo Pylkkänen: Naturalizing the mind in a quantum framework. In Paavo Pylkkänen and Tere Vadén (eds.): Dimensions of conscious experience, Advances in Consciousness Research, Volume 37, John Benjamins B.V., 2001, ISBN 90-272-5157, pages 119-144
- Bruce, V., Green, P. & Georgeson, M. (1996). Visual perception: Physiology, psychology and ecology (3rd ed.). LEA. p. 110.
- Carlson, Neil R. and Heth, C. Donald (2010) Psychology the Science of Behaviour Ontario, CA: Pearson Education Canada. pp 20–22.
- Smith, Barry (ed.) (1988) Foundations of Gestalt Theory, Munich and Vienna: Philosophia Verlag, 1988.
- Gestalt psychology on Encyclopædia Britannica
- Gestalt Society of Croatia
- International Society for Gestalt Theory and its Applications – GTA
- Embedded Figures in Art, Architecture and Design
- On Max Wertheimer and Pablo Picasso
- On Esthetics and Gestalt Theory
- The World In Your Head – by Steven Lehar
- Gestalt Isomorphism and the Primacy of Subjective Conscious Experience – by Steven Lehar
- The new gestalt psychology of the 21st century
- The Pennsylvania Gestalt Center
- Gestalt Theory
- Ecological Approach to Visual Perception
- James J. Gibson in brief

Do our students think that their liberal education proves valuable in regard to their careers and finances in later life? A purely economic indicator seems to show that their answer to that question is Yes.
Parents, in difficult economic times it is tempting to steer sons and daughters to focus, narrow their interests, and learn a specific set of skills that seem designed for a particular job. To thrive in the world ahead, much more is needed.
Students interested in liberal arts subjects ought to be encouraged to pursue these subjects, since we know that interest is generally a key component of success, both in completing a college degree and in acquiring the skills the graduates of today will need for the jobs of tomorrow.
The Founding Fathers envisioned a Republic with an enlightened citizenry educated in "all philosophical Experiments that Light into the Nature of Things ... and multiply the Conveniences or Pleasures of Life" -- not just technical training for jobs that pay well.
Students will not show their true stuff unless they find what their "wow" factor is. They have to find the arena -- the discipline that engages them so that they do their best work -- because it interests them. Round pegs don't go in square holes.
Parents and students expect real results from the four-year undergraduate curriculum. This is not unreasonable. Scholarly studies have shown that programs like Global Citizen Year do deliver real educational outcomes.
Efforts to encourage innovation should stretch well beyond science and technology. Graduates in the fine arts, humanities and social sciences have roles to play. We need their creativity, ability to express important ideas, and understanding of societal needs.
At most liberal arts colleges, the majority of classes have fewer than 20 students. In this environment, faculty can guide students in sharing perspectives, debating ideas and making discoveries in ways that are just not possible when enrollments number in the hundreds or thousands.
It is on a college or university campus that students learn and strengthens an ability to live together as part of a community in a concrete and irreversible way: to give and take, to solve disagreements maturely.
Liberal arts courses are offered at art schools not only to satisfy the requirements for a college degree. They inform and provide greater depth to the art that a student is creating and will make in the future.

Editor’s Note: David Wise is the author of numerous books on national security, intelligence and espionage. His latest book, Tiger Trap: America’s Secret Spy War with China, was published June 14 by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
By David Wise – Special to CNN
For almost half a century during the Cold War, the world focused on the global espionage battle between the United States and the Soviet Union. The duel between the CIA and the KGB, portrayed in countless books, films and news stories captured the public imagination.
Espionage became a kind of entertainment thanks in no small part to the fictional exploits of James Bond. This fiction masked a cold reality.
In the actual conflict, spies and their agents died. Lives were shattered. The KGB's supermoles - Aldrich Ames in the CIA and Robert Hanssen in the FBI - stole U.S. secrets by the trunkful and betrayed agents working for U.S. intelligence. Many of those agents were executed.
A the East-West intelligence battles played out in back alleys across the globe, scant attention was paid to the espionage operations of a rising global power– China. And scant attention was paid to the efforts of U.S. counterintelligence (not always successful) to counter Beijing's attempts to acquire America's secrets.
Inside the FBI, Soviet spies were regarded as the principal quarry. Chinese counterintelligence was relegated to a back seat. Yet, China has spied on America for decades with some spectacular but little known results.
During World War II, Soviet spies penetrated the Manhattan Project and stole U.S. atomic secrets. That was not lost on China. In the decades after World War II, Chinese espionage was principally aimed at stealing U.S. nuclear weapons data. By acquiring those secrets, China could bypass years of research and testing and speed its own development of nuclear weapons.
With its modernization efforts devastated by the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, China coveted such shortcuts. So the United States, particularly the nuclear weapons labs at Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore, became its primary target.
The FBI suspected that Gwo-Bao Min, an engineer at the Livermore lab, had passed the secrets of the neutron bomb to China. The case was given the code-name TIGER TRAP by the Bureau. Although the FBI gathered considerable evidence, the Justice Department declined to authorize an arrest. However, Min was forced to resign from the nuclear weapons lab.
Another priority of Chinese intelligence has been to infiltrate U.S. counterintelligence. The F.B.I. was penetrated until 2002 by Katrina Leung, a prominent figure in the Chinese American community in Los Angeles who worked as an F.B.I. asset for twenty years under the code name PARLOR MAID.
Leung was having affairs with the bureau's two top agents on the West Coast responsible for Chinese counterintelligence, James J. Smith and William V. Cleveland, Jr. She fed F.B.I. secrets to China’s foreign intelligence service, the M.S.S., for years, telling investigators she filched them from Smith's briefcase during their trysts at her home.
F.B.I. director Robert S. Mueller III assigned his top counterintelligence agent, Leslie G. Wiser, Jr., to go to Los Angeles in 2002 and investigate. Operating with a team of handpicked agents from a secret location in Santa Monica, Wiser broke open the case. Leung and Smith were arrested. Smith pleaded guilty to lying about his affair with Leung. She, too, pleaded guilty to lying about their affair and to failing to report some of her income from the F.B.I. Neither was sentenced to prison. And the government had avoided a sensational espionage trial in which the Bureau’s secrets might have been aired.
The CIA was also penetrated by Chinese intelligence. A mole named Larry Wu-Tai Chin worked for Chinese intelligence for more than 30 years until he was caught by the FBI in 1985.
There have been many more recent examples of Chinese spying against the United States. Dongfan "Greg" Chung volunteered to spy for China. Chung, a naturalized U.S. citizen, worked in the aerospace industry in southern California for thirty years.
At Boeing he was a stress analyst on the space shuttle. Chung sent twenty-four manuals from Rockwell to China on the B-1 bomber. When the F.B.I. searched his home in California in 2006 they were astonished to find 300,000 pages of Boeing documents hidden in the house pertaining to the space shuttle, rockets and military aircraft. Some of the documents were in a crawl space underneath the house. Chung was arrested, convicted and sentenced in 2010 to almost sixteen years in prison.
China and the United States have a mutual dependence and a common interest in avoiding conflict. Without exaggerating the danger of Chinese espionage, it is a fact that China’s spying on America is ongoing, current and shows no sign of diminishing.
Chinese computer hackers have penetrated the Pentagon, the State Department and U.S. companies, such as Google.
Americans should be aware that China, when it can, steals U.S. secrets. The espionage battle is no less real for being largely unseen.
The views expressed in this article are solely those of David Wise.
The Global Public Square is where you can make sense of the world every day with insights and explanations from CNN's Fareed Zakaria, leading journalists at TIME and CNN, and other international thinkers. Join GPS editor Jason Miks and get informed about global issues, exposed to unique stories, and engaged with diverse and original perspectives.
Every week we bring you in-depth interviews with world leaders, newsmakers and analysts who break down the world's toughest problems.
CNN U.S.: Sundays 10 a.m. & 1 p.m ET | CNN International: Find local times
Check out all of Fareed's TIME columns here:

ANWR: Producing American Energy and Creating American Jobs
Map of northern Alaska showing locations of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge,
the 1002 area, and the National Petroleum Reserve—Alaska (NPRA).
Source: U.S. Geological Survey
Chairman Doc Hastings recently announced plans to recommend increased offshore and onshore drilling – including in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) in Alaska - to the Joint Select Committee as a way to help reach their deficit reduction goals. Responsible energy production on less than three percent of ANWR’s total land could create thousands of jobs, generate billions in new revenue and help reduce our dependence on foreign sources of oil.
Small Area = Big Energy Potential
The North Slope of ANWR, known as “Area 1002”, was specifically set aside by Congress and President Carter in 1980 for oil and natural development. This area is not designated as Wilderness.
A plan developing 500,000 acres—less than three percent of ANWR’s acreage—would provide access to the majority of ANWR’s resources.
Supplying America’s Families and Businesses with American Energy
According to U.S. Geological Survey estimates, the North Slope contains an estimated 10.4 billion barrels of oil.
This is more than the known oil reserves of entire countries that the U.S. currently imports oil from, including: Mexico, Angola, Azerbaijan, Norway, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Egypt, Australia and New Zealand, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
At peak production, ANWR could supply up to 1.45 million barrels of oil per day.
This is more than the U.S. imports from Saudi Arabia every day.
Alternatively, 1.45 million barrels of oil per day is over one quarter of what the U.S. imports from OPEC countries each year.
Reducing the Debt, Generating New Federal Revenue
Developing ANWR’s resources could generate approximately $150 billion to $296 billion in new federal revenue – a substantial amount that would help pay down our Nation’s debt.
Total government revenue, including leases, royalties, and state local and federal taxes for the life of ANWR field production, could be as much as $440 billion.
Creating American Jobs, Growing the Economy
Opening a small portion of ANWR to energy production would create tens of thousands of American jobs and contribute to significant economic growth.
Studies have shown ANWR job creation ranging from 55,000 to 130,000 jobs.
Increasing Our National Security
Responsibly developing our own American energy resources in ANWR will help reduce our dependence on oil from hostile countries and lower foreign imports.
According to the Energy Information Administration, crude oil imports will decline by one barrel for every barrel of ANWR oil production.
Protecting the Environment Through New Technology
Extended reach drilling allows for one single platform to cover a 28,000 foot radius,
which is larger than the size of Washington, D.C.
Advancements in technology allow for energy production to occur safely and with minimal environmental impact.
For example, new extended reach drilling allows for one single drilling platform to cover a 28,000 ft radius—larger than the size of Washington D.C. (see map).
Supporting Local Communities
Many Alaska Natives support energy production in ANWR and recognize the jobs and economic benefits it will bring to their communities. It has strong support from the Village of Kaktovik - the only town within the coastal plain of ANWR.

(HealthDay News) - Lifting objects -- sometimes even light ones -- is a common cause of back strain and injury.
To help prevent injury when lifting things, follow these techniques suggested by the American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons:
By Dr. Eric L. Seiler - Chiropractor
Back problems seem to occur in epidemic proportions. This might lead one to believe that our spines are poorly designed - but nothing could be further from the truth. Every part of the miraculous human body was designed to function perfectly and last you 90 plus years. The problem is not the way our bodies are designed, but rather the abnormal stresses we subject our bodies to. In this sense, in many ways, our bodies are like square pegs being forced into round holes. Not a good fit.
Modernization has improved the quality of our lives in many ways, but it has also taken a toll. We subject ourselves to physical stresses in the modern world that our bodies were not designed to handle. One example is that we spend too much time sitting. Sitting places our spines in an abnormal and ‘compressive’ orientation with gravity. This causes misalignment of vertebrae and pre-mature breakdown of spinal discs - a major cause for all the back pain, neck pain and headaches that we suffer.
For over a century now, the chiropractic profession has led the way in understanding how abnormal lifestyle-induced stress can cause alignment problems in the spine that in turn cause pain, reduced mobility and even problems with general health and wellness. Misaligned vertebrae can irritate nerves, causing a wide variety of health problems. Misaligned vertebrae that irritate nerves have a special name. They are called ‘subluxations’.
Chiropractors correct subluxations using spinal adjustments; gentle forces applied by hand to re-align vertebrae. Chiropractors may also council their patients in how to avoid or minimize the negative physical stresses that cause spinal problems in the first place. One thing you can do right away to help yourself is to find ways to minimize the amount of time you sit in an upright position. No one should sit continuously for more than a half an hour without getting up and moving around for awhile. Even taking a one minute ‘micro-break’ each half hour from the compressive stress of sitting can have a major positive effect on your spine over time.
If you are locked-in to a lifestyle that keeps you sitting, consider investing in an ergonomically designed work chair that minimizes postural stress. ‘Zero-gravity’ reclining chairs are also an excellent choice for relaxing and reducing the stress of sitting upright all day. While recliners are very helpful, relieving your spine of the compressive force of gravity is achieved primarily through sleep. If you are a restless sleeper, or sleep for only short durations, you may find that you have morning back or neck pain. You may profit from investing in a new bed and pillows that provide proper support as you sleep.
Your specialist at ‘The Better Back Store’ has a full range of products that will allow you to sit and sleep in a healthier way. A good chiropractor, along with some intelligently designed, properly supportive furniture can help make a better fit for your ‘square peg’ body in this physically stressful ‘round hole’ world!
Seiler Chiropractic Clinic
Eric L. Seiler D.C.
30651 U. S. 19 N
Palm Harbor, Fl 34684
© 2002- TheBetterBackStore.net All Rights Reserved.

Dr. Gabriel Barkay points to the tomb where he discovered the tiny biblical artifacts that date from well before the Dead Sea Scrolls.
SOLVING A RIDDLE WRITTEN IN SILVER
By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD
New York Times
....An archaeological discovery in 1979 revealed that the Priestly Benediction, as the verse from Numbers 6:24-26 is called, appeared to be the earliest biblical passage ever found in ancient artifacts. ["May Yahweh bless you and keep you; may Yahweh cause his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you; may Yahweh lift up his countenance upon you and grant you peace."]
Two tiny strips of silver, each wound tightly like a miniature scroll and bearing the inscribed words, were uncovered in a tomb outside Jerusalem and initially dated from the late seventh or early sixth century B.C. - some 400 years before the famous Dead Sea Scrolls.
But doubts persisted. The silver was cracked and corroded, and many words and not a few whole lines in the faintly scratched inscriptions were unreadable. Some critics contended that the artifacts were from the third or second century B.C., and thus of less importance in establishing the antiquity of religious concepts and language that became part of the Hebrew Bible.
So researchers at the University of Southern California have now re-examined the inscriptions using new photographic and computer imaging techniques. The words still do not exactly leap off the silver. But the researchers said they could finally be "read fully and analyzed with far greater precision," and that they were indeed the earliest.
In a scholarly report published this month, the research team concluded that the improved reading of the inscriptions confirmed their greater antiquity. The script, the team wrote, is indeed from the period just before the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 B.C. by Nebuchadnezzar and the subsequent exile of Israelites in Babylonia.
The researchers further reaffirmed that the scrolls "preserve the earliest known citations of texts also found in the Hebrew Bible and that they provide us with the earliest examples of confessional statements concerning Yahweh."
Some of the previously unreadable lines seemed to remove any doubt about the purpose of the silver scrolls: they were amulets. Unrolled, one amulet is nearly four inches long and an inch wide and the other an inch and a half long and about half an inch wide. The inscribed words, the researchers said, were "intended to provide a blessing that will be used to protect the wearer from some manner of evil forces."
The report in The Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research was written by Dr. Gabriel Barkay, the archaeologist at Bar-Ilan University in Israel who discovered the artifacts, and collaborators associated with Southern California's West Semitic Research Project. The project leader is Dr. Bruce Zuckerman, a professor of Semitic languages at U.S.C., who worked with Dr. Marilyn J. Lundberg, a Hebrew Bible specialist with the project, and Dr. Andrew G. Vaughn, a biblical historian at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minn.
A companion article for next month's issue of the magazine Near Eastern Archaeology describes the new technology used in the research. The article is by the same authors, as well as Kenneth Zuckerman, Dr. Zuckerman's brother and a specialist in photographing ancient documents.
Other scholars not affiliated with the research but familiar with it agreed with the group's conclusions.
They said it was a relief to have the antiquity and authenticity of the artifacts confirmed, considering that other inscriptions from biblical times have suffered from their uncertain provenance.
Scholars also noted that early Hebrew inscriptions were a rarity, and called the work on the amulets a significant contribution to an understanding of the history of religion in ancient Israel, particularly the time of the Judean Monarchy 2,600 years ago.
"These photographs are far superior to what you can see looking at the inscriptions with the naked eye," said Dr. Wayne Pitard, professor of the Hebrew Bible and ancient Near Eastern religions at the University of Illinois.
Dr. Pitard said the evidence for the antiquity of the benediction was now compelling, although this did not necessarily mean that the Book of Numbers already existed at that time. Possibly it did, he added, but if not, at least some elements of the book were current before the Babylonian exile.
A part of the sacred Torah of Judaism (the first five books of the Bible), Numbers includes a narrative of the Israelite wanderings from Mount Sinai to the east side of the Jordan River. Some scholars think the Torah was compiled in the time of the exile. A number of other scholars, the so-called minimalists, who are influential mainly in Europe, argue that the Bible was a relatively recent invention by those who took control of Judea in the late fourth century B.C. In this view, the early books of the Bible were largely fictional to give the new rulers a place in the country's history and thus a claim to the land.
"The new research on the inscriptions suggests that that's not true," Dr. Pitard said. In fact, the research team noted in its journal report that the improved images showed the seventh-century lines of the benediction to be "actually closer to the biblical parallels than previously recognized."
Dr. P. Kyle McCarter of Johns Hopkins University, a specialist in ancient Semitic scrip ts, said the research should "settle any controversy over these inscriptions."
A close study, Dr. McCarter said, showed that the handwriting is an early style of Hebrew script and the letters are from an old Hebrew alphabet, which had all but ceased to be used after the destruction of Jerusalem. Later Hebrew writing usually adopted the Aramaic alphabet.
There was an exception in the time of Roman rule, around the first centuries B.C. and A.D. The archaic Hebrew script and letters were revived and used widely in documents. But Dr. McCarter noted telling attributes of the strokes of the letters and the spelling on the amulets that, he said, ruled out the more recent date for the inscriptions. Words in the revived Hebrew writing would have included letters indicating vowel sounds. The benediction, the scholar said, was written in words spelled entirely with consonants, the authentic archaic way.
The two silver scrolls were found in 1979 deep inside a burial cave in a hillside known as Ketef Hinnom, west of the Old City of Jerusalem. Dr. Barkay, documenting the context of the discovery, noted that the artifacts were at the back of the tomb embedded in pottery and other material from the seventh or sixth centuries B.C. Such caves were reused for burials over many centuries. Near this tomb's entrance were artifacts from the fourth century, but nothing so recent remains in the undisturbed recesses.
It took Dr. Barkay another seven years before he felt sure enough of what he had to announce details of the discovery. Even then, for all their microscopic examination of the inscriptions at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, scholars remained frustrated by the many unreadable words and lines.
About a decade ago, Dr. Barkay enlisted the help of Dr. Zuckerman, whose team had earned a reputation for achieving the near-impossible in photographing illegible ancient documents.
Working with scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Dr. Zuckerman's group used advanced infrared imagining systems enhanced by electronic cameras and computer image-processing technology to draw out previously invisible writing on a fragment of the Dead Sea Scrolls. The researchers also pioneered electronic techniques for reproducing missing pieces of letters on documents. By examining similar letters elsewhere in the text, they were able to recognize half of a letter and reconstruct the rest of it in a scribe's own peculiar style.
"We learned a lot from work on the Dead Sea Scrolls," Dr. Zuckerman said. "But at first a processing job like this would send your computers into cardiac arrest. We had to wait for computer technology to catch up with our needs."
As the researchers said in their magazine article, the only reasonably clear aspect of the inscriptions was the Priestly Benediction. Other lines preceding or following the prayer "could barely be seen."
To get higher-definition photographs of the inscriptions, Ken Zuckerman applied an old photographer's technique called "light painting," brought up to date by the use of fiber-optic technology. He used a hand-held light in an otherwise dark room to illuminate a spot on the artifact during a time exposure. In addition, he photographed the artifact at different angles, which made the scratched letters shine in stark relief.
The next step was to convert the pictures to digital form, making possible computer processing that brought out "the subtleties of the surface almost at the micron level." This analysis was particularly successful in joining a partial letter stroke on one side of a crack with the rest of the stroke on the other side. It also enabled the researchers to restore fragments of letters to full legibility by matching them with clear letters from elsewhere in the text.
In this way, the researchers filled in more of the letters and words of the benediction itself and for the first time deciphered meaningful words and phrases in the lines preceding the benediction.
Scholars were particularly intrigued by a statement on the smaller artifact. It reads: "May h[e]/sh[e] be blessed by YHWH, the warrior/helper, and the rebuker of Evil."
Referring to God, Yahweh, as the "rebuker of Evil" is similar to language used in the Bible and in various Dead Sea Scrolls, scholars said. The phraseology is also found in later incantations and amulets associated with Israel, evidence that these artifacts were also amulets, researchers concluded.
"In the ancient world, amulets were taken quite seriously," Dr. Zuckerman said. "There's evil out there, demons, and you need protection. Having this around your neck, you are involving God's presence and protection against harm."
Dr. Esther Eshel, a professor of the Bible at Bar-Ilan and an authority on Hebrew inscriptions, said this was the earliest example of amulets from Israel. But she noted that the language of the benediction was similar to a blessing ("May he bless you and keep you") found on a jar from the eighth century B.C.
If the new findings are correct, the people who wore these amulets may have died before they had to face the limitations of their efficacy. They might then have asked in uncomprehending despair, "Where was Yahweh when the Babylonians swooped down on Jerusalem?"
Other scholars, including those previously skeptical, will soon be analyzing the improved images. In a departure from usual practices, the researchers not only published their findings in a standard print version in a journal but also as an accompanying "digital article," a CD version of the article and the images to allow scholars to examine and manipulate the data themselves.
The research group said, "As far as we are aware, this is the first article to be done in this fashion, but it certainly will not be the last."

"Who Save One Life."
The Email message read, "Can you help me by locating in your records the name of a monastery in France where I was hidden?" It explained that Quakers in the South of France had helped the writer during World War II.
Archives staff wanted to help but wondered if there were any ways to do so. Would it be possible to find the name of a monastery among hundreds of documents from that period? Would letter writers even include that sort of information, knowing the letters would be censored? If this had occurred when Germany occupied Vichy France, would any letters actually have found their way to the United States? These were some of the doubts that crossed our minds.
It took us several days to remember an unlikely connection that had occurred several years before. That was to be the key that unlocked a poignant and extraordinary story.
Some years prior to receiving the Email inquiry, the AFSC Archives received personal stories on tape from a European woman by the name of Alice Resch Synnestvedt. On the tapes, she shared some of her experiences about her work in the South of France where she was a member of the Secours Quaker group working among refugees who had congregated there. Prior to the German occupation of Vichy France in 1942, this group had included a mixture of European and U.S. workers. Those from the United States were arrested and interned in Germany after the occupation, while the European members of the group continued the work.
At the end of one of the cassettes, Alice discovered she had several remaining minutes of blank tape, so she filled it in by telling a true story. It was about how a Jewish mother approached her in the Toulouse region of France and asked Alice to hide her two children. The children were a boy and girl. The mother said the boy was 14, but Alice said she snorted in disbelief and thought he looked more like 17 because he was so tall. She thought it would be difficult to find a place to hide him. The girl was quite young and a place could easily be found for her. Alice pondered a good deal about a refuge for the boy and finally decided to visit a monastery she knew of where the monks were friendly and willing to be of help in such situations. So off Alice drove to the monastery to talk to the Abbott.
Alice Synnestvedt's recollection after so many years did not include the names of the boy or girl. She did remember, however, that the boy had sent a postcard to her from the monastery quite openly thanking her for finding a place of refuge for him. This caused her a number of days of anxiety about whether the postcard might have been read by someone else and the information passed to the authorities. However, the children went undiscovered, were eventually reunited with their father, and escaped with him to Switzerland a year later.
When we in the AFSC Archives heard this story, it made quite an impression, but, a number of years later when the man's Email inquiry arrived; it didn't immediately ring a bell. Days later, however, one of us suddenly made the connection. Alice Synnestvedt and the "boy" -- now a grown man and retired from his work -- were put in touch with each other. Indeed, they discovered that, unlikely as it seemed, Alice was the one who had hidden the boy and his sister.
A few years later Alice was invited to come to the United States to celebrate her ninetieth birthday. Those inviting her were other people she had helped as children during the war years, when her efforts helped them, too, to survive the Nazi Holocaust. At that time, they came into contact with her through the Secours Quaker staff. These middle-aged-and-older adults -- "her children" -- feted her by taking her to visit a number of cities in the Untied States, including Washington, D.C. There she visited the United States Memorial Holocaust Museum, where she saw her name listed among other righteous gentiles who had offered aid to others in need at the time.
The mystery was solved, and the writer of the Email message finally had a chance to express his gratitude to Alice. In one of his first letters to her, after many years of a separation that seemed unlikely to end, he wrote: "The Talmud says that those who save one life save the world. And you and your organization did just that."
Written by Jack Sutters, September 2002

Wed April 11, 2012
What Would The Buffett Rule Mean For The U.S. Economy
A tax-the-rich proposal named after Warren Buffett has little chance of passing this year, but that hasn't stopped the debate over what impact it would have.
Some economists are skeptical that a 30 percent minimum tax on people with million-dollar incomes — known as the "Buffett rule" — would do much to reduce the deficit or boost the economy. But the Obama administration says the proposal is necessary to make the tax code more equitable.
The Buffett rule would apply to wealthy people, but not all wealthy people. Instead, it would affect the tiny number of taxpayers — some of the nation's wealthiest — who make most of their money from investments.
Rob Williams, a senior fellow at the Tax Policy Center, says the proposed rule would not affect many of the people we think of as "very rich."
"For high income people who get a lot of their income from wage and salaries — the George Clooneys of the world, LeBron James, the CEOs — those people would not see an effect from the Buffett tax, because they're already paying tax rates above 30 percent," Williams says.
But, he says, wealthy people who get their money from assets like stocks and bonds would feel the pain.
"If you're in a situation like Mitt Romney or Warren Buffett ... paying a very low tax rate because most of your income comes from investments, you'll see a very large increase in taxes," Williams says.
All told, the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center says 217,000 households would be subject to the Buffett rule. While the actual amount would vary enormously from person to person, those households would pay an additional $190,000 in taxes, on average.
Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at BMO-Harris Private Bank, says many of those wealthy investors would rethink what they do with their money.
"If you tax millionaires that are investing in, for example, municipal bonds, and they're enjoying the tax benefit of that interest, you could see a whole rash of investors moving away from buying bonds of our state and local governments," Ablin says.
Under the Buffett rule, people who sell assets would suddenly be forced to pay much higher taxes on the profits they make. Will McBride, an economist with the Tax Foundation, says many people would rush to unload the assets they hold before the law takes effect.
"If this tax were to go into effect Jan. 1 of next year," McBride says, "the stock market in December would not look pretty."
Over the longer term, McBride says, the law would do even more damage to the economy. Because people would have to pay more taxes on the profits they make, they would have less incentive to invest, he says.
As a result, McBride argues, small startups would suffer. "You don't want to heavily tax investment, because you're taxing the thing that creates long-term economic growth," he says.
But Williams of the Tax Policy Center says there's little evidence that higher taxes actually affect investment all that much. Williams says companies and individuals have lots of cash — but they're not using it.
"The problem right now is not that people don't have monies to invest," Williams says. Rather, he says, "People don't see investment opportunities that they think are worth putting their money into," because the economy is so weak.
Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow with the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, contends that the Buffett rule could actually benefit the economy.
"A lot of very wealthy people spend a lot of time and money and effort structuring their income to take advantage of a tax code that's fraught with loopholes," Bernstein says.
Because the Buffett rule establishes a 30 percent minimum tax rate for millionaires, Bernstein says, it would be much harder for rich people to game the system.
"If anything, I think the kind of simplicity here militates against the kind of game-playing that we see so much of in our economy," he says. And, he argues, a simpler tax system would be good for the economy in the long run.
But none of that will happen unless the Buffet rule becomes law. And right now, there's little indication that Congress is going to pass it.

The bending of water waves as they encounter different depths and bottom conditions, or of other waves as they pass from one medium to another of different properties.
The bending of waves as they approach a shore so that their crests make no more than a 5° angle with the shoreline.
The re-orientation of a wave so that it approaches a shoreline at a more perpendicular angle. This process is caused by the differential reduction of water depth as a linear wave approaches a curved shoreline. A reduction in water depth causes a wave to slow down causing the waves approaching a nonlinear shoreline to curve with the shore's shape.
The process by which a wave is bent or turned from its original direction. In sea waves, as a wave approaches a shore obliquely, part of it reaches the shallow water near the shore while the rest is still advancing in deeper water; the part of the wave in the shallower water moves more slowly than the part in the deeper water. In seismic waves, refraction results from the wave encountering material with a different density or composition.
The process by which a wave approaching the shore changes direction due to slowing of those parts of the wave that enter shallow water first, causing a sharp decrease in the angle at which the wave approaches until the wave is almost parallel to the coast.

Students represent water issues through artThe 7th annual Water is Life art contest invites Minnesota’s 9-12 grade students to create art and videos that represent issues facing our freshwater resources.
The 7th annual Water is Life art contest invites Minnesota’s 9-12 grade students to create art and videos that represent issues facing our freshwater resources.
This year, the theme for the contest is water conservation. Collaborating with Minnesota’s Educational Service Cooperatives, the Freshwater Society hopes to inspire and educate Minnesota’s youth of the important issues facing vulnerable freshwater resources.
Freshwater resources are facing a crisis, according to the society. The increase in human population, development and contamination of our water resources are creating a strain on surface and ground waters.
Conservation of these resources is the most efficient, economical and immediate tactic to ensure the sustainability of freshwater resources for future generations, according to the Freshwater Society.
The contest awards $500 scholarships to the six top finalists, prizes to each region’s semifinalists and recognition to each participant.
Each year the students produce amazing art and artist statements. The winning artwork and all the semi-finalists’ entries are exhibited at public venues, including the state Capitol.
For more information visit www.freshwater.org or www.lcsc.org.

Medicines are the treatment
that works best for schizophrenia, and you may be taking more than one at a time. They may be used for
negative symptoms, but they don't work as well for
negative symptoms as they do for positive symptoms.
It may take time to find
which medicines are best for you. This may be frustrating. Getting support from
your family, your friends, and a community-based rehabilitation program is
helpful, especially while you and your doctor are trying to find the best
medicines. It also may help to speak with and get support from others who have
had trouble finding the right medicines.
If you stop taking your
medicines, you may have a relapse. Don't stop taking your medicines until you
talk with your doctor. If you and your health care team decide you should stop
using medicine, you will need to be checked on a regular basis.
Medicines used most often to
treat schizophrenia include:
- First-generation antipsychotics, such as haloperidol
(Haldol), perphenazine, and chlorpromazine.
- Second-generation antipsychotics, such as risperidone (Risperdal) and aripiprazole (Abilify).
- Clozapine, such as
These medicines often are used along with
the medicines listed above:4
- Lithium carbonate, such as Lithobid and
- Antianxiety medicines, such as clonazepam (Klonopin)
and diazepam (for example, Valium).
- Anticonvulsant medicines, such as
carbamazepine (for example, Tegretol) and valproate (for example, Depakote).
- Antidepressant medicines, such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (for example, Zoloft or Celexa) or tricyclic
antidepressants (for example, Pamelor).
Because of side
effects or the risk of side effects, you may be tempted to stop using your
medicine. But if you stop using medicine, the symptoms of schizophrenia may
come back or get worse.
If you have any concerns about side
effects, talk to your doctor. He or she will work with you. Your doctor may
give you a smaller dose of the antipsychotic medicine, have you try another
antipsychotic medicine, or give you another medicine to treat the side effect.
Some side effects of antipsychotic
medicines can be serious.
- Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare but life-threatening side effect of antipsychotics.
The first signs usually include a fever between
102°F (38.9°C) and
103°F (39.4°C), a fast or
irregular heartbeat, rapid breathing, and severe sweating.
- Tardive dyskinesia is body movement that you can't
You may need regular blood tests to check for side effects. Children, teens, and older adults
may need to have blood tests more often than other people.

Chapter 14. Evolutionists' Confessions Regarding the Invalidity of the "Horse Series"
Until recently, the imaginary sequence showing the supposed evolution of the horse headed the list of fossil chronologies portrayed as evidence for the theory of evolution. However, many evolutionists now openly admit that the horse-evolution scenario is a fabrication.
The equine evolution scenario was proposed on the basis of evolutionists' imaginations with invented sequences of fossils, set out in order of size, belonging to different life forms that lived at different times in India, North America, South America and Europe. Various researchers have proposed more than twenty different equine evolution sequences. There is absolutely no consensus regarding these completely different alleged lines of descent. The only thing these sequences have in common is the belief that the first ancestor of the horse was a relatively small dog-like animal known as Eohippus (Hyracotherium) that lived in the Eocene period some 55 million years ago. In fact, however, Eohippus, which supposedly became extinct millions of years ago, is in fact identical to the animal known as the hyrax, which is still to be found in Africa today, which has nothing to do with the horse and bears no resemblance to it.
The inconsistency of the idea of equine evolution is becoming more and more apparent with every new fossil discovery. It has been established that fossils of horse breeds living today (Equus nevadensis and E. occidentalis) have been found in the same strata as Eohippus. This shows that the present-day horse was living at the same time as its supposed ancestor and is therefore obvious proof that no such process as the evolution of the horse ever took place.
One of the most important pieces of evidence that totally demolish the claim in question is that at a time when evolutionists maintain an ancestor of the horse the size of a dog appeared, in other words 50 million years ago, perfect horses were actually already in existence. Flawless horse skulls dating back 45 million years prove the invalidity of Darwinist claims.
Boyce Rensberger, an evolutionist, addressed a conference held at the Chicago Museum of Natural History in November 1980, with the participation of 150 evolutionists at which the problems of the theory of evolution were discussed. He described how the scenario of equine evolution was unsupported by the fossil record and that no gradual equine evolution ever occurred:
Some other renowned evolutionists have also made confessions about this fact.
Gordon R. Taylor is an evolutionist author and chief science advisor for the BBC:
Paleontologist Niles Eldredge, curator of the American Museum of Natural History:
Prof. N. Heribert-Nilsson, a famous evolutionist botanist at the University of Lund in Sweden:
Stephen Jay Gould:
Prof. Dr. Ali Demirsoy:
266- Boyce Rensberger, Houston Chronicle, November 5, 1980, p. 15.
267- Gordon Rattray Taylor, The Great Evolution Mystery, p. 230.
268- Niles Eldredge, quoted in Darwin’s Enigma by Luther D. Sunderland, Santee, CA, Master Books, 1988, p. 78.
269- Prof. Heribert Nilsson, Synthetische Artbildung, Verlag CWE Gleerup, Sweden, 1954, pp. 551-552.
270- Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge, "Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age," Nature, Vol. 336 (18 November 1993), p. 226.
271- Ali Demirsoy, Kalıtım ve Evrim [Inheritance and Evolution], p. 37.

George Washington Carver
Shampoo from peanuts? Ink from sweet potatoes? With imagination and scientific skill, George Washington Carver developed hundreds of unexpected products from everyday plants.
Although he is best known for his work on a common legume (the peanut), this exhibition reveals he was an exceptionally uncommon man: outstanding scholar, innovative scientist, pioneering conservationist, and impassioned educator.
The exhibition is organized by The Field Museum in collaboration with Tuskegee University and the National Park Service. It is sponsored in Chicago by Motorola Foundation and Sara Lee Foundation.
Approximately 4,500 ft2 (418 m2)
One-way, inbound, paid by host venue
- George Washington Carver Fact Sheet
- George Washington Carver Tour Schedule
- George Washington Carver Exhibition Brief
- George Washington Carver Exhibition Website

Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
In tort law, the standard of care is the degree of prudence and caution required of an individual who is under a duty of care. A breach of the standard is necessary for a successful action in negligence.
The requirements of the standard are closely dependent on circumstances. Whether the standard of care has been breached is determined by the trier of fact, and is usually phrased in terms of the reasonable person. It was famously described in Vaughn v. Menlove (1837) as whether the individual "proceed[ed] with such reasonable caution as a prudent man would have exercised under such circumstances."
Professional standard of care Edit
In certain industries and professions, the standard of care is determined by the standard that would be exercised by the reasonably prudent manufacturer of a product, or the reasonably prudent professional in that line of work. Such a test (known as the 'Bolam Test') is used to determine whether a doctor is liable for medical malpractice.
Medical standard of care Edit
A standard of care is a medical or psychological treatment guideline, and can be general or specific. It specifies appropriate treatment based on scientific evidence and collaboration between medical and/or psychological professionals involved in the treatment of a given condition.
Some common examples include:
- Treatment standards applied within public hospitals to ensure that all patients receive appropriate care regardless of financial means.
- Treatment standards for gender identity disorders
1. Diagnostic and treatment process that a clinician should follow for a certain type of patient, illness, or clinical circumstance. Adjuvant chemotherapy for lung cancer is "a new standard of care, but not necessarily the only standard of care." (New England Journal of Medicine, 2004)
2. In legal terms, the level at which the average, prudent provider in a given community would practice. It is how similarly qualified practitioners would have managed the patient's care under the same or similar circumstances. The medical malpractice plaintiff must establish the appropriate standard of care and demonstrate that the standard of care has been breached.
A special standard of care also applies to children, who are held to the behavior that is reasonable for a child of similar age, experience, and intelligence.
- Care Standards Act 2000
- Clinical governance
- Duty of care
- National Care Standards (Scotland)
- Reasonable person
- Standard of care in English law
- Treatment protocols
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|

Pre- and Post-Visit: Winter (Grades 1-2)
Students that have spent time preparing for their visit to Glacier National Park get more out of a field trip to the park. Activities post-visit also help to reinforce information learned during the trip.
The following are some of our suggested pre-visit activities, as well as supplementary materials that may aid in preparing for your trip.
Suggested classroom activities from Teacher's Guide
Winter Ecology Teacher's Guide (pdf) - this is a large file and may take time to download
Did You Know?
Did you know that over 35 Hollywood films were set in Glacier National Park? In honor of film being an American tradition, the Glacier Centennial Program hosted a film festival throughout 2010.

Natural disasters hurt incumbents
As Hurricane Sandy leaves millions without power across the East Coast, many commentators have argued that at least one person may benefit from the storm: President Barack Obama. But seeing Sandy as only an electoral benefit for the president ignores accumulating evidence on how “acts of God” influence elections. That evidence shows that voters often punish the incumbent party for adverse events, even events seemingly beyond any president’s control.
For example, one of us was part of a team that examined how tornadoes affect voting behavior. We found that voters in counties which sustained damage in election years were 1 point to 2 percentage points less likely to vote for the incumbent. While most states affected by Sandy are reliably Democratic, even small changes could affect close House and Senate races in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, or in a swing state such as Virginia.Continue Reading
A Princeton study found that American voters punished the incumbent presidential party for droughts, flu epidemics and even shark attacks. In 1916, in some of the very same New Jersey beach communities devastated by Sandy, shark attacks cost incumbent Woodrow Wilson up to eight percentage points.
In recently published research, we looked at decades of weather data and hundreds of elections in India. We found that incumbents fare much worse at the polls when droughts or floods — events over which the government has no control — occur. An adverse weather event cost incumbent parties about six percentage points at the polls. While the United States is not India — our population of farmers is smaller — the study provides two important lessons. First, the electoral effect is much more pronounced when the weather shock occurred in an election year. Second, voters voted against the incumbent ruling party, rather than against their individual legislators.

ixated as the Victorians were on death, it is not at all surprising that a number of talented British poets in the nineteenth century would have explored mourning. From the elaborate, regal funerals of British royalty down to the simpler funerals of members of the working class — paid for by dutifully purchased death insurance — rituals of death formed an integral part of British life (Jones, 199). Yet the poets explored here do not write about funerals. Nor do they follow the traditional patterns of elegiac poetry, for example, used in Algernon Charles Swinburne's elegy to Baudelaire, "Ave Atque Vale." Rather, they thoroughly explore various aspects of the emotional experience of mourning. Some poets, notably Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Alfred Lord Tennyson, delve into the ways that people express grief. Tennyson also struggles with the role of one's conscience in the process of mourning and with ways to reconcile a personal need for comfort and consolation with a strong desire to honor and preserve the memory of the deceased. Christina Rossetti examines how gender and sexual interest influence the way people mourn; in particular, she considers the value of mourning in relationships in which the fleeting nature of love is acknowledged. Both she and Tennyson deal with the dead woman as an aesthetic object, and the belated mourning of a previously inattentive male figure who feasts his eyes upon the dead female, bringing to light another aspect of the way gender relations affect mourning. Finally, Rossetti presents contrasting images of the afterlife that variously affect the practice of mourning, depending upon the consciousness of the deceased.
A common motif permeating poetry that deals with mourning is sound, be it in the form of tears of mourning, a missed language, a song of mourning or a noted silence. A large number of poems that consider death and mourning utilize images related to sound. The role of sound in the various elements of mourning these poets consider is crucial: sound is a critical link between two people; when one person dies, this connection is apparently broken, and the mourner is left in the unhappy position of vocally trying to maintain contact with the deceased. Thus, the numerous sound illusions in elegiac poetry are no more surprising than the general Victorian focus on death: people have mourned by means of words and songs for a long time. The emotionally charged and experimental ways of examining this method of mourning set apart the work of these poets.
Seeking a means of expressing grief
The loss of her parents is a shadow that hangs over Aurora Leigh in her struggle to mold her identity, in Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Aurora Leigh. Aurora tells of the loss of her mother early in the poem, describing the pain of a young child hardly old enough to understand what has happened but intensely aware that something is amiss. Aurora feels that she will always be searching for a mother because she was so young when her mother died and hence their time together was extremely brief.
I felt a mother-want about the world,
And still went seeking, like a bleating lamb
Left out at night, in shutting up the fold, —
As restless as a nest-deserted bird
Grown chill through something being away, though what
It knows not. [First book, lines 40-45, p. 2]
In Aurora's pain, she likens herself to "a bleating lamb," interestingly connecting her own mourning with the repeated cry of a young animal. The other animal analogy she makes is to a "nest-deserted bird," and since birds are associated with songs, this also seems to have aural connotations. Aurora is like a crying animal, calling out for attention to a loved one who will not hear her. Thus, this passage subtly develops the idea of mourning as a plea to the one who has died somehow to respond and return. Aurora feels that her mother, by dying, has shut her out of her love and deserted her.
The animals symbolically carry out Aurora's crying; she is too young to mourn by means of words, tears or songs, as her father writes in the verses to the memory of her mother, "Weep for an infant too young to weep much / When death removed this mother" (first book, lines 103-4, p. 4). Her father's entreaty is primarily calling for sympathy for the child who is too young to have known her mother and therefore too young to mourn her. However, he is literally calling for the act of mourning by means of tears to make up for the child's inability to cry about death at her age. Thus, there is a positive association with mourning in Aurora Leigh: there is a perceived need for Aurora to cry as part of the process of mourning her mother; the sadness of this circumstance is that the child is too young to mourn and hence show reverence and the pain of loss. She is also too young to experience the cathartic effects of mourning.
When she is still quite yo ung, Aurora's father dies as well. Aurora is then taken from her nurse and from Italy, her homeland, and sent to live with her aunt. The moment of parting from her nurse is wrought with agony and sounds of loss. Aurora cannot yet express her sadness, but at this point she is acutely aware of others' sounds, particularly the sounds emitted by her nurse in her unhappiness at being parted from Aurora.
[W]ith a shriek,
She let me go, — while I, with ears too full
Of my father's silence, to shriek back a word,
In all a child's astonishment at grief
Stared at the wharfage where she stood and moaned!
My poor Assunta, where she stood and moaned! [First Book, lines 226-31, p. 7]
Even as Aurora cannot speak in her youthful misery, she notices that her father's voice has been stilled and that her nurse moans as she anticipates the loss of Aurora. Thus, vocal mourning is associated not only with the adult way of grieving a death but also with the separation of people. Sound creates a connection between people, and death and parting break that link.
It is not until Aurora reaches England that she is finally able to cry over the death of her father. She hears Britons speaking English, a language which she had only heard her father speak, and she feels the pain of unfulfilled expectations: the love she had come to associate with that language has passed with the death of her father, and that same language is now spoken by strangers.
And when I heard my father's language first
From alien lips which had no kiss for mine,
I wept aloud, then laughed, then wept, then wept, —
And some one near me said the child was mad
Through much sea-sickness. [First Book, lines 254-58, p. 8]
Hearing the language and focusing on her loss, Aurora is finally able to grieve aloud, and she cries and laughs with sadness and relief at her ability to mourn. Her expression of grief is perceived by those around her as delirium or a fit of insanity. Although this is a somewhat negative response to her mourning, those around her do not know the cause of her tears, and so this passage does not seem to contradict the general sentiment in Aurora Leigh with regards to vocal mourning: it is a natural expression of pain that adults manifest, and that children, as they mature, will also learn to convey. Furthermore, the loss of a person creates a void: his voice is silenced. Hence, the vocal act of calling a person back fills that sound void, and is therefore comforting to the mourner.
Tennyson also considers the appropriate way to mourn and the role of sound in this process — particularly in the form of mourning songs — in In Memoriam, his experimental elegy for his beloved friend, Arthur Henry Hallam. He questions the morality of such methods of mourning with respect to the memory of the deceased; yet it seems that in addition to his concern for the deceased, the narrator is also personally dissatisfied with the effects of mourning songs.
Peace; come away: the song of woe
Is after all earthly song.
Peace; come away: we do him wrong
To sing so wildly: let us go. [57, lines 1-4, p. 239]
These lines suggest that the songs a mourner sings and the sounds of weeping together express a need to cling to the deceased and a refusal to relinquish him. The speaker and the other mourners dwell on the dead one, carrying on wildly rather than letting him pass peacefully and calmly. The narrator's call to those singing is to leave the dead behind and go on. He literally says that it does the deceased wrong when those alive sing, but he seems to be concerned with those who survive as well. Although this singing about loss is an earthly thing to do, and it is not exactly viewed by the speaker as an inappropriate way for those on earth to channel their grief, it is nonetheless not satisfying for exactly the reason it is natural: it is only earthly, and it provides no divine satisfaction to the mourner. The narrator is seeking that sort of spiritual experience and confirmation that Hallam died for a divine reason. The speaker feels this divine connection to Hallam in poem 95 of In Memoriam, and it is by means of touch not sound that the spiritual experience occurs, and that the narrator finds at least some degree of satisfaction.
The role of conscience
Throughout In Memoriam, Tennyson, as an evolving narrator, struggles in his efforts to cope with Hallam's death. He considers thoroughly how he will be affected by different modes of mourning, and he worries deeply about the effects these will have on him. He is acutely concerned that in mourning Hallam, he will somehow ease his own suffering; although he is urgently searching for divine meaning behind Hallam's death, his conscience continuously discourages him from mourning in any way that consoles him, and this makes his mourning process even more difficult and painful.
He contemplates the morality of writing about his friend's death, fearing that the action of writing, which may mitigate his pain — "Like dull narcotics, numbing pain" (5, line 8, p. 208), is unethical. The act of forming words out of his pain, he fears, will misrepresent his feelings because it is impossible to perfectly capture the state of his soul (5, lines 1-4, p. 208). Similarly, he worries that beyond simply soothing his pain, he is actually using the death of his friend as inspiration for his own artistic creation, just as the yew tree receives its nourishment from the dead bodies buried in graveyards (2, lines 1-4, p. 207); this is a highly disturbing thought to a character so plagued by his conscience. He also worries that the elegy he is writing for Hallam will not provide an enduring tribute to his friend.
Come; let us go: your cheeks are pale;
But half my life I leave behind.
Methinks my friend is richly shrined;
But I shall pass, my work will fail. [57, lines 5-8, p. 239]
Thus, in his mourning, the narrator is aiming not only to grapple with Hallam's death, but to create a worthy memorial for him.
Although the narrator calls for an end to mournful singing, he expresses the belief that he will always be haunted by sounds reminding him of the death of Hallam. He notes that until his hearing fails him or until he himself dies, he shall hear a slow, constant bell announcing the death of his friend repeatedly in his own ears. He also describes hearing the repeated farewells said to those who are dead.
Yet in these ears, till hearing dies,
One set slow bell will seem to toll
The passing of the sweetest soul
That ever look'd with human eyes.
I hear it now, and o'er and o'er,
Eternal greetings to the dead;
And "Ave, Ave, Ave," said,
"Adieu, adieu," for evermore. [57, lines 9-16, p. 239]
Thus, even when the mourner stops his vocal mourning, he nonetheless remains doomed to hear reminders of the death. It is as though the connection between the two men is so strong that not even death can break it, and sounds still draws them to one another.
At this point in the poem, the narrator seems to believe that it is the responsibility of the mourner forever to hear morbid, painful sounds. Interestingly, if memories of the dead can aurally infiltrate the being of the mourner but the mourner must remain silent and experience pain fully, the natural order of the world becomes inverted: rather than the dead being silenced and those who remain alive retaining the power to speak and sing, the reverse essentially is condoned. That is, the narrator may continue to speak and sing, orally expressing his grief, but such vocal manifestations of sadness are not encouraged. On the contrary, the bells prompting him to grieve, which the narrator hears in his mind, are considered righteous and appropriate.
Whereas some poems denigrate the act of mourning aloud, suggesting that it is inappropriate or inadequate, others discourage such forms of mourning in the particular context of romantic relationships and gender relations. For example, in Christina Rossetti's "Song," the narrator's request that the person to whom the poem is addressed not mourn is more a reflection of the dynamic between the characters and an indicator of gender relations than a suggestion of a general dissatisfaction of the narrator with vocal mourning.
When I am dead, my dearest,
Sing no sad songs for me;
Plant thou no roses at my head,
Nor shady cypress tree:
Be the green grass above me
With showers and dewdrops wet;
And if thou wilt remember,
And if thou wilt forget. [lines 1-8, p. 198]
As George Landow has shown in "The Dead Woman Talks Back: Christina Rossetti's Ironic Intonation of the Dead Fair Maiden," Rossetti is toying with and upsetting common ideas of Victorian femininity. The last two lines of the quotation above seem to conform to standard stereotypes of the self-sacrificing female: she does not want to inconvenience her lover or cause him distress by demanding that he mourn her and always remember her. Yet the final lines of the poem, "Haply I may remember, / And haply may forget" (lines 15-16) reverse the previous vision of self-sacrifice and eternal love on the part of the female speaker, suggesting instead that she is content to or at least quite capable of forgetting her lover and that he should do the same.
This reading allows for further consideration of the role of the specific acts of mourning that are mentioned in the poem. As the poem continues, the speaker describes a senseless afterlife in which she will not see, feel or hear anything, including the nightingale's song. Thus, her death will distinctly separate her from the world, and not even the mourning song of the nightingale will reach her. The removal of the speaker from the living world will render her incapable of hearing songs of mourning, and therefore such mourning rituals become ridiculous. In the course of the poem, the narrator gradually challenges the notion that there is eternal love between herself and the speaker. Thus, death can be seen as the appropriate moment at which to accept the rupture of their relationship, since it would not continue forever anyway; there is no need, then, to prolong the connection by means of songs and other customs of mourning. Rossetti boldly states what many people dare not admit: that the person who has died will not benefit from the mourning practices of those who survive him and hence, such customs only serve those who live. In a situation in which the lover is not likely to go on loving the woman who has died, Rossetti's narrator urges him not to mourn in false, showy ways: both of them will soon forget each other anyway.
Beyond projecting herself into the grave, the speaker in Rossetti's "After Death" is already dead and narrates the poem from the grave. She is thus a standard aesthetic object, deemed a beautiful and rich source for poetry (Landow). In this poem, the lamenting words of the dead woman's beloved reach her ears, even though he does not know it.
He leaned above me, thinking that I slept
And could not hear him; but I heard him say:
"Poor Child, poor child:" and as he turned away
Came a deep silence, and I knew he wept. [lines 5-8, p. 200]
In this case, the man's grieving words do provide comfort to the narrator, whom he did not love in her life and whom he can only pity in death. In the silence, she indicates her certainty that he is crying for her. Thus, words and tears of mourning have practical significance in this poem because they can be heard and felt by the deceased. Here the acts of mourning do not fall on deaf ears, and they are conveyed to the reader by the character with the most personal investment in them: the dead woman for whom they were intended.
The dead woman as an aesthetic object also appears at the end of Tennyson's "The Lady of Shalott" when the knight Lancelot notices the beauty of the dead Lady of Shalott. From the moment that she places herself in the boat and sets out down the river, sound plays a key role in setting the scene of her death. As she floats, "the noises of the night"(line 139) are mentioned, but it is the music that she herself creates that is the more powerful sound.
They heard her singing her last song,
The Lady of Shalott.
Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
Till her blood was frozen slowly,
And her eyes were darkened wholly,
Turned to tower'd Camelot.
For ere she reach'd upon the tide
The first house by the water-side,
Singing in her song she died,
The Lady of Shalott. [lines 143-53, p. 44]
It is as though the Lady of Shalott sounds her own death knell with her song. Her music is her final and only direct interaction with the world, distant as it is, before her death. She has emerged from her bower and sings a song that reaches the ears of those her boat passes on the journey to Camelot. Then, after death, she physically confronts the outside world. Previously, she saw shadows and reflections of the world outside and made no art that the outside world could appreciate. The sound she emits before her death, however, establishes a brief and melancholic connection between her and the world.
Yet when she reaches Camelot, she is "silent" (line 158, p. 44), and her deathly presence causes the merriment in the palace to cease, killing the sounds within (lines 164-5, p. 45). The silence of those at the palace stresses the absence of vocal mourning, emphasizing the distance between her and them, and their inability to feel deep compassion for her. The connection she made with them with her song is largely one-sided: most of them do not respond. Lancelot, however, does respond, but his comments about the beauty of her face and his request for God's blessing on her ring of transience: in death she has caught his fancy for a moment, but he will soon move on and forget her. In the same way that Rossetti argues against the immortality of love in "Song," Tennyson seems to suggest the inherently ephemeral nature of vocal mourning at the end of "The Lady of Shalott." The use of the word "mournful" anticipates her death, and perhaps compensates for the fact that she will not be mourned by anyone who knew her, except in her own self-pitying song.
The post-mortem mourning of the men who did not love or notice the women in life has a dramatic and ironic, yet somewhat shallow effect. In both "After Death" and "The Lady of Shalott," the reader is left with a slight feeling of satisfaction: at least the man has finally noticed the woman, if only for a moment and after her death. An aura of revenge, if only mild revenge, is thereby achieved: the punishment for having ignored the women in life is that the men are doomed to see beauty in the women only when they are already out of reach.
Images of the Afterlife
Rossetti's imaginings of life after death range from the complete alertness seen in "After Death" to the partially aware state of the woman in "Dream Land" to the completely senseless states of the women in "Song" and "Rest." The woman discussed in "Rest" is completely shielded from the sounds of earthly life. However, the sounds discussed in the poem are not sounds of mourning, but rather the sounds that make up daily life. The omniscient narrator calls for the earth to physically isolate and protect the buried woman from "mirth/ With its harsh laughter" (lines 3-4, p. 200) and the "sound of sighs" (line 4, p. 200). The narrator, who several times alludes to sound, claims that the woman will be spared all noise in her rest, and that the silence of death will be "more musical than any song" (line 10, p. 200). The afterlife in this poem resembles that described in "Song" in that the woman escapes to a senseless, timeless place of peace. Although "Rest" does not deal directly with mourning, it reinforces the idea that sound establishes a connection between people; in the woman's desire to escape the world in death, she is entirely isolated, both from people and sound.
Interestingly, in Rossetti's "Dream Land," she creates a post-mortem state somewhere between the full awareness of the narrator in "After Death" and the senseless afterlife described in "Song" and "Rest." The third person narrator in "Dream Land" never states that the woman in the poem is dead, saying rather that she is asleep, which is also implied by the title. However a number of illusions in the poem suggest that her sleep is actually death, or at least strongly resembles such a state: "a perfect rest" (line 17), "rest, for evermore" (line 25), and
Till time shall cease:
Sleep that no pain shall wake;
Night that no morn shall break
Till joy shall overtake
Her perfect peace. [lines 28-32, p. 199].
The final two lines in particular suggest the prospect of heaven after a deathly respite. Although Rossetti describes how the speaker cannot see grain or feel rain, she nonetheless is able to see "the sky look pale" (line 14) and hear "the nightingale / That sadly sings" (lines 15-6). Her awareness of these sights and sounds suggests an increased awareness as opposed to the senseless afterlife anticipated by the narrator of "Song." In "Dream Land" there is no indictment of mourning. Rather, there is a slight indication that sounds can pass between the worlds of the living and the dead or at least deeply sleeping; therein may lie a justification for the nightingale's song or a lover's cries of mourning, despite the indications in "Song" that such methods of mourning are futile.
As a contrast to Rossetti's quieter imaginings of the afterlife, and a parallel to "After Death," it seems reasonable to mention the afterlife envisioned by Robert Browning in his dramatic monologue, "The Bishop Orders his Tomb at Saint Praxed's Church." In "A Strangely Literal Afterlife," I discuss the lack of faith suggested by the fully aware, materialistic, and grudge-holding afterlife the Bishop envisions for himself. Yet despite Rossetti's devout religious tendencies, her depiction of the afterlife, in the poems discussed above, seems less religiously than emotionally focused: she is concerned with the women's connections or lack thereof to the world and people around them, and how death and awareness of sound affect these connections.
Mourning and the connections people hope to make by emitting sounds are relatively specific themes, yet they illuminate a distinct perspective on the broader topics of personal expression, conscience, gender and the afterlife, all subjects explored by the Victorian poets here considered. They created characters who aspire to connect with other people, sometimes those who have died and are therefore out of reach. These characters struggle to adequately express their emotions. In situations of loss, this need to express oneself is heightened as a result of suffering. As they grieve and search for meaning or solace in the wake of a death, some characters feel the strains of a strong conscience, causing them to question which forms of mourning and self-expression are moral and which are not. Certain poets considered the way that men grieve for women, sometimes viewing the process from unusual angles. Gender relations played an ever-changing role in Victorian life, so of course their appearance in the elegiac poetry of the nineteenth century is understandable. Poetry that deals with love often also considers loss, and this loss allows for creative conceptions of the afterlife. All of these subjects intimately relate to human relationships. By addressing these issues, the poems discussed show that sounds both draw people together and ultimately force them to accept that their connections have been severed — and that all that remains is silence.
Bolton, John, Robert Glorney and Julia Bolton Holloway, eds. Elizabeth Barrett Browning: Aurora Leigh and other Poems. Penguin Putnam Inc., New York, 1995.
Buckley, Jerome H. ed. The Pre-Raphaelites. Academy Chicago Publishers, Chicago: 1968.
Hill, Robert W. Jr., ed. Tennyson's Poetry. W. W. Norton and Company, Inc., New York: 1999.
Jones, Gareth Stedman. "Working-class culture and working-class politics in London, 1870-1900: Notes on the remaking of a working class" in Languages of class: studies in English working class history, 1832-1982. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1983.
Smalley, Donald ed.
Poems of Robert Browning
. Houghton Mifflin Company Riverside Editions, Boston: 1956.
Swinburne, Algernon Charles. "Ave Atque Vale, In Memory of Charles Baudelaire." [text on U. of Toronto site].
Last modified 17 December 2003

This is the third and final installment of this three part series. Please see earlier entries for part 1 and part 2.
What does the atheist do with Jesus of Nazareth?
Some atheists, right from the start, try to inject doubt into this topic by either overtly claiming or subtly hinting that there actually was no historical Jesus of Nazareth. For example, Bertrand Russell wrote: “Historically it is quite doubtful whether Christ ever existed at all, and if he did we know nothing about him.”
Although some may argue for the participation of other, earlier historical figures that began making these claims, most historians peg the start of these allegations with a man named Bruno Bauer (1809 – 1882). Bauer was a German theologian, philosopher and historian who looked at the sources of the New Testament and controversially concluded that early Christianity owed more to Greek philosophy (Stoicism) than to Judaism. Starting in 1840, he began a series of controversial works arguing that Jesus was a myth, a second century fusion of Jewish, Greek, and Roman theology.
Bauer’s work was picked up by Albert Kalthoff (1850-1906) who followed Bauer’s extreme skepticism about the historical Jesus. Kalthoff went so far as to claim that Jesus of Nazareth never existed and was not the founder of Christianity.
However, Bauer’s and Kalthoff’s assertions were refuted (and have continued to be refuted) by legions of historians, both Christian and secular. One example is Gary Habermas book “The Historical Jesus” that chronicles scores of extra-Biblical historical references to Jesus’ first century life, the count of which outnumbers citations of historical figures that no person doubts (e.g. Tiberius Caesar; 10 mentions vs. 43 for Jesus).
Summing up the conclusion on whether Jesus of Nazareth actually lived, Princeton New Testament scholar Dr. Bruce Metzger says, “Today no competent scholar denies the historicity of Jesus.”
So where is the atheist’s evidence that Jesus of Nazareth never existed? To date, no compelling proof has been offered.
Some atheists who know better than to attack the historicity of Jesus’ actual life put forward arguments that involve Christ being mythologized by His followers into more than He was. They try and assert that various pagan gods such as Horus, Mithras, etc., influenced the disciples who borrowed traits from those deities and attached them to Jesus.
Books such as James Frazer’s The Golden Bough and more recent works like the Internet Zeitgeist movie have been literally pulverized into submission by scholars who have showcased the many logical fallacies committed by the authors and the extraordinary lack of real commitment to historical research. Metzger says, “It goes without saying that alleged parallels which are discovered by pursuing such methodology evaporate when they are confronted with the original texts. In a word, one must beware of what have been called, ‘parallels made plausible by selective description.’”
The fact is, the atheist cannot deny the historicity of Jesus’ life and be on the side of historical truth. The core historical facts include the following:
Jesus was born to a young and very ordinary couple. There was some controversy surrounding his birth (which primarily centered on who his actual father was), however outside of that, he lived in relative obscurity for about thirty years. He then burst onto the religious scene in the Roman occupied areas of Galilee and Jerusalem as a very learned Jewish Rabbi, despite never being formerly educated. Reports of him performing amazing miracles (e.g. healing the sick, raising the dead, performing exorcisms) spread throughout the regions, along with claims of him being the long awaited Jewish Messiah. He gathered around him a band of fairly unsophisticated disciples, with others also following his itinerant preaching journeys.
Soon, though, he ran afoul of the Jewish religious leaders and was brought before the Roman authorities on a number of unsubstantiated charges. He was then condemned to death under the Roman prefect Pontius Pilate, put to death under the common form of Roman execution, which was crucifixion, and then buried.
Three days later, his body went missing and remains missing to this day. Reports of him appearing to both believers and unbelievers alike quickly began to circulate. His disciples who had fled from him during his arrest then boldly began to declare that they had seen him alive, that he was the Christ of God, with his resurrection becoming the absolute center of their preaching. A number of his disciples were martyred for their refusal to deny their story, with others like John dying of natural causes.
Lastly, a zealous Jewish Pharisee, Saul of Tarsus, who had formerly persecuted the new Jesus movement, claimed he too had seen Jesus alive. Saul converted to the Christian faith and eventually was beheaded by the emperor Nero for his faith around 65 A.D.
Now, it’s important to understand one thing about the prior statements: none of them requires any faith whatsoever to believe. Not one. Every claim above can be confirmed via the standard, scholarly methods (including archaeological finds that back the Bible) used to verify ancient history.
The question is, when a philosophical appeal to the best explanation is made to account for these facts, where does the atheist end up?
What bothers the atheists the most, obviously, is Christ’s resurrection. Dead men stay dead, says the atheist. Our experience tells us that this is something you can count on.
Dead people do indeed stay dead in a naturalistic-only reality that is a closed system. But what if…what if there is a supernatural reality and our universe is actually an open system to a Creator that transcends everything that is physical? That is a horse of a different color, and one that goes back to the atheist’s need for philosophical and empirical evidence to rule out God.
Occasionally an atheist will say to me (quoting Carl Sagan): “Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.” What they often don’t realize is that, while they meant to slice into me with their comment, their sword actually cuts both ways.
The atheist claims that a cause (with a beginning all its own) possessing none of the characteristics of its effects created all that we know. That’s a pretty extraordinary claim.
The atheist claims that “Living objects . . . look designed, they look overwhelmingly as though they’re designed. Biology is the study of complicated things which give the impression of having been designed for a purpose”, and that the information (not data) contained with all of us did not come from an intelligent source. That’s a pretty extraordinary claim.
The atheist claims that either Jesus never existed or all the historical accounts written about Him are inaccurate, exaggerated, and cannot be trusted. That’s a pretty extraordinary claim.
If extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence, then the atheist has some explaining to do. And that explaining needs to involve supplying the same rock-solid proof (not mere theories) that they themselves routinely require of Christians.
 Bertrand Russell, Why I am not a Christian, pg. 16.
 Bruce Metzger, The New Testament: Its Background, Growth, and Content (New York: Abingdon, 1965), pg. 78.
 Bruce Metzger, Historical and Literary Studies: Pagan, Jewish, and Christian (Grand Rapid, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1968), 9.
 Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 1986, Pg. 1.

Flight pioneer Bertrand Piccard, an aeronaut who made the first nonstop round the world balloon flight, recently unveiled a prototype of an incredible solar-powered airplane that will one day circle the globe. Dubbed the Solar Impulse, the plane first caught our attention when it was being developed, and we’re thrilled to see a working prototype of the vehicle. Is the age of the solar powered airplane upon us?
The first test of the HB-SIA, (the technical name for the Solar Impulse), will take place at the end of 2009. The Solar Impulse team is aiming for a flight sequence that will last for two days and one night, propelled only by solar energy. Once that test is completed, they plan on traveling around the world.
The Solar Impulse is made out of carbon fibre concentrate, looks like a glider, and has a wingspan of over 60 meters. The wings are covered in almost 12,000 solar cells which store excess power in over 400 kilograms worth of batteries. These solar cells power four ten horsepower electric motors, which propel the plane into flight.
“If an aircraft is able to fly day and night without fuel, propelled solely by solar energy, let no one come and claim that it is impossible to do the same thing for motor vehicles, heating and air conditioning systems and computers.” said Bertrand Piccard. Sounds like history in the making.

Czech Family History
Czech Surname History
This Czech origins and history page contains the accumulated history of the Czech family name made up of user-uploaded content from users like you. Czech family history has a rich and complex origin whose details have been accumulated over the years by Czech family members. The last name Czech is an old heredity that has spread all across the world over the centuries, and as the name Czech has migrated, it has evolved making its origin tricky to unearth.
No content has been submitted here about Czech. The following is speculative information about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
The evolution of Czech begins with it's early ancestors. Even in the earliest days of a name there are changes in that name simply because family names were infrequently written down back when few people could write.
It was commonplace for a surname to change as it enters a new country or language. As families, tribes, and clans emigrated between countries, the Czech name may have changed with them. Czech family members have travelled around different countries all throughout history.
Czech country of origin
No content has been submitted about the Czech country of origin. The following is speculative information about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
The nationality of Czech may be complicated to determine because countries change over time, leaving the nation of origin indeterminate. The original ethnicity of Czech may be difficult to determine as result of whether the surname originated organically and independently in multiple locales; e.g. in the case of names that are based on a craft, which can appear in multiple places independently (such as the family name "Gardener" which was given to people of that profession).
Meaning of the last name Czech
No content has been submitted about the meaning of Czech. The following is speculative information about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
The meaning of Czech come may come from a craft, such as the name "Fisher" which was given to fishermen. Many of these trade-based family names might be a profession in a different language. For this reason it is useful to know the country of origin of a name, and the languages used by its progenitors. Many names like Czech originate from religious texts like the Bhagavadgītā, the Quran, the Bible, and so on. Often these names relate to a religious sentiment such as "Favored of God".
- Edward J Czech 1927 - 2005
- Peter Czech 1921 - 1993
- Thaddeus A Czech 1921 - 1990
- Mary Czech 1913 - 1975
- Joseph Czech 1902 - 1971
- Natalie M Czech 1913 - 2005
- Valentine Czech 1916 - 1974
- Stanley Czech 1918 - 1978
- Edna Czech 1912 - 2003
- Joseph Czech 1891 - 1968
- Max Czech 1915 - 1965
- Peter S Czech 1914 - 2000
- Anna Czech 1891 - 1967
- Helen B Czech 1927 - 1992
- Evelyn Czech 1926 - 1981
- K E Czech 1956 - 1990
- Michael J Czech 1921 - 1999
- John Czech 1896 - 1976
- Agnes Czech 1901 - 1973
- Doris T Czech 1927 - 2000
Czech Family Tree
Famous people named Czech
No famous people named Czech have been submitted. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
Nationality and Ethnicity of Czech
No content has been submitted about the ethnicity of Czech. The following is speculative information about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
We do not have a record of the primary ethnicity of the name Czech. Many surnames travel around the world throughout the ages, making their original nationality and ethnicity difficult to trace.
More about the name Czech
Fun facts about the Czech family
We have no fun facts about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
Czech spelling variations
No content has been submitted about alternate spellings of Czech. The following is speculative information about Czech. You can submit your information by clicking Edit.
In times when literacy was uncommon, names such as Czech were transcribed based on how they were heard by a scribe when people's names were written in court, church, and government records. This could have led to misspellings of Czech. Knowing misspellings and spelling variations of the Czech surname are important to understanding the history of the name. Surnames like Czech transform in how they're said and written as they travel across tribes, family branches, and languages over time.

Secular biology textbooks have finally begun to remove a long-time favorite of evolutionary teaching—the fraudulent drawings of embryos produced by Ernst Haeckel in 1868. But another one of Haeckel’s errors is still alive and well. Haeckel claimed that “gill slits” (now called “throat pouches”), a backbone, and a tail in vertebrate embryos are proof that humans and animals descended from a common ancestor. This idea is still presented in textbooks, despite the fact that the initial stages of development follow very different patterns of cell division and become very different structures in the mature organisms. The differences are ignored, and the similarities, though fleeting and only superficial, are emphasized to support the idea of a common evolutionary history.
The fact that the “throat pouches” develop into jaw and gill structures in fish, and ear and throat structures in humans shows that the apparent similarities in the embryos are not indications of common ancestry. Rather, it is clear that these vertebrates do not share a common ancestor because they develop in unique ways.
Help keep these daily articles coming. Support AiG.
If you decide you want to keep Answers coming, simply pay your invoice for just $24 and receive four issues (a full year) more. If not, write “cancel” across the invoice and return it. The trial issue is yours to keep, regardless!
Please allow 4-6 weeks for delivery.
New subscribers only. No gift subscriptions.
Offer valid in U.S. only.
Building a Biblical Worldview
ISSN: 1937-9056 | © 2013 Answers in Genesis

NetWellness is a global, community service providing quality, unbiased health information from our partner university faculty. NetWellness is commercial-free and does not accept advertising.
Sunday, May 19, 2013
What is pulmonary hypertension?
Pulmonary hypertension is a lung disorder in which blood pressure in the pulmonary artery rises above normal levels. The pulmonary artery is the blood vessel carrying oxygen-poor blood from the heart to the lungs. Pulmonary hypertension is present when the mean pulmonary artery pressure is greater than 25mmHg at rest or 30mmHg with exercise. This abnormally high pressure (pulmonary hypertension) is associated with changes in the small blood vessels in the lungs, resulting in (More)
Understanding Pulmonary Hypertension
Commonly Asked Questions
Research and Your Health:
Ask an Expert
Get Help With ...
Related Topics and Conditions

People of Northwest Public Radio
Shots - Health Blog
Thu January 26, 2012
Working Long Hours Can Be Depressing, Truly
Putting in a lot of of overtime can make a person more vulnerable to depression.
You might have guessed that. But now there are some hard numbers, thanks to a study that tracked the health of civil service workers in Great Britain.
People who worked 11 hours a day or more than doubled their risk of major depression, compared to colleagues putting in eight hours a day.
Well, who wouldn't be depressed, trapped in the office all those hours? But the story's a bit more complicated, and interesting, than that.
Earlier studies have found that people with jobs are less likely to be depressed, as are people with higher incomes. And executives often put in long hours in order to pull down those fat salaries.
But this study, which was published online in the journal PloS One, found that long hours at the office wiped out the protective effect of income.
"Despite the fact that many of the employees who worked long hours were high [socio-economic status] employees," Marianna Virtanen, an epidemiologist at the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health who led the study, told Shots in an email, "working long hours was associated with depression."
All the people in the study were white-collar workers in the civil service, so it's a pretty small snapshot of the working world. Those working longer hours were more likely to be men in higher-level job grades. They were also more likely to be married or living with someone, and likely to drink more than they should.
Sounds almost like a British version of Don Draper, the hard-drinking ad exec at the center of the AMC series Mad Men.
The correlation between long working hours and depression didn't come to light until the researchers adjusted their data to level out income. That's a standard statistical technique to try to determine the effect of different factors. "In terms of prevention, revealing the relevance of long working hours as a risk factor among high-[socio-economic status] employees who otherwise have lower risk of depression seems important," the researchers write.
Still, it's worth noting that the population groups most at risk for major depression are women, members of minority groups, and people unable to work or unemployed, and those without health insurance, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

This article explains the advantages of using the h-index method of ranking over the impact factor, and the virtues of the new Google Scholar Metrics:
The main flaw with the impact factor is that it is basically an arithmetic mean and, consequently, sensitive to outliers. Like a megastar that pulls all the lesser celestial bodies towards itself, one highly influential paper can draw the impact factor closer to its own citation count. This could give a distorted sense of the importance of the journal publishing the paper if its other contributions were largely forgettable. Suppose that in the current calendar year, the journal's one-hit wonder had 200 citations and its remaining 10 articles no citations. This would give the journal an impact factor of 18.2, suggesting, misleadingly, that articles it distributed typically receive 18 citations per year. Contrast this with the journal's h-index of 1, an accuracte reflection of the number of highly-cited articles the journal had published.
Another advantage of Scholar Metrics is its inclusion of web repositories like the Social Science Research Network and arXiv, where authors can make manuscripts or published articles available to the web community at no cost to themselves or their readers. By making it into the top 10 of the h-index ranking, these repositories demonstrate the importance of open access and early views in strengthening a publication's sway.

DESOTO COUNTY, MS (abc24.com) - "Shake out so you don't freak out" was the motto of hundreds of students and teachers in DeSoto County Thursday during an earthquake drill.
Mississippi is one of nine states taking part in the "Great Central U.S. Shakeout." It's designed to make sure everyone knows exactly what to do if an earthquake strikes.
About three million people ran through the drill, a good number of them were school children.
"I heard poles falling, walls breaking, ceilings falling in and all different kinds of stuff," says second grader Reagan Sandy. "It's very important to get down under your desk very quickly," adds classmate Bella Miller.
Students at Desoto Central Primary are prepared for the worst.
"We always have to cover our head," says Casey Montelelne.
"When they say that you can exit the building, then you have to put your hands over your head and exit the building," Miller tells abc24.com.
The kids practice drills like this every year. "In case if an earthquake really happened," Sandy says.
Their response will be second nature.
"We want them to kick into automation mode," says Dr. Marcia McNutt, director of the U.S. Geological Survey.
Schools in Mississippi and eight other states, including TN and AR, practiced the safety techniques of drop, cover and hold on.
"So they can protect themselves from falling debris and everything else," McNutt says.
Scientists believe there's up to a 40% chance a serious earthquake will happen in the next 50 years.
"There might be some in our lives that happen," Sandy says. "If we don't know how to do them we won't be prepared."
Emergency responders want people to be ready, especially kids.
"Then they go home and teach parents and older siblings what to do and it becomes a domino effect of increasing earthquake awareness everywhere," adds McNutt.
Students start learning these drills in kindergarten and practice them through high school.

|| Home | Contents |||| Settlement of Mobile ||
|| Quick Summary | Details | Bibliography ||
and the Settlement of Mobile
1702 French, led by Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, found Mobile, capital of French Louisiana, on a bluff 27 miles north of mouth of Mobile River; town clustered around Fort Louis.
1711 After upriver site flooded, Mobile moved to permanent settlement on west bank of Mobile River; Fort Condé built to protect settlers.
1718 Biloxi supplants Mobile as capital of French Louisiana, and in 1720 New Orleans replaces Biloxi. Mobile serves as the main center for trade with the Muscogee Indians.
1763 British claim Mobile as part of settlement of French and Indian War in Treaty of Paris of 1763.
1780 Spanish occupy Mobile during American Revolution.
1783 Spanish gain title to British West Florida, including Mobile, in Treaty of Paris of 1783.
1803 Louisiana PurchaseU.S. claims that Mobile is part of West Florida, which was included in Purchase lands.
1804 Mobile placed in a U.S. Customs District.
1810 Planters in West Florida declare their independence from Spain; President James Madison annexes territory that includes Mobile.
1813 During War of 1812 American forces occupy Mobile and the Spanish depart; IMPERIAL RULE ENDS.
1819 Mobile included in the new state of Alabama (following time in Mississippi and Alabama Territories); Americans soon demolish colonial fort and develop downtown riverfront property.

The Juvenile Court system is modeled after the adult court system, but the way that it is implemented and the purpose behind it are quite different. The Juvenile Court system is much more child oriented. It is understood that children entering the Juvenile court system are at varying developmental stages and are capable of only certain levels of understanding.
In recognizing this fact, the Juvenile Court has tried to make the courtroom atmosphere and the language surrounding it less intimidating. For example, children commit law violations, not crimes, and they admit or deny to the charges rather than plead guilty or not guilty. Due to the intimidating nature of the judicial system, it is important for the court to accommodate and cater to these special needs. The Juvenile Court is, therefore, more open to modification , which is dictated by the individual needs of the children.
Juvenile offenders going through the Juvenile Court system are afforded almost every right that adult offenders are granted. The exception to this is that they are not given the right to a jury trial. A judge will always decide the issue at any Juvenile proceeding. The step of grand jury is also bypassed in the Juvenile Court system.
Another major difference between the two court systems is the philosophy or focus. The Juvenile Court system's goals are that the offending child take responsibility for his or her actions, and get help to overcome the problem. If the offending child denies the allegations, the case proceeds much like in the adult court system.
The District Attorney's computer system does not contain the status of Juvenile cases. In order to find out what is going on in a juvenile case, you should call the offending child's probation officer. This person is assigned to the case when it first enters the Juvenile Court system. He/she is an extremely helpful source of information (e.g. - date of the next court hearing, the conditions of the offending child's release, etc.). To find out who is the assigned probation officer, you may call the Juvenile Court. You may also call the D.A.'s office at Juvenile. Most Juvenile Court hearings are held at the Family Court building at 3030 Center Street NE; however, because of the increased caseload, some juvenile trials are also being set at the courthouse. Please be advised, given the delicate and confidential nature of juvenile cases, officials may not be willing to discuss cases over the phone unless you have a specific relation to the case, and a "need to know".

Now four new studies presented at the Alzheimer’s Association International Conference in Vancouver add to the growing evidence that the elderly should get off the couch, showing that regular exercise — both aerobic training, like walking, and strength training involving weights — helps improve memory and reduces the frequency of those momentary hiccups we call “senior moments.”
In one study, Dr. Kirk Erickson of the University of Pittsburgh and his research team found that when sedentary adults start working out even after the age of 65, the brain still benefited, increasing in size and function. The researchers looked at 120 inactive adults, some of whom were cognitively healthy and some who reported having mild memory lapses. The volunteers were assigned to a yearlong exercise program, doing either moderate-intensity walking or participating in a stretching-toning program.
The researchers used an MRI to scan the brain and found that after a year of exercise, the walking group showed improved memory and increases in volume in the hippocampus, a brain region crucial for processing memory, compared with those who stretched.
“Our findings suggest that the aging brain remains modifiable, and that sedentary older adults can benefit from starting a moderate walking regimen,” Erickson said in a statement.
Two other studies looked at older adults who had already been diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a condition involving mild problems with thinking and memory that may precede dementia or Alzheimer’s. One of the studies, led by Dr. Hiroyuki Shimada of the National Center for Geriatrics & Gerontology in Japan, evaluated 47 adults ages 65 to 93 who were assigned to either a multifaceted exercise program or a no-exercise group for a year. The exercise program, which included aerobic exercise, strength training and balance training, involved two 90-minute sessions a week. Those who didn’t exercise attended health-education classes instead. At the end of the study, the exercise group showed improvements in memory and language skills.
In the second study, by researchers at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, women ages 70 to 80 with MCI were assigned to one of three groups: resistance training, aerobic training or balance-and-tone training. In each program, participants exercised two times a week for six months. At the end of the study period, those who had participated in strength training fared best: they outperformed the other groups on tests measuring attention, memory and higher-order brain functions like conflict resolution. They also showed increased function in three brain regions involved in memory. The same results were not found for those doing aerobics, though that group did improve on a memory task.
“It’s definitely one of the first times resistance training has been looked at in connection with Alzheimer’s. And we’ve seen in that body of literature that people who do resistance training increase their ability to be more mobile, but it may have some other benefits,” Heather Snyder, of the Alzheimer’s Association, told CNN
For the final study, also by the University of British Columbia, researchers looked at 155 community-dwelling women ages 65 to 75 who were randomly assigned to do either resistance training or balance-and-tone training for a year. In this case, researchers found that both groups had improved memory at the end of the study, but the women who started out with higher levels of cognitive function at the beginning of the study reported more improvements in memory with resistance training.
“Where previously we had seen positive associations between aerobic activity, particularly walking, and cognitive health, these latest studies show that resistance training is emerging as particularly valuable for older adults,” said Dr. William Thies, chief medical and scientific officer of the Alzheimer’s Association, in a statement.
It not only improves mobility and strength, but as the recent research shows, it appears to boost brain function as well. One more reason to add weights to your workout.

|Banner Photograph for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada|
The book touches upon the problems caused by the education of generations of Canadian Indians in residential schools. Thousands of Indian children, as young as 6 years of age, were taken from their families on their home reserves to attend these schools. At some schools they would get to go home at Christmas. At other schools they would be there from September to June.
The schools were part of the Federal Government’s attempt to assimilate Canadian Indians through education and taking away their culture. At the schools children were punished for using their native language or following any traditional cultural practices. Discipline was harsh. They would remain in the residential schools for up to 12 years.
There were major problems with physical and sexual abuse. There have been generational problems as the children who, essentially grew up without parents and other family, became adults and had their own children.
In recent years the issues of residential schools are being addressed through a Federal Government compensation system and a Truth and Reconciliation Commission that is currently holding hearings across
I have represented Indians pursuing compensation. They consider themselves survivors of residential schools. It is a wrenching experience to listen to strong, physically powerful, men break down in your office recounting experiences some had not even told their families.
At the same time I have also represented individuals who worked in residential schools against whom abuse allegations have been made. While they face no legal or financial consequences it is also difficult to hear persons emotionally stating they are facing false accusations.
The residential schools deeply scarred generations of Canadian Indians.
The stolen children were raised on missions or by foster
parents. They were totally cut off from their Aboriginality.
They were severely punished when caught talking their
Aboriginal language. Some children never learned anything
traditional and received little or no education. Instead the
girls were trained to be domestic servants, the boys to be
In Arthur Upfield’s book The Will of the Tribe he talks about two educated aboriginal people, Tessa and the Captain. While educated they neither fit into white nor aboriginal society.
Smilla talks of the dislocation for the Greenlanders removed from their semi-nomadic life on the land to urban
. Many found themselves isolated neither accepted by Danes or native Greenlanders. They struggle to find a place in society. I described Smilla as a misfit in Denmark . Denmark
In contrast is the experience of Jimmy Perez in Raven Black by Ann Cleeves. Children as young as 12 would be brought to Lerwick from the smaller Shetland Islands to live in a hostel so they could attend school. Perez from the more distant Fair Isle, could not go home for weekends. While required to move away for school at a young age there is not the same cultural dislocation as with indigeneous children.
I do recognize the impact on a person leaving home to go to school. I left home to attend boarding school when I was 15. It was the hardest year of my life going to live at a school where I did not know anyone. Yet my experience was mainly positive as I adjusted and matured. There was none of the abuse of Indian residential schools.
In Canada, Australia and Denmark each nation sought to eliminate the cultural identity and assimilate their aboriginal or indigenous people. The results were devastating to each country’s indigenous peoples with the effects continuing into the future. Australia described it best as “stolen generations”.

- Historic Sites
The Day Before Hollywood
It was a suburb of orange blossoms and gardens, of gracious homes and quiet, dignified lives—until a regrettable class of people moved in.
December 1983 | Volume 35, Issue 1
And yet the movies brought the benefit the Chamber of Commerce had always striven for: tourism. To cope with the influx, the Chamber prepared a booklet that assured tourists that motion-picture studios were only a part of Hollywood—“lower Hollywood”—and were “more or less lost in the far-spreading bungalowed landscape.” The only other evidence of movie business might be the presence on the sidewalk of a group of people, “a man turning the crank of a camera … while another man makes a girl do something foolish over and over again. Scenes like this attract little attention. The real Hollywood is engaged in its own affairs, which are those of ordinary everyday humanity, working and trading and living, and well satisfied to live in a beautiful place.” The fan magazines attacked this attitude, calling its authors “Hollywood’s Shameber of Commerce,” but actually most studios were anxious to avoid visitors. Although Universal welcomed tourists at its vast studio ranch in the San Fernando Valley, the other studios were considerably less hospitable. Lacking the space of Universal, they had also suffered from a plague of souvenir hunters on the occasions they had admitted visitors. Objects vital to continuity vanished, and pictures were held up while identical articles were tracked down in town. Anything portable was automatically pillaged by eager star worshipers, and it proved safer to close the studio gates. The wonderful sets tourists had seen in pictures were denied them, and the exteriors of most studios were uniformly dull. In later years visitors were offered special tours of the stars’ homes. But in the early days these were all too ordinary. “The trouble with Hollywood,” said one disgruntled visitor, “is that it’s so damn unimpressive.”
Some of the movie people felt the same way, despite the astonishing climate and the breathtaking scenery. When shots of New York appeared on the screen, you could identify members of the movie colony by their applause.“The heat gets on your nerves,”said one.“It’s so dusty you have to change your clothes three times a day and you’re never clean.”
How quickly they came to change their minds! After the real estate explosions of the 1920s and 1930s, the quietness and simplicity of the early years were greatly missed.
Katherine Albert wrote, in the 1930s, that Hollywood had been like a child, charming and naive. “Now it is a woman of the world, sparkling, bizarre, hard and bitter, with a painted face and narrow eyes.” The description is a period piece in itself, proving the dangers of uncritical nostalgia.
But even today anyone who wanders around the old residential streets of Hollywood at sunrise can scent in their quiet atmosphere something of the paradise that existed just a lifetime ago.

HealthyLife® Students' Self-Care Guide
Section V – Common Mental Health Problems
People with passive-aggressive behaviors show hostility and aggression in passive ways. Their aim is to resist job and social demands. Examples of passive-aggressive behaviors are:
The goal of passive-aggressive behavior is to frustrate the wishes of others and make others angry. This anger is most often directed at bosses, roommates, spouses, parents, teachers, or anyone who has power or authority. But, sometimes, people are not aware that their behavior is purposeful.
What leads to passive-aggressive behavior? Some researchers think that these behaviors stem from certain childhood experiences. They believe that parents who were aggressive and exercised complete control over their child did not let the child express himself or herself. This may have pushed the child into adopting passive-aggressive behavior patterns to cope. If, for example, the child openly disagreed with the parent and was punished for doing so, the child learned to substitute passive resistance for active resistance.
A person who shows a lot of passive-aggressive behavior can have a Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder. A person with this disorder:
Questions to Ask
Copyright 2004, 5th Edition, American Institute for Preventive Medicine. All rights reserved.The content on this website is proprietary.YOU MANY NOT MODIFY, COPY, REPRODUCE, REPUBLISH, UPLOAD, POST, TRANSMIT,OR DISTRIBUTE, IN ANY MANNER, THE MATERIAL ON THIS SITE. March 16, 2007

a trip to Middle Earth no, not Tolkien's land of hobbits and elves, although
the sites may not look too different from that fantasy world. Middle Earth is
one area of the California Cavern in Calaveras County, Calif. And yes, that
is the Calaveras County made famous by Mark Twain's jumping frogs. The cavern
has also hosted such notable visitors as Bret Harte and John Muir.
California Cavern is imbedded in limestone beds beneath the Sierra Nevada foothills.
Ten million years ago, hot brine pools formed, dissolving much of the limestone
and leaving giant caverns, says Steve Fairchild, president and founder of Underground
Adventures, which maintains the cavern and offers tours there. The limestone
was then metamorphosed into marble with the emplacement of the immense Sierra
Nevada batholith nearby. Speleothems began growing shortly after the caverns
were formed, according to dating from stalactite and stalagmite growth rings.
Moaning Cavern's spectacular speleothems are other-worldly. Photo courtesy of Underground Adventures.
California Cavern first opened to the public after its discovery in 1850 by a miner, and is California's first cave on exhibit, according to Fairchild. A mining camp called Cave City was established around the cavern between 1859 and 1875, and early residents used the cavern for dances, religious services, town meetings and weddings; there was even a bar inside.
Now a popular tourist spot, California Cavern offers three walking tours, including the Middle Earth expedition.
The journey to Middle Earth is the longest tour, lasting three to four hours,
and is more than a mile long. Tour operators warn visitors that they will get
soaked to the skin and covered in mud on this expedition. The first hour of
the trip is crawling and wiggling through passages that connect 13 chambers
in the Mammoth Cave area. Explorers then pass into Middle Earth, a major cave
that connects Mammoth Cave to another cave the Cave of the Quills
that was found in the 1950s, Fairchild says. It is a large room filled with
rare speleothems, such as beaded helictites (curved, twiglike deposits of calcite
or aragonite). Here guides lead visitors through nearly knee-deep clay muck.
The remainder of the journey consists of exploring horizontal fissures in the
Cave of the Quills (named because of porcupine quills found at its mouth when
it was first discovered) and an underground rafting trip across a 200-foot-deep
lake in one of the caves.
Underground rafting in California Cavern is certainly not an everyday experience. Photo courtesy of Underground Adventures.
Another tour, the Trail of Lights journey (aptly named because it is well-lit,
in contrast to other trails), is more suitable for the entire family. The tour
is a little more than an hour long and meanders over fairly level, lighted passages
and walkways. Experienced guides lead groups into the recently discovered Jungle
Room (named for the array of crystalline "vines" (stalactites) covering
the ceiling), and they teach the history and geology of the cavern.
Winter and early spring are an interesting time to visit California Cavern,
but you have to time it right, Fairchild says. The cave floods in the winter,
usually around Jan. 1, and small clear pools cover the ground and provide an
interesting glimpse into natural cave life. When the cave is completely flooded,
the trails close so be sure to call ahead if visiting over the winter.
Moaning Cavern is not far from California Cavern and was discovered in 1851
by gold miners hoping to strike it rich. When the prospectors realized there
was not significant gold, they abandoned the cave. Moaning Cavern was rediscovered
in 1919, and legend has it that tourists were lowered into the cavern in ore
buckets with only candles or whale oil lamps to light their way. The bones of
about 100 humans were found at the bottom of the cavern, but don't worry, they
weren't modern tourists one skull was dated using uranium-thorium isotopes
to be 13,000 years old!
Moaning Cavern is the largest single-chamber public cavern in California. The
main room is large enough to fit the Statue of Liberty inside. The total depth
of the cave is 410 feet, though family walking tours only descend 165 feet.
The cavern was christened by early explorers who noticed a distant moaning sound
emitting from the cave. The "moan" is created by echoes of drops of
water, which falls into holes in a flowstone formation with a bottle-like shape,
Fairchild says. The sound is similar to one you can make by blowing across the
top of a partially full soda bottle, and the cave still moans today. "More
like a booming echo," Fairchild says, "but still moaning."
As at California Cavern, Underground Adventures offers varying tours of Moaning
Cavern. The Adventure Trip begins with a rappel 165 feet straight down into
the main chamber of the cavern. While
visitors can stop there, it might be well worth spending a couple of hours exploring
the deep chambers and passages that are mostly undeveloped meaning there
are no stairs, walkways or lights with professional, experienced guides.
At 310 feet below ground, explorers encounter the Pancake Room, Godzilla's Nostril,
Roach Motel and Meat Grinder, among other interesting places, and will frequently
be crawling on their bellies or wading through thick mud. The total trip is
about three hours, and minors over the age of 12 must be accompanied by an adult
(no one under 12 is admitted). All equipment is provided, and again, prepare
to get dirty.
Beginning with a 165-foot rappel deep into the earth, a visit to Moaning Cavern is for the truly adventurous. Photo courtesy of Underground Adventures.
Moaning Cave is open to visitors every day of the year, and fall and winter are a great time to visit to avoid crowds, Fairchild says. November is also the month that offers the most exploration because the water table is at its lowest point, he adds. Moaning Cavern doesn't flood like California Cavern, but it does get wetter in the winter, and some treks will get very wet and muddy.
Both caverns also offer gemstone and gold mining, as well as aboveground nature trails with free trail guides to learn about the local flora and fauna, the Gold Rush, and the original human inhabitants of the area.
California Cavern and Moaning Cavern are about 150 miles from the San Francisco Bay Area, 70 miles from Sacramento and 100 miles from South Lake Tahoe. Nearby sites include Columbia State Historic Park, Big Trees State Park, Sutter Gold Mine and Bear Valley Ski Resort. What better way to begin or end an adventurous family weekend than by visiting the world's natural wonders?
Underground Adventures in California
Back to top

In the Great Recession, it has not been hard to picture the following situation:
The leadership team of the company is deciding on cost reduction changes to the company. Some of the options may be viewed as inconsistent with stated company values. The leadership team is split on the course of action, yet convinced that if significant changes in financial performance do not occur, the company may fail. However, whatever the decision, the entire company must support it and work together to survive.
This situation requires a special tool that successful teams use: a “consensus” decision. The key is in the need for all to support and work for together for the successful action. This requirement of unanimous support is in alignment with Webster’s (2nd) definition: “group solidarity in sentiment and belief”. There is a very strong emphasis on the solidarity. In fact, it is “active” solidarity, for once consensus is achieved, the group’s position is solid and unanimous. All disagreement and discussion becomes part of the confidential history of the team. Consensus is usually only required for the most difficult and potentially unpopular decisions.
For a team to be effective, such consensus must respect the integrity of the team. Team members cannot follow the example of today’s politicians: once the meeting is over, individual team members publicly air their disagreement with the decision. For the team to truly work with high levels of trust, once consensus is achieved, there should be complete solidarity with the outcome by all team members. To all outside the team, it should appear to be a unanimous decision.
This level of agreement requires significant emotional cost: someone may have to support a position that is different than his or her own personal choice. Because of the cost, this process must only be used rarely, when solid team support is required. Agreement to abide by a consensus must be a requirement for team membership.
To achieve such consensus decision requires complete and open discussion where all opinions are heard. Active listening and mind mapping or brainstorming techniques may be used to capture all points presented and allow for the group to work its way to a solution. Every team member should be allowed to present his or her opinions and supporting reasons.
It is recommended that active listening be used to ensure that all are correctly heard. This feeling of being heard is critical and discussion should continue until all key participants feel understood. Understanding does not mean that there will be agreement, although that occasionally happens, and the process eliminates the need for consensus action.
If all discussion is complete and there is still disagreement, the team leader must make a decision for a course of action, which the team then actively supports. This decision may be for a less popular position, as the leader may identify that position as most in line with the values and mission of the team. Remember, the value of the majority opinion does not determine the decision as it would in a democracy.
This consensus process is useful in reducing the disruptive impact of passive resistance techniques occasionally used by the members not yet fully committed to the team’s success or values. The unanimous position after consensus reduces the ability to use an emotional situation to manipulate and weaken the role of the team.
Have you used this consensus technique?
Do you recall a team decision where you wish you had?

POLITICAL THOUGHT IN MODERN EGYPT. The bases of Egyptian thought had remained fundamentally Arab-Islamic until its roots extended themselves into the modern soil of European culture throughout the nineteenth century. Eventually Egyptian political thought crystallized into modern concepts and terms. However, other influences also played an important role. Most sources agree that the French invasion of Egypt (1798-1801) opened the eyes of the Egyptian intelligentsia to political concepts they had never known.
Even though the Egyptians did not benefit immediately or directly, the French factor marked the beginnings of the modernizing of society in MUHAMMAD ‘ALI's reign (1805-1848). Muhammad ‘Ali's educational missions to Europe were a potent factor in the development of Egyptian political thought and bridged some gaps between Egypt and the West. European academicians and experts brought into Egypt new ideas and principles. They also extended the wide and active translation movement, which had transplanted into Egypt, among other things, many new political ideas.
The press was also an important factor in promoting political consciousness, an influence of the French. During Muhammad ‘Ali's reign, the Bulaq printing press was built (1821) and the al-Waqa’i‘ al-Misriyyah was issued (1828). Pope CYRIL IV gave orders for the purchase of a press to be established in 1860. This was followed by a great journalistic revival, and papers like Al-Watan, edited by ‘Abdallah Abu al-Su‘ud (1866), and Al-Watan, edited by Mikha’il ‘Abd al-Sayyid (1877), were issued. The newspapers helped form public opinion and established a base of readers with distinct political interests. The second half of the nineteenth century witnessed the growth of cultural institutions, scientific societies, and literary salons where political ideas were exchanged. There appeared, for instance, the Knowledge Society (1868), the Geographic Society (1875), the Islamic Benevolent Society (1878), the Higher Institute for Arabic and Islamic Studies (1872), and the National Library (1870).
During the first half of the nineteenth century there were attempts to modernize some sectors of Egyptian society, notably the army and governmental administration, by utilizing European expertise. This began a flood of European ideas into Egypt that put the traditional political and social structure in jeopardy. Repercussions occurred in the second half of the nineteenth century, with European political ideas being absorbed into the Arab-Islamic tradition along with Coptic reformism. Although some rejected the European intellectual influence and held to their traditional culture, others enthusiastically adopted Western ideas.
From this variety of attitudes emerged political thought based on certain specific attitudes, the most outstanding of which were the liberal trend, the democratic trend, the religious-political trend, and the socialist trend.
The National Liberal Trend
This represents a response, though limited at the beginning, to the flow of European thought into Egypt after the French invasion. Among the first Egyptians to accept this thinking was Shaykh Hasan al-‘Attar (1766-1835), who greatly influenced Rifa‘ah al-Tahtawi (1801-1873), who was considered the real initiator of the modern renaissance. In his books Hasan recorded his observations in France and made valuable comments on the state, the constitution, the ruler's jurisdiction, and the citizens' rights. It was from such works that Egyptian liberals drew many of their ideas.
In his books al-Tahtawi presented the ideas of the French Enlightenment, including those of Voltaire, Condillac, Rousseau, and Montesquieu. Al-Tahtawi's new ideas inspired the next generation through his pupils, who established their liberal ideas in the press and in their literary works, particularly in the second half of the nineteenth century.
This movement was followed by the liberal ideas of Jamal al-Din al-Afghani (1838-1897). Shaykh Husayn al-Marsafi's Epistle on the Eight Modes of Speech (1881) also introduced new concepts of nationalism, politics, and social justice. Mikha’il ‘Abd al-Sayyid, a Copt, also established (1877) his daily newspaper Al-Watan where he reflected the nationalistic attitude before the British occupation (1882) and after. Adib Ishaq, a Syrian orthodox Christian living in Egypt (1882), issued the first organ named Misr, which dealt with nationalistic principles and advocated freedom of thought. Writing in a simple, popular style, ‘Abdallah al-Nadim (1845- 1896) came forth with a campaign against autocracy and foreign interference, calling for national unity and the Egyptianization of new ideas. ‘Abdallah Fikri combined the idea of Egyptian patriotism with educational rather than political reform.
The generation that emerged after the British occupation included such names as Ahmad Lutfi al-Sayyid (1872-1963), who advocated political democracy and a secular state based on national rather than religious laws (Shar‘ah). He influenced a whole generation through his newspaper Al-Jaridah (1907). After World War I, his followers preached his ideas in varying forms and degrees. Qasim Amin, however, was preoccupied with the problem of modernizing society by reviving it intellectually and scientifically. He was a reader of Rousseau, Herbert Spencer, John Stuart Mill, and others. Ultimately his studies led him to advocate a change in the status of women and in their freedom in society. His Tahrir al-Mar’ah (Liberation of Women; 1899) and Al-Mar’ah al- Jadidah (The New Woman; 1900) express his philosophy.
Another contemporary was Ahmad Fathi Zaghlul, who espoused the cause of transplanting European culture to Egypt in certain fields and advocated political democracy, new methods of government, a free economy, and secularism in legislation. He meticulously translated some of the works of Jeremy Bentham, such as An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1892), part of Camille Desmoulins' Oeuvres (1900), and at least two of the treatises of André Lebon, including Modern France (Story of the Nations) (1913). Most of the Egyptian writers of this generation belonged to al-Ummah party, whose members enriched Egyptian political thought with liberal patriotism.
These writers were also contemporaries of such leaders and political thinkers as MUSTAFA KAMIL (1874-1908) and Muhammad Farid (1868-1919), who were not so much theorists as practical politicians. They patriotically played their roles in combating the British presence in Egypt. They stood for Islamic unity, in spite of the concept of secular patriotism detectable in their writings as members of the National party (established in 1907). SA‘D ZAGHLUL emerged as a political leader after World War I. He led the 1919 revolution on a national basis—actually a continuation of the practical politics expounded by the National party. After the 1919 revolution, the political unity of the country was fragmented into parties such as the WAFD and the Constitutional Liberals, as well as the National party.
From the 1920s to the 1940s exponents of the liberal national trend dominated the scene. Some thinkers advocated the abolition of
religious courts, the modification of marital laws, and the dismantling of certain social institutions. They also championed the use of Western techniques in the field of literature, as expounded in Taha Husayn's Al-Shi‘r al-Jahili on pre-Islamic poetry (1926). The writings of Tawfiq al-Hakim and Taha Husayn, the sculptural works of Mahmud Mukhtar, the novels of Najib Mahfuz and Mahmud Taymur, and the writings of Salama Musa (a Copt), Louis ‘Awad (another Copt), Mahmud ‘Azmi, and others called for the Egyptianization of foreign ideas in all areas. In the 1930s some of those writers turned their thoughts to Oriental Islamic topics, as in the Islamic writings of Taha Husayn and Muhammad Husayn Haykal.
The Democratic Trend
It might be an overstatement to say that Egypt was acquainted with democratic thought before al-Tahtawi. It was not until the reign of Isma‘il (1863-1879) that a parliamentary council, the Shura al-Nuwwab, was established as the first representative body in Egypt. Sharif Pasha's cabinet was made up of those loyal to the 1879 constitution. Recognizing the supremacy of the people, the cabinet tried to issue a basic code for the council and another for elections. During the same period, another revolution in thought occurred, promoting more freedom and more constitutional rights, in the writings of Adib Ishaq, a Copt who advocated the establishment of a senate house that would be a link between the Shura al-Nuwwab and the government, while Mikha’il ‘Abd al-Sayyid, another Copt, launched a campaign to open the council members' eyes to matters of rule and politics.
The ‘Urabi revolution (1881-1882) marked a new stage in Egyptian democratic thought. Jamal al-Din al-Afghani had played his part in paving the way for its advent through the old National party (see POLITICAL PARTIES); ‘Abdallah al-Nadim played a distinguished role in this period. He made a social analysis of the nature of representative councils and advocated that their membership should represent all social classes. He often reiterated that democracy is a practice in which the people should be trained. Later on, Muhammad ‘Abduh (1849-1905) emphasized his claim that the representative-council manifesto should mention its part in helping the government and in sharing the rule of the country by supervising its activities and work.
After the British occupation, Ahmad Lutfi al-Sayyid emerged as one of the political thinkers who linked the claim for independence to that of rule by the people through their representatives. He borrowed his ideas of political democracy from Rousseau, Locke, and Hobbes. Together with his disciples in the Ummah party, he succeeded in bringing about a democratic trend on a wide scale. This trend was manifest when Egypt obtained a limited degree of independence after the February 1922 declaration. At that time, a committee was set up to write the 1923 constitution, which marked the start of a constitutional monarchy in Egypt. That constitution played a part in creating parliamentary life from 1924, thus letting the common people participate in ruling the country. On that occasion a number of thinkers tried to deepen the democratic concepts and fight autocracy. Outstanding among those were Muhammad Husayn Haykal, Mahmud ‘Azmi, and Salama Musa.
The Religious Political Trend
In spite of the rise of religious reform movements such as Wahhabism, Senusism, and Mahdi’ism prior to the twentieth century, their supporters in Egypt never constituted a majority. Perhaps religious reform had a revolutionary political impression that was precipitated by Jamal al-Din al-Afghani (1839-1897). His emergence represents a turning point in the history of religious reform. His disciples were acquainted with European political and administrative institutions, economic systems, and thought. Some of them advocated a compromise between the essence of the Islamic faith, on the one hand, and the sciences and Western concepts and institutions, on the other. Such views represented the Islamic reaction to Western hegemony. Though religion was a fundamental element in Afghani's system, it treated the secular and religious elements equally. He was also known for his advocacy of Pan- Islamism.
Muhammad ‘Abduh clarified and analyzed his teacher's ideas and then developed them further. He called for a return to authentic Islam and to the freedom of religious thought from the shackles of tradition and conservatism. He launched an onslaught on the al- Azhar, the oldest Islamic university in Cairo, and he advocated an understanding of the religious guidelines expressed by the earliest Muslims before sectarian differences developed. He claimed that the spirit of modern civilization and Islam are not contradictory; indeed, one of his basic objectives was to prove the possibility of a compromise between Islam and modern thought. However, he did not deal with the relationship between religion and the state as much as was later done by a number of his disciples.
Whereas al-Afghani was associated with the Pan-Islamic movement, Muhammad ‘Abduh concentrated on the Islamic political revival and modernization of its legal theories. Some of his disciples assumed a secularizing attitude. Among them were Lutfi al-Sayyid, Taha Husayn, and ‘Ali ‘Abd al-Raziq. Others, led by Muhammad Rashid Rida (1865-1935) and his Manar school, interpreted his views on the basis of early Islamic thought. Rashid Rida agreed with his mentors al-Afghani and Muhammad ‘Abduh that Islam could constitute a worthy national entity capable of opposing the secular tendencies of modern European thought. Immediately after his arrival in Egypt in 1898, in his articles in Al-Manar, his monthly journal, Rida issued a proclamation calling for the constitution of a Pan-Islamic society under the Ottoman caliph's flag. His main objective was the unification of all Muslims under one legal system based on Shari‘ah, the code derived directly from the Qur’an under the leadership of the caliphate, as against the Western concept of nationalism promoted by Kemal Atatürk after his suppression of the Ottoman caliphate in 1924. This was followed in 1925 by ‘Ali ‘Abd al-Raziq's (1888-1961) famous work Islam and the Principles of Government, in which he denied that the caliphate was a basic institution of Islam. He made it clear that the Prophet's leadership was religious and that it ended with his death, when his authority was taken over by lay political power.
Conservative thinkers objected to his ideas, and a reactionary religious movement flared up, ending with the rise of the Muslim Brethren, whose ultimate objective was the reconstruction of society on the basis of a modern Pan-Islamic front derived from the Qur’an against secular European trends.
The Socialist Trend
Cultured Egyptians had read and heard about socialism from the middle of the nineteenth century in organs such as Al-Muqtataf magazine. In fact, socialism did not come from a vacuum but was the outcome of social, economic, and cultural developments manifest in the development of Egyptian society during the reign of Muhammad ‘Ali. The first group of socialist advocates was inspired by Saint-Simon, whom Muhammad ‘Ali invited to Egypt. Shibli Shumayyil (1860-1917), a Christian Syrian who went to Egypt in 1885, engaged himself in writing literary commentaries instead of practicing medicine, and socialism was one of his chief topics. He was followed by another Syrian Christian, Nicola Haddad, who was a prolific author in many fields, including socialism.
In the meantime, an Egyptian teacher by the name of Mustafa Hasanayn al-Mansuri contributed a valuable study of socialism in his own writing or in translations from European literature. Together with the aforementioned writers, he aimed at carrying his theories into practice by the establishment of a socialist party in 1909. The project was doomed to failure until it was assumed by the real pioneer of socialism in Egypt, SALAMAH MUSA (1887-1958), who had studied in England and France and had become acquainted with Britain's Labour party. A prolific writer, he fell under the influence of socialist thinkers such as George Bernard Shaw, and his book on socialism may be considered the first consistent work on the subject to be published in the Arab world.
Generally, socialist thought was regarded as a European idea that had infiltrated into Egypt on a wide scale since the middle of the nineteenth century. With the outbreak of the Russian revolution of 1917 and the Third International in 1919, which marked the beginning of Russia's interest in the East, cultured Egyptians became acquainted with the new socialist trend.
Joseph Rosenthal, an Egyptian Jew, called for the establishment of an Egyptian socialist party that would speak for workers' unions, instead of being restricted to a membership consisting mainly of foreigners living in Alexandria. Rosenthal induced a group of progressive Egyptians to join him, Salamah Musa, ‘Ali al-‘Inani, Muhammad ‘Abdallah ‘Inan, and Mahmud Husni al-‘Arabi being the outstanding figures in that group. They signed a manifesto establishing the Socialist party in 1921. Although successive governments tried to suppress the party, it carried on its activities and attracted hundreds of workers, who were very often encouraged to go on strike. On the political front, ‘Aziz Mirhom led the labor movement for some time. However, the party ultimately splintered because of disagreements about ideological principles. In 1922 one of its factions that joined the Comintern called itself the Egyptian Communist party. It persisted through the 1930s and 1940s when Marxist circles became active in many secret ways, until the July 1952 revolution.
AHMAD ZAKARIYYA AL-SHILIQ
Click tabs to swap between content that is broken into logical sections.

Interaction of TCP/IP and Other Protocols
It is possible to classify applications as being network-aware or network-unaware. The distinction can be made because some applications, such as Web browsers and client/server applications, need to make explicit use of an underlying network protocol. Other applications, such as standard Windows application suites, simply function within the confines of a workstation's own operating system. For these applications to make use of network file and print services, it is necessary for the NOS to provide extensions to the functions of the local operating system. The next section examines how these different types of applications can make use of the underlying network.
Application Programming Interface (API):
Application developers can write network-aware applications by accessing a set of standard procedures and functions through an Application Programming Interface (API). This interface specifies software-defined entry points that developers can use to access the functionality of the networking protocols. The use of an API enables a developer to develop networkable applications, while being shielded from having to understand how the underlying protocols operate. Other APIs define interfaces to other system functionality.
Figure 114 provides a visual representation of how a networking API might fit within the OSI seven-layer model.
The majority of network applications have been written specifically to access a single networking protocol. This is because each of the NOS implementations have developed their APIs as a standard.
Redirectors and File Sharing:
One of the main application requirements within a network is saving files on a central file store. To achieve this, NOS implementations commonly include a program known as a redirector. A redirector program extends the functionality of the workstation operating system to enable it to address remote file stores.
In a DOS/Windows environment, file storage areas are denoted with the use of letters, typically with the letters A through E being reserved for local disk drives. When a user wants to access a network file volume, it is common for the NOS to facilitate some form of mapping between a volume name and an available drive letter. After the mapping has been made, it is possible for any application to access the shared file volumes in the same way as the would access a local drive. This is because of the operation of the installed redirector program. The program sits between the workstation operating system and the NOS protocol stack and listens for application calls made to any of the mapped network drives.
The functionality of a redirector can be further clarified by considering the example of an application user attempting to save a file on a network drive. The user prompts the application to save the file on a network file volume that the NOS has mapped to the DOS drive I:. The application makes a call to the workstation operating system to complete the required file save operation. The redirector program recognise that the application is attempting to access a network drive and steps in to handle the required data transfer. If the redirector hadn't been active, the workstation operating system would have been presented with a request to save a file on a drive letter that is knew nothing about, and it would have responded with a standard error message, such as 'Invalid drive specification'.
In a UNIX environment, similar file sharing capabilities are provided through the use of a Network File System (NFS). The use of NFS enables the workstation to access file volumes located on remote host machines as if they were extensions to the workstation's native filesystem. As such, the use of NFS, on the workstation side, is very similar to the use of the NOS redirector as outlined earlier. Implementation of client NFS software are available from several thirdparty companies. These implementations require a TCP/IP protocol stack to operate alongside the installed NOS protocol stack.
A workstation configured with both an NOS and a TCP/IP protocol stack is able to operate two independent applications that can provide file sharing access between environments. This is accomplished through the use of the redirector program, to provide access to the NOS file server, and NFS, operating on the TCP/IP protocol stack to provide access to NFS volumes on UNIX-servers.
Figure 115 illustrates how a single workstation can be utilise to access both network environments.
The indicated workstation loads a NetWare protocol software and the associated redirector software. File areas on the NetWare server are mapped as local drive F: and G:. The TCP/IP stack and NFS implementation are also loaded, and the remote UNIX file system is mounted as the local drive H: on the workstation PC. Files are then available to be saved by any application operating on the workstation to any of the mapped drivers.
NOS Gateways and Servers:
It is often more efficient to utilise an NOS server as a gateway into an existing TCP/IP network than to run dual protocol stacks upon each network client.
In figure 117, the NetWare server has the Novel NFS Gateway software installed. The UNIX host has exported the NFS, which has been mounted to a drive on it. This file area is now available to any of the NetWare client workstations. These users are able to access the UNIX file area through the standard NetWare redirector program, removing the requirement of having to load a TCP/IP protocol stack and run a TCP/IP-based application.
The NetWare server provides application gateway services between the IPX/SPX-based networks and the TCP/IP network. To achieve this, it is necessary for the server to load both protocol stacks. On the network clients, however, it is necessary to operate only the standard IPX/SPX protocol. The client directs applications requests to use resources within the UNIX network to the gateway using IPX/SPX protocols. The gateway relays these requests to the UNIX host via its TCP/IP protocol stack. In this way, the use of a gateway greatly reduces the administrative overhead required to provide network clients with access to TCP/IP hosts. Network users are able to utilise UNIX-based resources without the requirement to run multiprotocol stacks.
Figure 116 outlines a sample configuration of a NOS server as a gateway.
NOS gateways tend to be implemented in one of two ways. The first is through the operation of proxy application services. The use of a proxy service provides the user with a special set of the network applications, such as Telnet, FTP, and Web browsers, that have been specifically written to operate over NOS protocols. The client applications communicate with the gateway process, which forwards the application request to the specified UNIX hosts. An alternative solution utilise a tailored version of a standard WinSock driver. This special WinSock driver provides support for standard WinSock applications, but instead of operating on an underlying TCP/IP protocol stack it communicates using IPX/SPX protocols. Yet again, communication occurs between the client workstation and the gateway application, with the gateway acting to forward application data between the client and UNIX host. The use of the tailored WinSock driver means that network clients are able to utilise any standard. WinSock application and don't have to rely on the gateway manufacturer to provide specialised application software.
Figure 117 shows a tailored version of a standard WinSock driver enables the network clients to use any standard WinSock application.
NOS Support for Native IP:
The major NOS vendors have recognised an increasing demand to replace their proprietary communication methods with native TCP/IP protocols. However, network applications have generally interfaced with a specific protocol. If NOS vendors were to suddenly adopt a different protocol, many of the existing network applications would no longer function. For this reason, vendors are looking for ways to replace their proprietary network protocols, but at the same time to provide a degree of backward-compatibility to protect existing applications.
For example, within NetWare it is possible to replace the standard IPX/SPX protocols with a TCP/IP protocol stack to provide standard communication between network client and server. However, within this implementation each data packet actually consists of an IPX packet enclosed within a UDP packet. The inclusion of the IPX header provides NetWare with the backward-compatibility it requires to support its existing application base. However, the inclusion of the IPX header places an additional overhead on each data packet. This overhead is likely to account for around 8 to 10 percent of the total packet size.
Other NOS vendors also provide native support for TCP/IP protocols. For example, Windows NT allows for the users of the NetBEUI protocol or TCP/IP protocols or a combination of both. Within NT, network protocols are provided via an interface that it refers to as the Transport Driver Interface (TDI). This is a layer that is loaded toward the top of the protocol stack and is used to provide a standard interface between application environments and any underlying network protocols.
Figure 118 illustrates the location and operation of the Transport Driver Interface within Windows NT.
At the TDI interface, standard APIs such as NetBIOS and WinSock are able to interact with communication modules, principally TCP/IP and NetBEUI. The TDI model has been designed around a flexible architecture so that it can be adapted to support additional network protocols as required.
Under this networking model, applications that have been written to the NetBIOS interface can operate over an installed TCP/IP protocol stack. NetBIOS operates by assigning a unique name to every network node. The assignment and management of the NetBIOS name space results in the generation of a large amount of network traffic. This is because hosts send out broadcasts to all network nodes when they want to register the use of a name they need to perform name resolution. The NetBIOS over TCP/IP standards specifies a method whereby this functionality can occur over a TCP/IP protocol stack. The excessive broadcast requirements effectively limit the use of NetBIOS to small LAN environments where the necessary bandwidth is available. IP networks, on the other hand, often include wide area links where bandwidth might not be sufficient to handle the required broadcasts needed to maintain the NetBIOS address space.

June 19, 2003: Two of NASA's Great Observatories, bolstered by the largest ground-based telescopes around the world, are beginning to harvest new clues to the origin and evolution of the universe's largest building blocks, the galaxies. It's a bit like finding a family scrapbook containing snapshots that capture the lives of family members from infancy through adolescence to adulthood. The Hubble Space Telescope has joined forces with the Chandra X-ray Observatory to survey a relatively broad swath of sky encompassing tens of thousands of galaxies stretching far back in time. Called the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey (GOODS), astronomers are studying galaxy formation and evolution over a wide range of distances and ages.See the rest:
In preliminary results soon to be published, Hubble astronomers report that the sizes of galaxies clearly increase continuously from when the universe was about 1 billion to 6 billion years old. (Many astronomers believe that the universe is about 13.7 billion years old.) GOODS astronomers also find that the star-birth rate rose slightly between the time the universe was about 1 and 1.5 billion years old, and remained high until about 7 billion years ago, when it quickly dropped. This is further evidence that major galaxy building trailed off when the universe was about half its current age.
The Chandra observations amounted to a "high-energy core sample" of the early universe. One of the fascinating findings in this deepest X-ray image ever taken is the discovery of seven mysterious black holes that do not correspond to the galaxies seen in the Hubble image. Astronomers suspect that these objects are the most distant black holes ever detected, or the galaxies in which they reside cannot be seen because they are heavily enshrouded in dust.
When comparing the Hubble and Chandra fields, astronomers also found that active black holes in distant, relatively small galaxies were more rare than expected. This may be due to the effects of early generations of massive stars that exploded as supernovas, evacuating galactic gas and thus reducing the supply of gas needed to feed a supermassive black hole.
Astronomers used several observatories for this study because they want to build a coherent picture of galaxy evolution. The two orbiting observatories, Chandra and Hubble, analyzed different wavelengths of light. Chandra studied X-rays from supermassive black holes; the Hubble telescope's Advanced Camera for Surveys examined visible light from stars in galaxies. Another space observatory, the Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF), will sample the same regions of sky in infrared light soon after it is launched in August 2003.
Light yields information about an object. X-rays trace the hottest gas surrounding a supermassive black hole at a galaxy's center. Visible light yields clues about a galaxy's structure. Infrared light penetrates the dust surrounding young stars, collecting information about a galaxy's total stellar population.

|1.||The Granite Counter Fallacy|
The granite counter fallacy argues that the monetary value of an object is directly proportional to the amount of money that is spent on it. The fallacy lies in the essence that previous monies spent are subject to highly subjective rationale which may not add any practical value to the object. The fallacy is typically deployed with an appeal to novelty (newer is better) fallacy in order to manipulate the audience using current “trends” or “fads” in popular culture where the subject is likely to accept the argument based upon what they believe is “popular” and implies a “higher demand (value)”.
The Granite Counter Fallacy is as follows:more...
Person A purchases a house and spends x amount of dollars replacing the tile kitchen countertops with granite countertops.
Person A states that the value of the house has now increased because x dollars were spent replacing the tile counters with granite counters.
Person B states that they do not really mind tile countertops and to them, a countertop is a countertop - whether it is made of granite or tile does not change its practical use and therefore adds no real value.
Person A purchases a small house with large backyard for x dollars.
Person A demolishes the house and builds a much larger house with no backyard for y dollars.
Person A claims that the value of the new house is x + y because x dollars were spent on the previous house and y dollars were spent on the new house.
Person B says they prefer a house with a backyard and the lower electrical bills for cooling and heating, thus, the larger house’s added rooms add no real value from their point of view.
The fallacy is in Person A’s assumption that people will assume that a house is worth more than another house because it is larger while failing to understand the practical value that people may see in a smaller home. Such an argument can only work in an environment where the majority of people participate in a trend that unquestionably accepts the notion that a bigger house is better than a smaller house.

Live maths - tangled DNA, the Big Bang and musical superstrings
Twisting, Coiling, Knotting: Maths and DNA Replication
The proportions of a DNA molecule in a human cell are equivalent to a 2000-mile-long rope packed inside the Millennium Dome. When DNA replicates, it spins at an astonishing 10 turns per second. Therefore, it is hardly surprising that DNA can become highly twisted, super-coiled and even knotted! To understand this phenomenon, the molecular biologist must grapple with the mathematical concepts of twisting, writhing and knotting. In this highly-illustrated talk Professor Michael Thompson FRS will experiment with strings and rubber bands (bring your own!) to explore the geometrical rules which underlie the transmission our genetic code.
When: Thursday 24th of May 2007, 5pm - 6pm
Where: Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Clarkson Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA
Tickets are free but must be booked by emailing email@example.com
More information: http://mmp.maths.org/events/eventlist.php
Dinner@Dana: Back to the Big Bang
In honour of the Large Hadron Collider, the Dana Centre is holding an evening dinner and discussion attended by the expert James Gillies from CERN. There'll be slide shows and photographs and a two-course meal inspired by particle physics.
When: 15th of May 2007, 6.30pm - 8.30pm
Where: Dana Centre, 165 Queen's Gate, London SW7 5HE
Tickets: £15 per person, including a two-course meal and a drink. Tickets have to be booked by calling 0207942 4040 or e-mailing firstname.lastname@example.org.
Age range: this event is open only to those over 18 years of age.
More information: Visit the Dana Centre site.
Also the Science Museum in London has put on an exhibition in honour of the Large Hadron Collider. The exhibition is free and will run until the 7th of October 2007.
Superstrings - a Musical Journey through Time and Space
You probably knew that Einstein was a great scientist, but did you also know that he played the violin? In this unique double act a virtuoso violinist and the head of the department of particle physics at Oxford University combine the electricity of a live musical performance with an insight into the deepest corners of the Universe. The lecture explores Einstein's life, both in science and in music, from his theories that shaped space and time, to modern ideas in particle physics.
When: 18th of May 2007 5pm-7pm
Where: Science Oxford, 1-5 London Place, Oxford, OX4 1BD
Tickets: £6.50, £4.50 concession, available from The Oxford Playhouse on 01865 305305.
More information: The Oxford Trust
posted by Plus @ 10:03 AM

Benefits » Enabling People With Disabilities
High speed Internet empowers people with disabilities to become more independent. An Internet connection with enough speed to allow two-way voice, data, and video transfer can remove barriers that keep people with disabilities from participating in everyday activities such as employment, education, civic responsibilities and social connection.
According to the 2008 U.S. Census, 50 million Americans have some kind of disability. Not only does this substantial segment of our population stand to benefit greatly from universally accessible broadband, but we all benefit from the increased participation when more people are broadband users.
Expert studies find that Americans with disabilities currently use the Internet approximately half as much as those without disabilities and their rate of adoption lags behind that of the general population. This is true for people with disabilities in both urban and rural environments. With 60 percent of working-age persons with disabilities unemployed or underemployed, affordable, universal access to broadband at home is crucial. Those without high speed Internet access at home who must use public computers contend with transportation challenges and inaccessible locations.
Benefits of High Speed Internet for Enabling People with Disabilities
- Live streaming video and instant text communication liberate people who are deaf, or hard of hearing, and those with speech disabilities, from dependency on the phone.
- High speed Internet makes new services available to people with physical disabilities, such as attending classes remotely, online medical consultations with far away specialists, or applying for and securing jobs, eliminating the need for unnecessary or difficult commutes or trips.
- Programs that read text and describe visual contents aloud in a synthetic voice or a Braille display enable people who are blind or visually impaired to search the Internet, understand videos, and communicate online.
- For persons with certain mental conditions or learning disabilities, slow download speeds discourage Internet use.
- Video relay services (VRS), which require high speed Internet to run, allow people who are deaf to have phone conversations in their native sign language by means of an online interpreter.
- Initiatives to expand high speed Internet should include, as a principle, provisions to ensure not only affordability, but also accessibility and usability, for people with disabilities.
- Measures undertaken to increase employment through deploying more high speed Internet availability should include the employment needs of people with disabilities.
- Research on high speed Internet access should look at the economic benefits of assimilating marginalized segments of society as a means of integration.
For More Information
Related Blog Posts:
- 05-14-2013: The Truth About Lifeline
- 04-26-2013: Republican attack on Lifeline runs into strong defense
- 12-20-2012: FCC presents accessibility awards
- 11-19-2012: CWA stands with video interpreters
- 06-20-2012: Yes, Netflix, the ADA does apply to you
- 06-08-2012: To help the disabled, mobile needs more spectrum
- 03-05-2012: Digital technology makes the disabled more able
- 01-18-2012: FCC advances with Internet video closed captioning
- 12-21-2011: Genachowski and Knight Foundation name winners of “Apps for Communities” project
- 10-20-2011: House Dems Ask FCC To Develop Internet In Nation’s School And Libraries
- 10-13-2011: FCC Takes Major Step For People With Disabilities
- 08-29-2011: FCC Mandates Closed Captioning On Streaming Video
- 08-19-2011: Telemedicine Does Reduce Patient Travel
- 07-29-2011: Administration Presses Federal Government On Technology Accessibility
- 07-28-2011: FCC Sets Six Month Deadline for Online Closed Captioning
- 07-22-2011: Disabled Can Increase Employment Opportunities With Assistive Technology
- 07-08-2011: Bring Broadband to the Billion with Disability
- 06-30-2011: Lawsuit Against Netflix Exposes Need for Closed Captioning
- 06-20-2011: COAT Adds Its Support For AT&T/T-Mobile Merger
- 04-25-2011: App Design Challenge Offers Crowd-sourced Solution for Underserved Communities
- 04-14-2011: FCC Adopts Equipment Program for Persons with Disabilities
- 03-11-2011: AAPD Hosting Policy Forum on Telerehabilitation
- 03-08-2011: FCC Proposes Rules to Expand Access for the Disabled
- 02-16-2011: Americans With Disabilities are Underserved by Online Technologies
- 11-09-2010: NTIA/ESA Report Sheds Light on Broadband Gaps
- 11-01-2010: Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, CWA Urge FCC to Act
- 10-15-2010: Accessibility Act Signed Into Law
- 09-28-2010: Digital Disability Access Bill Passes Senate
- 08-24-2010: The Benefits of Broadband
- 08-10-2010: Senate Unanimously Approves Historic Accessibility Legislation
- 07-26-2010: The FCC Celebrates the 20th Anniversary of the ADA
- 07-21-2010: Senate committee approves new technology accessibility standards
- 06-02-2010: Kerry: Legislation Ensuring Broadband Access for Disabled May Pass in 2010
- 04-30-2010: Commerce announces $28.5 million in grant money for One Economy
- 04-28-2010: FCC begins work on new public safety broadband network
- 04-28-2010: Broadband adoption rates low among Americans with disabilities, according to FCC
- 04-22-2010: Hollis: National recovery efforts must include Internet equality
- 03-10-2010: High-speed Internet brings improved dental care to underserved community
- 02-01-2010: Disability advocates laud CWA’s broadband plan recommendations
- 02-01-2010: CWA calls for broadband goal of 50 mbps downstream and 20 upstream by 2015
- 11-20-2009: APT re-launches, focusing on broadband adoption
- 11-12-2009: Redefining “access” - broadband for those with disabilities
- 10-15-2009: Advances in telemedicine accelerate
- 07-15-2009: Speed matters to the American Association of People with Disabilities
- 06-15-2009: Broadband tools overcome barriers for quality healthcare
- 06-08-2009: National broadband plan must include public hearings, benchmarks for progress
- 06-05-2009: Broadband stimulus progress report stipulates grant application deadlines
- 09-19-2008: Hearing shows high speed Internet opening doors for the disadvantaged
- 09-03-2008: Telemedicine allows doctors to get regular vital signs from patients
- 11-09-2007: Broadband changes lives
- 09-20-2007: Children with Disabilities: Logging on to Learn
- 06-14-2007: High speed for the hard of hearing
- 10-09-2006: A picture is worth a thousand words
- 09-12-2006: Giving the Deaf a Welcome Sign
- 09-12-2006: Bringing More of the World to the Blind

Hemingway fought in Italy in WWI, that is well know, what we didn’t know is that his first ever work was written while sojourning in Taormina.
Gaetano Saglimbeni, Italian journalist and writer from Taormina embarked on a long research in London and stumbled upon the discovery of a lifetime.
Ernest Hemingway took part in the First World War as a journalist, soldier and volunteer for the Red Cross. At 19, while stationed in Southern Italy he was wounded while rescuing an Italian soldier and as a result spent many months in Taormina convalescing. According to sources, the young Hemingway stayed at Count Bronte’s villa in Taormina while recovering, and here is where he was first inspired to write a short story.
Hemingway’s sojourn in Italy and his romance with American nurse Agnes von Kurowsky, inspired one of his most famous novels, A Farewell to Arms, yet it seems that Italy was not only the backdrop to this literary romance, it was also where his love of writing first ensued.
Back to Saglimbeni. While researching Hemingway’s first works, he stumbled across The Mercenaries, a collection of short stories published posthumously in 1987. Amongst this collection of short stories, five previously unpublished, one in particular stands out.
Set in Taormina, and revolving around love, food, wine and a duel set in the garden of a restaurant, this previously neglected novella is sure to kindle some interest, especially form Italians. Unfortunately, as of yet, these The Mercenaries, is not available in Italian.

1946-01 Introduction to What Means This Strike? [Petersen]
More than four decades have passed since Daniel De Leon delivered his great speech before the striking textile workers of New Bedford, Massachusetts. When it appeared in print it was instantly recognized as one of the great speeches of our times. It contains all the elements that combine to make a speech a great classic. It measures up to Daniel Webster’s claim as to the requirements of a great speech: The Man; the Subject; the Occasion. The Man: eloquent, gifted, fully informed, fearless, uncompromising, and the very soul of integrity. The Subject: a great, irrepressible issue, and the need of stating it in simple, yet withal correct and scientific terms. The Occasion: a supremely important manifestation of that fundamental, irrepressible issue — a typical and illuminating effect of the basic cause of the universal conflict of our times, the STRIKE. And presently the merging of Subject and Occasion into the Man, the speaker, who (tirelessly and patiently proclaiming the truth born of new occasions) pointed to the true goal of the victims of modern injustice — clear and specific beyond any doubt or wavering as to the nature of that goal, and the means imperative and essential for its attainment.
The strike is the manifestation of two primary factors: The fact of a social system based on classes, one of which exploits and feeds upon the other; and the indomitable spirit and unconquerable mind of slaves worthy to be free, and destined to become freemen. Around these two manifestations revolve our entire social problem and the relations of modern classes,, and the solution of that problem. In his famous speech De Leon probes the cause of the strike. The cause, being shown to be the struggle between the capitalists and the workers over the "division" of the wealth produced by labor alone (the question of length of working day being a mere variant of the same thing), De Leon proceeds to show what are wages, and what profits, and the whence and wherefore of both. He establishes the fact that the share of the capitalists in; production is nil, that the "work" they do is no more productive than "the intense mental strain and active ‘work’ done by pickpockets is directly or indirectly productive." He shows how the owners of capital came into possession of their "original accumulation." He analyzes the class struggle, and outlines the development of capitalist society. He disposes of the myth that inventors reap the benefit of their genius, showing that, on the contrary, it is the useless, unproductive owner of capital who appropriates the fruits of the inventor’s genius. He demonstrates the never-ceasing process of concentration of capital, with its destruction of smaller competitors who join in the labor market the workers displaced by improved machinery. And last, but not least, he projects the principles and the structure of the organization which the workers must build if they would free themselves from wage slavery, and without which the strikes in and by themselves would become and remain idle and hopeless gestures of despair against the all-crushing power of capital, that is, of the strongly entrenched and powerfully organized capitalist class.
"What Means This Strike?" is the class-struggle primer par excellence. It is the handbook, the textbook, of the exploited worker seeking to understand the meaning, the sense, of strikes, and what to do when they take place. Strikes, in the language of Marx, are the "unavoidable guerrilla fights incessantly springing up from the never-ceasing encroachments of capital or changes of the market." Guerrilla fights are disorganized skirmishes by individuals or separate groups or bands (usually in a losing struggle) carried on against highly organized armies in aggressive pursuit. That correctly describes the struggle of the modern workers on strike in their present form of organization against the solidly organized power of capital. Hence, the form of organization, its avowed purpose and objective, are of the highest significance to the workers, whether on strike or not. That strike, therefore, is lost (no matter what the temporary gain may seem to be] which does not take heed of the structure and objective of labor unions. And experience has proved that in the situation and set of circumstances so brilliantly and eloquently portrayed by De Leon, the workers, in order to seize the crown of victory, MUST ORGANIZE COMPACTLY INTO SOCIALIST INDUSTRIAL UNIONS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENDING CAPITALIST WAGE SLAVERY — FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF FREE LABOR. Not merely for a few more crumbs, not simply in order to ease the chains of slavery, but in order that the workers may secure the whole loaf which they alone produced; in order that .slavery itself may be forever banished from the earth. Strikes are rife throughout the country during this postwar period. The immediate cause is, of course, the return to "peacetime" production standards. During World War II, capitalism-backed financially and otherwise by the power of government-produced for "use" — that is, for war use. Costs, expenses, were no more a consideration than were human lives. The workers, through overtime pay and uninterrupted labor, enjoyed a relatively high standard of living. Shifted back on a peacetime production basis, all this came to an end. Capitalism, when it is not producing for war and destruction, is producing for a market. The question of keeping workers employed, or paying at least a living wage, concerns the capitalists not at all. Hence, the workers, employed in decreasing numbers, were offered wages that fell far below those received during the war. To their credit the workers have rebelled. They have refused to sell their labor power below its value, that is, below the amount required to maintain the minimum in a bare living.
And so the struggle is on. The corporations, entrenched behind their tremendous economic resources, can afford to wait. Moreover, they even benefit by keeping their plants idle, at least until the huge tax reductions become effective. For a time, at least, it was as profitable for them to keep their plants closed down as to operate them, and evidently they feel that they are in a position to starve their wage slaves into submission. In view of the fact that the working class is not organized in Socialist Industrial Unions, prepared to take over the operation of industry for itself and society at large, the plutocratic exploiters may be right. Then, again, they may be wrong — they may be stretching the bow too far. For these are not the halcyon days of prewar capitalism — these are not the days when workers would submit — grumblingly to be sure, but submit nevertheless — to the caprices of the market, and the whims of capitalist exploiters. A world war has been fought during which the workers were told that they were fighting and producing for a "victory" that was to bring peace and plenty. The workers have had a taste of higher standards, and many of them swallowed whole the promises of capitalists and politicians. But now they stand, with empty hands, or "enjoying" a starvation diet, with increasing millions out of work. And they don’t like it. And despite efforts on the part of the labor fakers to hold them back, they are forcing these to act.
Meanwhile, the capitalist class and its political and editorial spokesmen are howling and denouncing the workers. The familiar fake arguments are advanced — the dear "public" is menaced, "inflation" is being caused by the workers’ demands, and, horror of horrors, the sacred private-property interests and prerogatives of the ruling class are being placed in jeopardy! Dire threats issue from the halls of Congress, threats of repressive legislation, anti-strike laws, compulsory arbitration, and so forth. In 1941, Representative Hatton W. Summers of Texas raucously shouted from his privileged seat in Congress: "… I would not hesitate one split second to enact legislation to send them [striking workers] to the electric chair." Similar barbarous cries may soon be heard again, from Congress, from the press and radio — aye, even from the pulpit. For the ruling class of America has learned little from the fate that befell its kindred spirits, the Hitlers and the Mussolinis. And thus we may find history repeating itself on this side of the ocean where economic fascism is as rampant as ever it was in Hitler’s and Mussolini’s slave empires before they met their doom.
The menace confronting the working class can be met only by organized resistance to the exploiting, useless owners of industry. But that resistance, to become effective, and in order to place the workers in an offensive instead of a defensive position, must manifest itself through powerful Socialist Industrial Unions a& urged by the Socialist Labor Party, and the goal of Socialist freedom must be proclaimed by the working: class thus organized. For there can never be peace, plenty and general social well-being without Socialism. May the workers soon fully realize this.
What De Leon said in his memorable New Bedford address forty-three years ago holds good today — in some respects even more so. Here and there the text has become somewhat "dated" by the relentless march of events, and the enlargement and deepening of the science of Socialism. On page 43 of this pamphlet De Leon speaks of the workers bringing the government under their control, implying that the State would be controlled by the workers in their interest, and that that would be Socialism. State ownership is not Socialism; Industrial Union administration and operation of industry is. And organizing in Industrial Unions, and capturing at the ballot box the political government and dismantling it, will alone establish Socialism — not the "industrial unions" headed by the John L. Lewises, Philip Murrays, Sidney Hillmans, etc. These are not industrial unions in any proper sense. They are in reality agencies of capitalism and, structurally as well as ideologically, almost identical to Hitler’s "Labor Front" and Mussolini’s "corporate State." They are, in short, instruments of slavery and not of freedom. The same now erroneous implication is found on page 45, second paragraph. The reference to "shop organization" on page 50 must now be read as "Socialist industrial organization" in order to render the argument valid. The same applies in a measure to the language employed on pages 52 and 53. The Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance ceased to exist in 1905 when it merged with the Industrial Workers of the World organized that year in Chicago. The Industrial Workers of the World until 1908 represented Socialist Industrial Unionism in its true, though incomplete and undeveloped, form. In 1908 it was captured by an Anarchist element, disrupted and is now practically out of existence.
On page 53, De Leon also speaks of the workers boldly marching out upon the streets, organizing monster parades, etc. Street demonstrations, parades, and the like have proved vain and futile efforts in the class struggle. Today the watchword is: Organization on class and industrial lines.
Here and there, De Leon speaks of profits when, strictly speaking, he should have used the scientific term "surplus value." The occasion was hardly one that lent itself to the use of terms which required involved or lengthy explanation. And though the word "profit" was technically wrong, it did express the general idea.
On page 36, De Leon speaks of "the brown of his brains being exhausted…." This is probably a typographical error. The sentence no doubt should have read: "his brawn and his brain being exhausted
On pages 19 through 22, De Leon presents some arbitrary figures to illustrate a point. Through what the erudite would call a lapsus linguae, De Leon failed to correlate the figures properly. The argument, however, is not affected.
Apart from these minor or incidental corrections, De Leon’s "What Means This Strike?" remains after more than forty years the same instructive and inspiring introduction to a study of Socialism which it proved to be when first released. And the basic principles and arguments will remain sound and irrefutable while capitalism persists as the blight of the fair earth and the curse of man.
To this pamphlet there has been added an appendix which is a resolution on strikes adopted by the National Executive Committee of the Socialist Labor Party in May session, 1940. It should be read carefully as a supplement to De Leon’s masterpiece. Absorbing the knowledge which these important documents impart, the worker will be fortified and aided in his struggle, and, acting upon the knowledge and lessons imparted, by organizing correctly, politically and industrially, his early freedom will be assured. And out of the present chaos, darkness and slavery, there shall then emerge order, light and freedom for all.
January 24, 1946.

Working within healthcare appeals to our society in a way virtually no other professional sector does. The mystique of making medical diagnoses, the desire to help those in need, the adrenalin surge that comes with working at a fast pace and in stressful situations, and the allure of earning a handsome salary. If you need further proof that we like the idea of healthcare jobs, just think about how many movies and televisions shows (reality, dramas, and comedies) take place or have taken place inside hospitals.
Our attraction to this industry will probably always be well-matched with the necessity to educate and employ more qualified healthcare professionals—especially right now, as a substantial portion of our population is aging and requiring more medical care. In fact, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) reports that there will be more employment growth within the healthcare and social assistance sector than in any others this decade.
Here's a snapshot of the 24 healthcare professions that we at U.S. News have labelled the best to break into, either this year or in the years to come.
The Doctors Are In
What's a list of healthcare jobs without doctors? For 2013, we highlight a handful of professions that utilize this title, although the long road to earning the honor is different for each job. Whether you choose to be a Medical Doctor (M.D.), a Doctor of Dental Medicine (D.M.D.), a Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD), or even a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (D.V.M.), you can expect to spend at least two years following undergrad completing a professional degree and residency program. Some medical specialties require up to eight years working as a resident.
The initials behind your name are only part of the payoff for all those years of training: Doctors are imperative to providing quality healthcare, as they're the ones who make the medical diagnoses and final decisions on how to treat patients. The four categories of doctors we highlight this year could together see nearly 300,000 new hires between 2010 and 2020.
Expected Openings: 27,600
Expected Openings: 69,700
Expected Openings: 168,300
Expected Openings: 22,000
Some of the most significant work in a healthcare facility is performed by medical secretaries, technologists, and technicians. And like the doctors, therapists, and nurses who they support, these workers undergo specialized training to become qualified to properly operate complex medical equipment, decipher prescription orders, prepare patients for procedures, keep detailed medical records, and possibly even perform initial analyses and medical examinations.
However, you won't find yourself in a four-years-or-more learning purgatory (er, training period) to enter one of these six positions from our Best Jobs list. And job prospects are excellent, as healthcare facilities strive to meet the demand to treat more patients by hiring these types of workers to provide general care and free up registered nurses, therapists, and doctors. Keep in mind that technologists are senior to technicians, typically earn higher salaries, and often need a bachelor's degree and credentials.
Expected Openings: 23,800
Expected Openings: 23,400
Expected Openings: 210,200
Expected Openings: 108,300

Related Articles and Videos
What's your credit question?
Search for answers to your questions.
See all Three Reports and Scores
See your Experian, TransUnion and Equifax credit reports in one easy-to-read format. Includes a FREE PLUS Credit ScoreSM from Experian. See them online for only $39.95!
What Is Credit
Credit is borrowed money that you can use to purchase goods and services when you need them. You get credit from a credit grantor, whom you agree to pay back the amount you spent, plus applicable finance charges, at an agreed-upon time.
There are four types of credit:
- Revolving credit. With revolving credit, you are given a maximum credit limit, and you can make charges up to that limit. Each month, you carry a balance (or revolve the debt) and make a payment. Most credit cards are a form of revolving credit.
- Charge cards. While they often look like revolving credit cards and are used in the same way, charge accounts differ in that you must pay the total balance every month.
- Service credit. Your agreements with service providers are all credit arrangements. You receive electricity, cellular phone service, gym membership, etc., with the agreement that you will pay for them each month. Not all service accounts are reported in your credit history.
- Installment credit. With installment credit, a creditor loans you a specific amount of money, and you agree to repay the money and interest in regular installments of a fixed amount over a set period of time. Car loans and mortgages are two examples of installment credit.
Why Do You Need Credit?
Good credit is necessary if you plan to use credit to make a major purchase, such as a car or a home, or want to be able to take advantage of the convenience credit can provide. The importance of good credit also extends beyond purchases, in that your credit information may be used by potential employers and landlords as part of the selection process.
Credit grantors review credit applications and credit reports to determine financial risk: If they lend you money, extend you credit or give you goods and services, will you pay them back? They may consider your income, how long you’ve lived at your present address, how long you’ve worked for the same employer, what kinds of assets you have and the balances of your bank accounts. Often, though, the primary resource guiding their decision is your credit information.

Selective extraction of gold(III) in the presence of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) by salting-out of the mixture of 2-propanol and water.
- PubMed: 18968825
The mixture of 2-propanol with water has been employed to extract Au(III) along with other precious metals such as Pd(II) and Pt(IV) by using NaCl in the concentration range of 2.5-4.0 mol dm(-3). Upon the addition of NaCl within this concentration range (2.5-4.0 mol dm(-3)) phase separation was attained. Gold(III) in aqueous phase was quantitatively extracted into the 2-propanol phase at 2.5-4.0 mol dm(-3) of NaCl. The extraction of the other metals such as Pd(II) and Pt(IV) was much lower than for that of Au(III). Thus a maximal selective separation of Au(III) from these metals could be attained using the mixture of 2-propanol with water. A reaction mechanism involving the ion-pair of Na(+) and AuCl(4)(-) has been proposed to explain this extraction.

Contents of 28-3
Practical Activities, Biodiversity for Beginners P66. Chris du Feu
Biodiversity is a difficult concept. It can be introduced to young children successfully, laying the foundations for further study in later years. This article describes one practical activity for 5- and 6-year-old children.
iPod Shuffle not Random. P71. Peter Holmes
This article discusses the behaviour of a sequence of events under random choice and under a restriction of randomness. Outline lesson plans at three different levels are suggested.
Wimbledon 2010: A Fifth Set Cliff-hanger in the Murray vs. Federer Final? P75. Elizabeth M. Glaister and Paul Glaister
Imagine the scene. The year is 2010 and Andy Murray and Roger Federer are playing each other for the first time in the Wimbledon Championships final. Will it be a straights sets victory or a nail-biting five-set match?
How a Dummy Replaces a Student’s Test and Gets an F (Or, How Regression Substitutes for t tests and ANOVA) P78. Joseph G. Eisenhauer
Using dummy variables, this note offers a convenient illustration to demonstrate that regression can replace both the one-factor analysis of variance and the two-population t test with independent random samples. The exercise also helps to develop students’ intuition regarding regression coefficients.
Consensus is Unfair. P81. Ruma Falk and Avital Lann
A coefficient of unfairness in the allocation of goods to people can be extended to measuring consensus among judges. The notion of relative variability underlies the formation of these measures.
NEWS & NOTES P83
The Royal Statistical Society Schools Lecture 2004: ‘Lies and Statistics’, Part 2. P84. Frank Duckworth
This article concludes the serialization of the Royal Statistical Society’s Schools Lecture for 2004, on ‘Lies and statistics’.
Statistical Diversions. P90. Peter Petocz and Eric Sowey
The regular column in Teaching Statistics to get you thinking.
COMPETITION REPORT P93
BOOK REVIEW P94
LOOK AHEAD P96
Index to Volume 28 (inside back cover)

Last time, I introduced you to SELinux: what it is, what it can do, and really why you need it (or a system like it). It is especially important with reported (and fixed) security vulnerabilities on the rise, and each year brings more reports, and more updates for end-users to install. This data tells us that we are in greater need of proactive security measures now than we ever were before. And this is where software like SELinux fits in.
There is a lot to SELinux, and we’re only going to touch on SELinux contexts and labels. Suffice it to say, SELinux policies contain various rules that allow interaction between different contexts. Contexts are ports, processes, files, directories, and so on. Instead of getting overwhelmed with the technical concepts of SELinux, we’ll instead look at the practical side of using SELinux so that it doesn’t seem quite as daunting.
The first thing to do is determine what mode SELinux is running in:
The getenforce command tells us what mode SELinux is in. The possible modes are Enforcing, Permissive, or Disabled. Enforcing means that SELinux will report access violations and deny the attempt, Permissive tells SELinux to report the violation but allow it, and Disabled completely turns SELinux off.
Ideally, if you are unprepared to run SELinux in Enforcing mode, it should be in Permissive mode.
This can be set at boot by editing (on Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Fedora) the /etc/sysconfig/selinux file and setting the SELINUX option:
This will ensure it persists across reboot. SELinux can transition from Enforcing to Permissive easily using the setenforce command. Providing setenforce with a “0″ argument will put the system in Permissive mode, a “1″ will set it to Enforcing. To transition to or from Disabled mode, you need to reboot after making the appropriate changes to the sysconfig file. Using setenforce can be a great way of troubleshooting problems; if the problem goes away after setting the system to Permissive mode then you know it is SELinux.
If not, then it is something else.
# setenforce 0
To view the contexts that a process is running with, add the Z option to ps:
# ps auxZ | grep httpd
system_u:system_r:httpd_t:s0 apache 30544 0.0 0.0 305612 6688 ? S Mar30 0:00 /usr/sbin/httpd
This tells us that the httpd process is using the httpd_t type, the system_r role, and the system_u user. More often than not, it is the httpd_t type you would be interested in.
The Z option is also used with other commands, such as ls, cp, id, and others. For instance, to view your security context:
# id -Z
Or to view the security context associated with a file:
# ls -lZ /var/www/html/index.html
-rw-r--r--. root root unconfined_u:object_r:httpd_sys_content_t:s0 /var/www/html/index.html
Again, probably the most useful bit of information here is the type, in this case it is httpd_sys_content_t.
As an example of how to quickly change the policy, assume that you do not put your websites in /var/www/, but rather use /srv/www/foo.com/html/ for your site’s document root. You can configure Apache to use these directories as the DocumentRoot for various websites, but if you were to visit them, Apache would return an error because SELinux would disallow access. SELinux knows nothing about allowing Apache to these directories as of yet.
To determine what type a file needs to have in order for Apache to access it, the above ls command tells us that the type we want is probably httpd_sys_content_t; after all, Apache by default serves files from /var/www/html/. Another, probably better, way is to use the semanage tool.
This tool is used to show, and change, defined SELinux policy. We could also do:
# semanage fcontext -l | grep '/var/www'
/var/www(/.*)? all files system_u:object_r:httpd_sys_content_t:s0
This command tells semanage to list all fcontext entries (file contexts), and we hand that output to grep to search for and display ‘/var/www’. For brevity, the whole output is not shown, but the above confirms that /var/www/* has the httpd_sys_content_t type. So what we need to do is tell SELinux to give this same type to /srv/www/foo.com/html/*, so that Apache can serve up those files.
This can be done by using semanage to add a new context:
# semanage fcontext -a -t httpd_sys_content_t '/srv/www(/.*)?'
# semanage fcontext -l | grep '/srv/www'
/srv/www(/.*)? all files system_u:object_r:httpd_sys_content_t:s0
# restorecon -Rv /srv/www
The SELinux policies here use regular expressions, so the above tells semanage to add (-a) a new fcontext with the type (-t) httpd_sys_content_t, and targets /srv/www itself and any sub-directories and files. We use semanage to list the fcontexts and search for any ‘/srv/www’ entries, to verify it is in place, and then use restorecon to re-label and set the appropriate security context on the /srv/www directory and any sub-directories and files.
At this point, Apache will serve content from that directory if configured to do so, because Apache has the right to read httpd_sys_content_t files and /srv/www/ will now be labeled correctly.
The restorecon tool is used to set default contexts on files and directories, according to policy. You will become very familiar with this tool because it is used very often. For instance, if you move a file from a home directory to this web root, it will not immediately gain the appropriate security context because the mv command retains the existing context (cp will make a new context because it is making a new file). For instance:
% echo "my file" >file.html
% ls -Z file.html
-rw-rw-r--. vdanen vdanen unconfined_u:object_r:user_home_t:s0 file.html
% mv file.html /srv/www/foo.com/html/
% ls -Z /srv/www/foo.com/html/
-rw-rw-r--. vdanen vdanen unconfined_u:object_r:user_home_t:s0 file.html
Apache is not, by default, allowed to serve up user_home_t files, so any attempt to display this file via Apache will fail with denied access. restorecon is required to re-label the file so Apache can access it:
# restorecon -v /srv/www/foo.com/html/file.html
restorecon reset /srv/www/foo.com/html/file.html context unconfined_u:object_r:user_home_t:s0->system_u:object_r:httpd_sys_content_t:s0
Now the security context of the file is correct.
Similarly, when going from Disabled mode to Permissive or Enforcing mode, SELinux will have to re-label the entire filesystem (effectively running “estorecon /) because contexts are not set at all when SELinux is disabled.
Once you wrap your head around these basics of SELinux, all of a sudden it is no more difficult to use than manipulating iptables firewall rules. Just as you would adjust your firewall to allow access to a new service, you adjust SELinux file contexts to allow applications and services to access them. Yes, it does require a little more work to set up, initially, but the security benefits are really quite useful, especially considering that the bulk of this kind of manipulation will only happen when initially setting up a system or adding new services. And getting into the habit of running restorecon on new files and directories as they are created isn’t any more difficult than using ls on them to double-check their permissions.
The next and final tip on SELinux will introduce us to SELinux logging, to detect access violations, and to some other basic SELinux commands.

Peru Demographic Resources
CIA World Factbook - This is a summary of all public information that the United States intelligence has about Peru. Information included: geography, people, government, economy, communications, transportation, military and transnational issues.
World Bank - The World Bank deals specifically with poverty reduction and economic issues, however there is much economic data that assists in developing what Peru looks like socially. Information included: GDP, population, private and public sector strength, health and education.
United States Department of State - This is a summary of the United States’ public position on Peru as well as demographic, safety and geographic information for travellers.
Health of Nations - This is a website presented by General Electric that presents information specifically regarding health. Information included: hospital beds (per 1000), vaccines and physicians (per 10,000).
World Health Organization - This is data presented specifically by the UN’s World Health Organization, data that is used by the organization to develop aid plans and to devote money for aid.
UNICEF - Information offered: nutrition, health, education, demographics, rate of progress, equity, etc. This is data only and does not offer any explanation of data.
International Human Development Indicators - Data from the United Nations accumulated while trying to evaluate development throughout the world. The site offers general development information and specific health data.
BBC - Information on Peru offered by BBC. It’s probably not too academic or groundbreaking, but a good place to start.
USAID Peru - Information offered by USAID about current projects.
Peru INEI - All in Spanish, but contains potentially valuable information if translated.
Newseum - Offers access to the front page of any newspaper in the world.

In a recent study, researchers sought to determine whether the U.S. Surgeon General Office's recommendation of moderate intensity exercise four or more times per week for at least 30 minutes per occasion was sufficient to facilitate body fat loss.
Ninety men and women were instructed to voluntarily exercise for 30 minutes four times weekly for 8 weeks. Participants were given two options, either continuous steady state cardiovascular training at 70% of HRmax, or circuit training for 30 minutes achieving similar intensity. Body composition was evaluated using air displacement plethysmography, familiar to most as a BodPod.
After 8 weeks the participants were categorized into controls, and by number of days exercised per week over the course of the study: less than 2 times per week, 2 to 3 times per week and 4 or more times per week. All three exercise groups lost body fat on average, however, only those who exercised 4 or more times per week achieved significant body fat loss during the 8 week study, approximately 13 lbs.
Although diet was not controlled for during this study, the findings underscore the importance of frequency of exercise for fat loss. The majority of Personal Training clients exercise with their Trainer 2 or 3 times per week. It is important that clients are encouraged to train additionally on their own to accumulate the desirable frequency.
Willis, F.B. et al (2009) Frequency of Exercise for Body Fat Los: A Controlled, Cohort Study. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 23 (8): 2377.

Basic economics state that a change in the supply of a product or service can drive the cost up or down. The more of availability of a product or service generally means there is greater competition to sell these products. However, if the demand increases even as the supply increases, the net costs of the product may increase as well. In other words, even as supply increases, the demand outpaces the supply and thereby increasing the cost to the consumer. This is the scenario that oil markets must consider when buying and selling crude oil.
As more nations move into an industrialized economy, the world demand for oil increases. Other factors which can impact demand are colder than normal seasons, war, industrial growth spurts, and the increase in leisure time and summer travel. The total supply of oil is a comprised of the number of barrels oil producing countries can provide plus the available stocks sitting in storage either on land or at sea in transit. There just as many variables which could... [continues]
Cite This Essay
(2007, 11). Supply V. Demand: False Perceptions That Impact Crude Oil Pricing. StudyMode.com. Retrieved 11, 2007, from http://www.studymode.com/essays/Supply-v-Demand-False-Perceptions-Impact-125215.html
"Supply V. Demand: False Perceptions That Impact Crude Oil Pricing" StudyMode.com. 11 2007. 11 2007 <http://www.studymode.com/essays/Supply-v-Demand-False-Perceptions-Impact-125215.html>.
"Supply V. Demand: False Perceptions That Impact Crude Oil Pricing." StudyMode.com. 11, 2007. Accessed 11, 2007. http://www.studymode.com/essays/Supply-v-Demand-False-Perceptions-Impact-125215.html.

Apr 13, 2006
what is the difference between Hep C and Hep B. Is one more serious than the other?
| Response from Dr. McGovern
Both can cause liver disease and liver cancer. Hepatitis B is spread through sex and injection drug use; hepatitis C is spread most commonly through injection drug use and much less commonly through sex.
However, hepatitis B most often clears from the body and does not cause chronic disease.
On the other hand, hepatitis C causes chronic disease in about 80 percent of people.
Both illnesses can be treated.
Get Email Notifications When This Forum Updates or Subscribe With RSS
This forum is designed for educational purposes only, and experts are not rendering medical, mental health, legal or other professional advice or services. If you have or suspect you may have a medical, mental health, legal or other problem that requires advice, consult your own caregiver, attorney or other qualified professional.
Experts appearing on this page are independent and are solely responsible for editing and fact-checking their material. Neither TheBody.com nor any advertiser is the publisher or speaker of posted visitors' questions or the experts' material.

From The New York Times (Felicity Barringer):
The federal government has come up with dozens of ways to enhance the diminishing flow of the Colorado River, which has long struggled to keep seven states and roughly 25 million people hydrated…
…also in the mix, and expected to remain in the final draft of the report [ed. Colorado River Basin Water Supply & Demand Study], is a more extreme and contentious approach. It calls for building a pipeline from the Missouri River to Denver, nearly 600 miles to the west. Water would be doled out as needed along the route in Kansas, with the rest ultimately stored in reservoirs in the Denver area…
The fact that the Missouri River pipeline idea made the final draft, water experts say, shows how serious the problem has become for the states of the Colorado River basin. “I pooh-poohed this kind of stuff back in the 1960s,” said Chuck Howe, a water policy expert and emeritus professor of economics at the University of Colorado, Boulder. “But it’s no longer totally unrealistic. Currently, one can say ‘It’s worth a careful look.’ ”
The pipeline would provide the Colorado River basin [ed. Denver, Kansas, etc., are not in the Colorado River Basin] with 600,000 acre-feet of water annually, which could serve roughly a million single-family homes. But the loss of so much water from the Missouri and Mississippi River systems, which require flows high enough to sustain large vessel navigation, would most likely face strong political opposition…
Rose Davis, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Reclamation, said that during the course of the study, the analysis done on climate change and historical data led the agency “to an acknowledged gap” between future demand and future supply as early as the middle of this century.
That is when they put out a call for broader thinking to solve the water problem. “When we did have that wake-up call, we threw open the doors and said, ‘Bring it on,’ ” she said. “Nothing is too silly.”[...]
It is unclear how much such a pipeline project would cost, though estimates run into the billions of dollars. That does not include the cost of the new electric power that would be needed (along with the construction of new generating capacity) to pump the water uphill from Leavenworth, Kan., to the front range reservoirs serving Denver, about a mile above sea level, according to Sharlene Leurig, an expert on water-project financing at Ceres, a nonprofit group based in Boston that works with investors to promote sustainability.
If the Denver area had this new source of water to draw on, it could reduce the supplies that come from the Colorado River basin on the other side of the Continental Divide.
But [Burke W. Griggs] and some federal officials said that the approval of such a huge water project remained highly unlikely.
Ms. Leurig noted that local taxpayers and utility customers would be shouldering most of the expense of such a venture through their tax and water bills, which would make conservation a more palatable alternative.
More Missouri River Reuse Project coverage here.

|135–185 million Communities majorly in Iran,Afghanistan and also in Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Russia, Kazakhstan, Georgia, Armenia, Oman, China (Xinjiang), India, Pakistan, United Kingdom, Germany and United States.|
|Regions with significant populations|
|Iran and Iranian Plateau, Anatolia, South Asia, Central Asia, the Caucasus and as immigrant communities in North America and Western Europe.|
|Related ethnic groups|
Other Indo-Iranian peoples
The Iranian peoples or Iranic peoples are an Indo-European ethno-linguistic group that comprise the speakers of Iranian languages, a major branch of the Indo-European language family, as such forming a branch of the Indo-European-speaking peoples. Their historical areas of settlement were on the Iranian plateau (mainly Iran) and certain neighbouring areas of Central Asia (such as Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Pakistan West of the River Indus, northern Iraq and eastern Turkey, and scattered part of the Caucasus Mountains) reflecting changing geopolitical range of the Persian empires and the Iranian history. Their current distribution spreads across the Iranian plateau, and stretches from Pakistan's Indus River in the east to eastern Turkey in the west, and from Central Asia and the Caucasus in the north to the Persian Gulf in the south – a region that is sometimes called the Iranian cultural continent, or Greater Persia by scholars, and represents the extent of the Iranian languages and influence of the Persian people, through the geopolitical reach of the Persian empire.
The Iranian group emerges from an earlier Iranian group during the Late Bronze Age, and it enters the historical record during the Early Iron Age.
The Iranians comprise the Persians, Medes, Scythians, Bactrians, Parthians, Sarmatians, Alans, Ossetians, Cimerians and their sub-groups. The Iranians had domesticated horses, had travelled far and wide, and from the late 2nd millennium BCE to early 1st millennium BCE they had migrated to, and settled on, the Iranian Plateau. They moved into the Zagros Mountains (inhabited by Gutians, Kassites and others, home of the Mannaean kingdom) above the indigenous non Iranian Elamite Kingdom. For approximately three centuries after arriving in the region, the Medes and Persians fell under the domination of the Assyrian Empire (911–609 BCE), based in nearby Mesopotamia. In 646 BCE, Susa and many other cities of Elam were plundered and wrecked by Ashurbanipal, King of Assyria, allowing the Iranian peoples to become the predominant group in Iran. After the death of Ashurbanipal in 627 BCE, the Assyrian Empire began to unravel due to a series of bitter civil wars. In 616 BCE the Median king Cyaxares threw off the Assyrian yoke, united the Medes and Persians, and in alliance with Nabopolassar of Babylon and the Scythians, attacked the civil war ridden Assyrian Empire. By 609 BCE, the Assyrians and their Egyptian allies had been defeated. This began the Iranian domination in the Iranian Plateau. Persians formed the Achaemenid Empire by the 6th century BCE, while the Scythians dominated the Eurasian steppe. With numerous artistic, scientific, architectural and philosophical achievements and numerous kingdoms and empires that bridged much of the civilized world in antiquity, the Iranian peoples were often in close contact with the Greeks, Romans, Egyptians, Indians, and Chinese. The various religions of the Iranian peoples, including Zoroastrianism, Mithraism and Manichaeism, are believed by some scholars to have been significant early philosophical influences on Christianity and Judaism.
The term Iranian is derived from the Old Iranian ethnical adjective Aryana which is itself a cognate of the Sanskrit word Arya. The name Iran is from Aryānām; lit: "[Land] of the Aryans". The old Proto-Indo-Iranian term Arya, per Thieme meaning "hospitable", is believed to have been one of the self-referential terms used by the Aryans, at least in the areas populated by Aryans who migrated south from Central Asia. Another meaning for Aryan is noble. In the late part of the Avesta (Vendidad 1), one of their homelands was referred to as Airyanem Vaejah. The homeland varied in its geographic range, the area around Herat (Pliny's view) and even the entire expanse of the Iranian plateau (Strabo's designation).
The academic usage of the term Iranian is distinct from the state of Iran and its various citizens (who are all Iranian by nationality and thus popularly referred to as Iranians) in the same way that Germanic people is distinct from Germans. Many citizens of Iran are not necessarily "Iranian people" by virtue of not being speakers of Iranian languages. Unlike the various terms connected with the Aryan arya- in Old Indian, the Old Iranian term has solely an ethnic meaning and there can be no doubt about the ethnic value of Old Iran. arya (Benveniste, 1969, I, pp. 369 f.; Szemerényi; Kellens).
The Avesta clearly uses airya as an ethnic name (Vd. 1; Yt. 13.143-44, etc.), where it appears in expressions such as airyāfi; daiŋˊhāvō "Iranian lands, peoples," airyō.šayanəm "land inhabited by Iranians," and airyanəm vaējō vaŋhuyāfi; dāityayāfi; "Iranian stretch of the good Dāityā," the river Oxus, the modern Āmū Daryā.
The term "Ariya" appears in the royal Old Persian inscriptions in three different contexts: 1) As the name of the language of the Old Persian version of the inscription of Darius the Great in Behistun; 2) as the ethnic background of Darius in inscriptions at Naqsh-e-Rostam and Susa (Dna, Dse) and Xerxes in the inscription from Persepolis (Xph) and 3) as the definition of the God of Iranian people, Ahuramazda, in the Elamite version of the Behistun inscription. For example in the Dna and Dse Darius and Xerxes describe themselves as "An Achaemenian, A Persian son of a Persian and an Aryan, of Aryan stock". Although Darius the Great called his language the Iranian language, modern scholars refer to it as Old Persian because it is the ancestor of modern Persian language.
The Old Persian and Avestan evidence is confirmed by the Greek sources". Herodotus in his Histories remarks about the Iranian Medes that: "These Medes were called anciently by all people Arians; " (7.62). In Armenian sources, the Parthians, Medes and Persians are collectively referred to as Iranians. Eudemus of Rhodes apud Damascius (Dubitationes et solutiones in Platonis Parmenidem 125 bis) refers to "the Magi and all those of Iranian (áreion) lineage"; Diodorus Siculus (1.94.2) considers Zoroaster (Zathraustēs) as one of the Arianoi.
The name of Ariana is further extended to a part of Persia and of Media, as also to the Bactrians and Sogdians on the north; for these speak approximately the same language, with but slight variations.
— Geography, 15.8
The trilingual inscription erected by Shapur's command gives a more clear description. The languages used are Parthian, Middle Persian and Greek. In Greek, the inscription says: "ego ... tou Arianon ethnous despotes eimi"("I am lord of the kingdom (Gk. nation) of the Aryans") which translates to "I am the king of the Iranian people". In the Middle Persian, Shapour states: "ērānšahr xwadāy hēm" and in Parthian he states: "aryānšahr xwadāy ahēm".
The Bactrian language (a Middle Iranian language) inscription of Kanishka the founder of the Kushan empire at Rabatak, which was discovered in 1993 in an unexcavated site in the Afghanistan province of Baghlan, clearly refers to this Eastern Iranian language as Arya. In the post-Islamic era, one can still see a clear usage of the term Iran in the work of the 10th-century historian Hamzeh Isfahani. In his book the history of Prophets and Kings writes: "Aryan which is also called Pars (Persia) is in the middle of these countries and these six countries surround it because the South East is in the hands China, the North of the Turks, the middle South is India, the middle North is Rome, and the South West and the North West is the Sudan and Berber lands". All this evidence shows that the name arya "Iranian" was a collective definition, denoting peoples (Geiger, pp. 167 f.; Schmitt, 1978, p. 31) who were aware of belonging to the one ethnic stock, speaking a common language, and having a religious tradition that centered on the cult of Ahura Mazdā.
History and settlement 
The language referred to as Proto-Indo-European (PIE): is ancestral to Diba and the Celtic, Italic (including Romance), Germanic, Baltic, Slavic, Indo-Iranian, Albanian, Armernian, Greek, and Tocharian languages.
'There is an agreement that the PIE community split into two major groups from wherever its homeland was situated (its location is unknown), and whenever the timing of its dispersal (also unknown). One headed west for Europe and became speakers of Indo-European (all the languages of modern Europe save for Basque, Hungarian, and Finnish) while others headed east for Eurasia to become Indo-Iranians. The Indo-Iranians were a community that spoke a common language prior to their branching off into the Iranian and Indo-Aryan languages. Iranian refers to the languages of Iran (Iranian), Pakistan (Balochi and Pashto), Afghanistan (Pashto and Dari), and Tadjikistan (Tajiki) and Indo-Aryan, Sanskrit, Urdu and its many related languages.' – (Carl C. Lamberg-Karlovsky: Case of the Bronze Age)
By the early 1st millennium, Ancient Iranian peoples such as Medes, Persians, Bactrians, Parthians and Scythians populated the Iranian plateau, and other Scythian tribes, along with Cimmerians, Sarmatians and Alans populated the steppes north of the Black Sea. The Saka, Scythian, tribes spread as far west as the Balkans and as far east as Xinjiang. Scythians as well formed the Indo-Scythian Empire, and Bactrians formed a Greco-Bactrian Kingdom founded by Diodotus I, the satrap of Bactria. The Kushan Empire, with Bactrian roots/connections, once controlled much of Pakistan, some of Afghanistan and Tajikistan. The Kushan elite (who the Chinese called the Yuezhi) were either a Tocharian-speaking (another Indo-European branch) people or an Eastern Iranian language-speaking people.
The division into an "Eastern" and a "Western" group by the early 1st millennium is visible in Avestan vs. Old Persian, the two oldest known Iranian languages. The Old Avestan texts known as the Gathas are believed to have been composed by Zoroaster, the founder of Zoroastrianism, with the Yaz culture (c. 1500–1100 BCE) as a candidate for the development of Eastern Iranian culture.
Western Iranian peoples 
|Part of a series on|
During the 1st centuries of the first millennium BCE, the ancient Persians established themselves in the western portion of the Iranian plateau and appear to have interacted considerably with the Elamites and Babylonians, while the Medes also entered in contact with the Assyrians. Remnants of the Median language and Old Persian show their common Proto-Iranian roots, emphasized in Strabo and Herodotus' description of their languages as very similar to the languages spoken by the Bactrians and Soghdians in the east. Following the establishment of the Achaemenid Empire, the Persian language (referred to as "Farsi" in Persian) spread from Pars or Fars Province to various regions of the Empire, with the modern dialects of Iran, Afghanistan (also known as Dari) and Central-Asia (known as Tajiki) descending from Old Persian.
Old Persian is attested in the Behistun Inscription (c. 519 BCE), recording a proclamation by Darius the Great. In southwestern Iran, the Achaemenid kings usually wrote their inscriptions in trilingual form (Elamite, Babylonian and Old Persian) while elsewhere other languages were used. The administrative languages were Elamite in the early period, and later Imperial Aramaic.
The early inhabitants of the Achaemenid Empire appear to have adopted the religion of Zoroastrianism. The Baloch who speak a west Iranian language relate an oral tradition regarding their migration from Aleppo, Syria around the year 1000 CE, whereas linguistic evidence links Balochi to Kurmanji, Soranî, Gorani and Zazaki.
Eastern Iranian peoples 
While the Iranian tribes of the south are better known through their texts and modern counterparts, the tribes which remained largely in the vast Eurasian expanse are known through the references made to them by the ancient Greeks, Persians, Indo-Aryans as well as by archaeological finds. Many ancient Sanskrit texts make references to tribes like Sakas, Paradas, Kambojas, Bahlikas, Uttaramadras, Madras, Lohas, Parama Kambojas, Rishikas, Tukharas or Tusharas etc. and locate them in the (Uttarapatha) (north-west) division, in Central Asia, around Hindukush range in northern Pakistan. The Greek chronicler, Herodotus (5th century BCE) makes references to a nomadic people, the Scythians; he describes them as having dwelt in what is today southern Russia.
It is believed that these Scythians were conquered by their eastern cousins, the Sarmatians, who are mentioned by Strabo as the dominant tribe which controlled the southern Russian steppe in the 1st millennium CE. These Sarmatians were also known to the Romans, who conquered the western tribes in the Balkans and sent Sarmatian conscripts, as part of Roman legions, as far west as Roman Britain.
The Sarmatians of the east became the Alans, who also ventured far and wide, with a branch ending up in Western Europe and North Africa, as they accompanied the Germanic Vandals during their migrations. The modern Ossetians are believed to be the sole direct descendants of the Alans, as other remnants of the Alans disappeared following Germanic, Hunnic and ultimately Slavic migrations and invasions. Another group of Alans allied with Goths to defeat the Romans and ultimately settled in what is now called Catalonia (Goth-Alania).
Some of the Saka-Scythian tribes in Central Asia would later move further southeast and invade the Iranian plateau, large sections of present day Afghanistan and finally deep into present day Pakistan (see Indo-Scythians). Another Iranian tribe related to the Saka-Scythians were the Parni in Central Asia, and who later become indistinguishable from the Parthians, speakers of a northwest-Iranian language. Many Iranian tribes, including the Khwarazmians, Massagetae and Sogdians, were assimilated and/or displaced in Central Asia by the migrations of Turkic tribes emanating out of Xinjiang and Siberia.
The most dominant surviving Eastern Iranian peoples are represented by the Pashtuns, whose origins are generally believed to be from the Sulaiman Mountains, from which they began to spread until they reached as far west as Herat, north to areas of southern and eastern Afghanistan; and as eastward towards the Indus. The Pashto language shows affinities to the Avestan and Bactrian.
The modern Sarikoli in southern Xinjiang and the Ossetians of the Caucasus are remnants of the various Saka tribes. The modern Ossetians claim to be the descendants of the Alano-Sarmatians and their claims are supported by their Northeast Iranian language, while culturally the Ossetians resemble their Caucasian neighbors, the Kabardians and Circassians. Various extinct Iranian people existed in the eastern Caucasus, including the Azaris, while some Iranian people remain in the region, including the Talysh and the Tats (including the Judeo-Tats, who have relocated to Israel), found in Azerbaijan and as far north as the Russian republic of Dagestan. A remnant of the Sogdians is found in the Yaghnobi speaking population in parts of the Zeravshan valley in Tajikistan.
Later developments 
Starting with the reign of Omar in 634 CE, Muslim Arabs began a conquest of the Iranian plateau. The Arabs conquered the Sassanid Empire of the Persians and seized much of the Byzantine Empire populated by the Kurds and others. Ultimately, the various Iranian people, including the Persians, Azaries, Kurds, Baluchis and Pashtuns, converted to Islam. The Iranian people would later split along sectarian lines as the Persians (and later the Hazara) adopted the Shi'a sect. As ancient tribes and identities changed, so did the Iranian people, many of whom assimilated foreign cultures and people.
Later, during the 2nd millennium CE, the Iranian people would play a prominent role during the age of Islamic expansion and empire. Saladin, a noted adversary of the Crusaders, was an ethnic Kurd, while various empires centered in Iran (including the Safavids) re-established a modern dialect of Persian as the official language spoken throughout much of what is today Iran and adjacent parts of Central Asia. Iranian influence spread to the Ottoman Empire, where Persian was often spoken at court, as well to the court of the Mughal Empire. All of the major Iranian people reasserted their use of Iranian languages following the decline of Arab rule, but would not begin to form modern national identities until the 19th and early 20th centuries (just as Germans and Italians were beginning to formulate national identities of their own).
The following either partially descend from Iranian people or are sometimes regarded as possible descendants of ancient Iranian people:
- Azeris: Although Azeris speak a Turkic language (modern Azerbaijani language), they are believed to be primarily descendants of ancient Iranians. Thus, due to their historical ties with various ancient Iranians, as well as their cultural ties to Persians, the Azeris are often associated with the Iranian people (see Origin of Azerbaijani people and the Iranian theory regarding the origin of the Azerbaijanis for more details).
- Uzbeks: The modern Uzbek people are believed to have both Iranian and Turkic ancestry. "Uzbek" and "Tajik" are modern designations given to the culturally homogeneous, sedentary population of Central Asia. The local ancestors of both groups – the Turkic-speaking Uzbeks and the Iranian-speaking Tajiks – were known as "Sarts" ("sedentary merchants") prior to the Russian conquest of Central Asia, while "Uzbek" or "Turk" were the names given to the nomadic and semi-nomadic populations of the area. Still today, modern Uzbeks and Tajiks are known as "Sarts" to their Turkic neighbours, the Kazakhs and the Kyrgyz. The ancient Soghdians and Bactrians are among their ancestors. Culturally, the Uzbeks are closer to their sedentary Iranian-speaking neighbours rather than to their nomadic and semi-nomadic Turkic neighbours. Some Uzbek scholars, i.e. Ahmadov and Askarov, favour the Iranian origin theory.
- The native name of Yakuts is Sakha, very similar to the Sakkas, proposing Yakuts to be related of descendants of Scythians, specifically Sakkahs.
- Volga TatarsMany are mixed from Volga bulgars. The reasons are same with Bulgarians, and the putative claim on the Iranian origin of bulgars.
- A few linguists suggest that the names of the South Slavic people, the Serbs and Croats are of Iranian origin. Those who entertain such a connection propose that the Sarmatian Serboi and Kharoti tribes might have migrated from the Eurasian steppe lands to eastern Europe, and assimilated with the numerically superior Slavs, passing on their name. Iranian-speaking people did inhabit parts of the Balkans in late classical times, and would have been encountered by the Slavs. However, direct linguistic, historical or archaeological proof for such a theory is lacking. (See also: Theories on the origin of Serbs and Theories on the origin of Croats)Ultimately, Montenegrins and Bosniaks may be counted to this theory.
- Some modern Bulgarian historians claim that the Bulgars were of Iranian origin and that they migrated to Europe from the region of today's northern Afghanistan – Hindukush mountains, from the Kingdom of Balhara. Their claims are based on medieval Armenian sources, the writings of ancient historians ("Ashharatsuyts" by Anania Shirakatsi; Agathias of Myrina, Theophylact Simocatta, Michael the Syrian) archaeological findings in modern Bulgaria, the similarities with Iranian languages (place names, people names, and Iranian words in modern Bulgarian), similarities with culture (e.g.: some buildings in Pliska were built in a Zoroastrian fashion; similarities in traditional music, dancing and carpet making) and the very close similarity of the DNA of Pamirian/Iranian people with that of modern Bulgarians After their arrival on Balkans, the Bulgars subjugated and then formed an alliance with the local Slavs and formed the Bulgarian nation. Ultimately, Slavic Macedonians could be counted due to their close linguistic affinities with the standard Bulgarian language.
|english||persian||zazaki||(Kurdish) Kurmanji / Sorani||bulgarian|
|i know||midânam||ez dizono||ez dizanim /min azanim||az znam|
|you know||midâni||ti dizana||tu dizanî / to azanit||ti znayş|
|i don't know||nemidânam||ez nizon||ez nizanim / min nazanim||az neznam|
|you don't know||nemidâni||ti nizona||tu nizanî / to nazanit||ti niznayş|
|a dog||sag||kûtik||kûtchik / sag||kutche (kûçe)|
- Indo-Aryan speakers
- Speakers of Indo-Aryan languages share linguistic affinities with speakers of Iranian languages, which suggests a degree of historical interaction between these two groups.
- Brahui people in Pakistan are speakers of a language classified as Dravidian, although culturally there is considerable Iranic influence among Brahui populations.
- Uralic speakers
- Many Volga Finns may be of part Iranian admixture due to Bulgar invasion of the Volga basin, if they (Bulgars) were Iranian people.
- Hungarians have long prided themselves as Scythians in the past, Scythians being an Iranian people, prior to the Finno-Ugric/Uralic theory. It's possible they've undergone a language shift. In a Magyar folkore suggests Iranian admixture among Hungarian, when Hunor and Magor marry princesses who were Alans, another Iranian people. Jassic people of Hungary are of Ossetian origin. The Szekely are possibly of Iranian origin, as their name is similar to Sakka.
- Shirazis:The Shirazi are a sub-group of the Swahili people living on the Swahili Coast of East Africa, especially on the islands of Zanzibar, Pemba and Comoros. Local traditions about their origin claim they are descended from merchant princes from Shiraz in Persia who settled along the Swahili Coast.
There are an estimated 150 to 200 million native speakers of Iranian languages, the five major groups of Persians, Lurs, Kurds, Baloch, and Pashtuns accounting for about 90% of this number. Currently, most of these Iranian peoples live in Iran, the Caucasus (mainly Ossetia, other parts of Georgia, and Azerbaijan), Iraqi Kurdistan and Kurdish majority populated areas of Turkey, Iran and Syria, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
The following is a list of peoples that speak Iranian languages with the respective groups's core areas of settlements and their estimated sizes (in millions):
|Persian-speaking peoples||Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Iraq, Bahrain||
|Kurds||Turkey, Iran, Iraqi Kurdistan, Syria||
|Baluchis||Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan||
|Gilakis & Mazanderanis||Iran||
|Lurs & Bakhtiaris||Iran||
|Pamiri people||Tajikistan, Afghanistan, China (Xinjiang), Pakistan||
|Ossetians||South Ossetia, Georgia,
Russia (North Ossetia), Hungary
|Yaghnobi||Uzbekistan and Tajikistan (Zerafshan region)||
It is largely through linguistic similarities that the Iranian people have been linked, as many non-Iranian people have adopted Iranian languages and cultures. However, other common traits have been identified as well, for example, a stream of common historical events have often linked the southern Iranian people, including Hellenistic conquests, the various empires based in Persia, Arab Caliphates and Turkic invasions.
Like other Indo-Europeans, the early Iranians practiced ritual sacrifice, had a social hierarchy consisting of warriors, clerics and farmers and poetic hymns and sagas to recount their deeds.
Following the Iranian split from the Indo-Iranians, the Iranians developed an increasingly distinct culture. Various common traits can be discerned among the Iranian people. For example, the social event Norouz is an Iranian festival that is practiced by nearly all of the Iranian people as well as others in the region. Its origins are traced to Zoroastrianism and pre-historic times.
Some Iranian cultures exhibit traits that are unique unto themselves. The Pashtuns adhere to a code of honor and culture known as Pashtunwali, which has a similar counterpart among the Baloch, called Mayar, that is more hierarchical.
The early Iranian people worshipped various deities found throughout other cultures where Indo-European immigrants established themselves. The earliest major religion of the Iranian people was Zoroastrianism, which spread to nearly all of the Iranian people living in the Iranian plateau. Other religions that had their origins in the Iranian world were Mithraism, Manichaeism, and Mazdakism, among others.
Modern speakers of Iranian languages mainly follow Islam. Some follow Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and the Bahá'í Faith, with an unknown number showing no religious affiliation. Overall the numbers of Sunni and Shia among the Iranian people are equally distributed. Most Kurds, Tajiks, Pashtuns, and Baluch are Sunni Muslims, while the remainder are mainly Twelver Shi'a, comprising mostly Persians in Iran, and Hazaras in Afghanistan. Zazas in Turkey are largely Alevi, while the Pamiri peoples in Tajikistan and China are nearly all Ismaili. The Christian community is mainly represented by the Armenian Apostolic Church, followed by the Russian Orthodox and Georgian Orthodox Ossetians followed by Nestorians. Judaism is followed mainly by Persian Jews, Kurdish Jews, Bukharian Jews (of Central Asia) and the Mountain Jews (of the Caucasus), most of whom are now found in Israel. The historical religion of the Persian Empire was Zoroastrianism and it still has a few thousand followers, mostly in Yazd and Kerman. They are known as the Parsis in the Indian subcontinent, where many of them fled in historic times following the Arab conquest of Persia, or Zoroastrians in Iran. Another ancient religion is the Yazidi faith, followed by some Kurds in northern Iraq, as well as the majority of the Kurds in Armenia.
Cultural assimilation 
In matters relating to culture, the various Turkic-speaking ethnic groups of Iran (notably the Azerbaijani people) and Afghanistan (Uzbeks and Turkmen) are often conversant in Iranian languages, in addition to their own Turkic languages and also have Iranian culture to the extent that the term Turko-Iranian can be applied. The usage applies to various circumstances that involve historic interaction, intermarriage, cultural assimilation, bilingualism and cultural overlap or commonalities.
Notable among this synthesis of Turko-Iranian culture are the Azeris, whose culture, religion and significant periods of history are linked to the Persians. Certain theories and genetic tests suggest that the Azeris are genetically more Iranian than Turkic.
||This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. (November 2010)|
R1 is more closely linked to Iranians, while R1b is linked to Europeans.
Haplogroup J2 especially the clade J2a is frequently found among almost all groups of Iranian people. In comparison with the haplogroup R1a1, J2 is not restricted to geographically eastern and western Iranian populations, but also found among north-western and south-western Iranian populations such as the Bakhtiaris and Mazanderani, as well as geographically north-western Iranian Ossetians. Despite its supposed origin in the fertile crescent, J2a is also found among Iranian populations in the east such as the Yagnobi which are of Soghdian origin as well as the Parsis of India. Beside the relatively high percentage among the Yagnobis in Central Asia, other Iranian populations tend to have a higher frequency of J2a when compared to neighboring Turkic populations. The relatively strong presence of J2a among Ossetians as well as Yagnobis proves distant from the supposed Mesopotamian origin region of J2, are carriers of this Haplogroup.
In the Indo-Iranian context, the occurrence of J2a in South Asia is limited to caste populations, with the highest frequencies found among northern areas of South Asia. Compared with R1a1, J2a shows a more conservative distribution, stronger limited to Indo-Iranian origin groups.
Many Haplotypes of Y-chromosomal Haplogroup R have been found throughout the Iranian Plateau, and it has been suggested that this Haplogroup may have had its origins in Iran. Cambridge University geneticist Toomas Kivisild has suggested : "Given the geographic spread and STR diversities of sister clades R1 and R2, the latter of which is restricted to India, Pakistan, Iran, and southern central Asia, it is possible that southern and western Asia were the source for R1 and R1a differentiation."(Kivisild et al. 2003). A similar conclusion was given by population geneticist Miguel Regueiro in the Journal of Human Heredity (Regueiro et al. Human Heredity vol. 61 (2006), pp. 132–143)
Genetic studies conducted by Cavalli-Sforza have revealed that Iranians have weak correlation with Near Eastern groups, and are closer to surrounding Indo-Europeans speaking populations. This study is partially supported by another one, based on Y-Chromosome haplogroups.
The findings of this study reveal many common genetic markers found among the Iranian people from the Tigris river of Iraq to the Indus of Pakistan. This correlates with the Iranian languages spoken from the Caucasus to Kurdish areas in the Zagros region and eastwards to western Pakistan and Tajikistan and parts of Uzbekistan in Central Asia. The extensive gene flow is perhaps an indication of the spread of Iranian-speaking people, whose languages are now spoken mainly on the Iranian plateau and adjacent regions.
Another recent study of the genetic landscape of Iran was done by a team of Cambridge geneticists led by Dr. Maziar Ashrafian Bonab (an Iranian Azarbaijani). Bonab remarked that his group had done extensive DNA testing on different language groups, including Indo-European and non Indo-European speakers, in Iran. The study found that the Azerbaijanis of Iran do not have a similar FSt and other genetic markers found in Anatolian and European Turks. However, the genetic Fst and other genetic traits like MRca and mtDNA of Iranian Azeris were identical to Persians in Iran. Azaris of Iran also show very close genetic ties to Kurds.
See also 
Literature and further reading 
- Banuazizi, Ali and Weiner, Myron (eds.). The State, Religion, and Ethnic Politics: Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan (Contemporary Issues in the Middle East), Syracuse University Press (August, 1988). ISBN 0-8156-2448-4.
- Canfield, Robert (ed.). Turko-Persia in Historical Perspective, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2002). ISBN 0-521-52291-9
- Curzon, R. The Iranian People of the Caucasus. ISBN 0-7007-0649-6.
- Derakhshani, Jahanshah. Die Arier in den nahöstlichen Quellen des 3. und 2. Jahrtausends v. Chr., 2nd edition (1999). ISBN 964-90368-6-5.
- Frye, Richard, Greater Iran, Mazda Publishers (2005). ISBN 1-56859-177-2.
- Frye, Richard. Persia, Schocken Books, Zurich (1963). ASIN B0006BYXHY.
- Kennedy, Hugh. The Prophet and the Age of the Caliphates, Longman, New York, NY (2004). ISBN 0-582-40525-4
- Khoury, Philip S. & Kostiner, Joseph. Tribes and State Formation in the Middle East, University of California Press (1991). ISBN 0-520-07080-1.
- Littleton, C. & Malcor, L. From Scythia to Camelot, Garland Publishing, New York, NY, (2000). ISBN 0-8153-3566-0.
- Mallory, J.P. In Search of the Indo-Europeans, Thames and Hudson, London (1991). ISBN 0-500-27616-1.
- McDowall, David. A Modern History of the Kurds, I.B. Tauris, 3rd Rev edition (2004). ISBN 1-85043-416-6.
- Nassim, J. Afghanistan: A Nation of Minorities, Minority Rights Group, London (1992). ISBN 0-946690-76-6.
- Riasanovsky, Nicholas. A History of Russia, Oxford University Press, Oxford (2004). ISBN 0-19-515394-4.
- Sims-Williams, Nicholas. Indo-Iranian Languages and People, British Academy (2003). ISBN 0-19-726285-6.
- Iran Nama, (Iran Travelogue in Urdu) by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman, Tibbi Academy, Aligarh, India (1998).
- Saga of the Aryans, Historical novel on ancient Iranian migrations by Porus Homi Havewala, Published Mumbai, India (2005, 2010).
- Chopra, R. M.,"Indo-Iranian Cultural Relations Through The Ages", Iran Society, Kolkata, 2005.
- Iran: Library of Congress, Library of Congress – Federal Research Division. "Ethnic Groups and Languages of Iran". Retrieved 2009-12-02. (Persian and Caspian dialects-65% Kurdish 8%-Luri/Bakhtiari 5%- Baluchi 2%):80% of the population or approximately 63 million people.
- Afghanistan: CIA Factbook Afghanistan: unting Pashtuns, Tajiks, Baluchs, 21 million
- Tajiks of Central Asia counting Tajikistan and Uzbekistan 10–15 million
- Kurds and Zazas of Turkey, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq based on CIA factbook estimate 22 million
- Ossetians, Talysh, Tats, Kurds of the Caucasus and Central Asia: 1–2 million based on CIA factbook/ethnologue.
- Tajiks of China: 50,000 to 100,000
- Iranian speakers in Bahrain, the Persian Gulf , Western Europe and USA, 3 million.
- Pakistan counting Baluchis+Pashtus+Afghan refugees based on CIA factbook and other sources: 35 million.
- The Ossetians of the Caucasus are Orthodox Christians
- R.N Frye, "IRAN v. PEOPLES OF IRAN" in Encycloapedia Iranica. "In the following discussion of "Iranian peoples," the term "Iranian" may be understood in two ways. It is, first of all, a linguistic classification, intended to designate any society which inherited or adopted, and transmitted, an Iranian language. The set of Iranian-speaking peoples is thus considered a kind of unity, in spite of their distinct lineage identities plus all the factors which may have further differentiated any one group’s sense of self."
- J. Harmatta in "History of Civilizations of Central Asia", Chapter 14, The Emergence of Indo-Iranians: The Indo-Iranian Languages, ed. by A. H. Dani & V.N. Masson, 1999, p. 357
- Ronald Eric Emmerick. "Iranian languages". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2011.
- PRODS OKTOR SKJÆRVØ (December 15, 2006). "Iran vi. Iranian languages and scripts Also, Diba". Encyclopedia Iranica.
- Frye, Richard Nelson, Greater Iran, ISBN 1-56859-177-2 p.xi: "... Iran means all lands and people where Iranian languages were and are spoken, and where in the past, multi-faceted Iranian cultures existed. ..."
- "Amazons in the Scythia: new finds at the Middle Don, Southern Russia". Taylorandfrancis.metapress.com. Retrieved 2009-06-21.
- "Secrets of the Dead, Casefile: Amazon Warrior Women". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2009-06-21.
- Runciman, Steven (1982). The Medieval Manichee: A Study of the Christian Dualist Heresy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-28926-2.
- Oxford English Dictionnary: "Aryan from Sanskrit Arya 'Noble'"
- Gershevitch, I. (1968). "Old Iranian Literature". Iranistik. Hanbuch Der Orientalistik – Abeteilung – Der Nahe Und Der Mittlere Osten 1. Brill Publishers. p. 203. ISBN 90-04-00857-8.: page 1
- "Farsi-Persian language" — Farsi.net . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Article in 1911 Britannica". 58.1911encyclopedia.org. Retrieved 2009-06-21.[dead link]
- G. Gnoli, "Iranian Identity as a Historical Problem: the Beginnings of a National Awareness under the Achaemenians," in The East and the Meaning of History. International Conference (23–27 November 1992), Roma, 1994, pp. 147–67. "?".
- G. Gnoli, "Iranian Identity ii. Pre-Islamic Period" in Encyclopedia Iranica. Online accessed in 2010 at "?".
- R. Schmitt, "Aryans" in Encyclopedia Iranica:Excerpt:"The name "Aryan" (OInd. āˊrya-, Ir. *arya- [with short a-], in Old Pers. ariya-, Av. airiia-, etc.) is the self designation of the peoples of Ancient Iran (as well as India) who spoke Aryan languages, in contrast to the "non-Aryan" peoples of those "Aryan" countries (cf. OInd. an-āˊrya-, Av. an-airiia-, etc.), and lives on in ethnic names like Alan (Lat. Alani, NPers. Īrān, Oss. Ir and Iron.". Also accessed online: "?". in May, 2010
- The "Aryan" Language, Gherardo Gnoli, Instituto Italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente, Roma, 2002.
- H. W. Bailey, "Arya" in Encyclopedia Iranica. Excerpt: "ARYA an ethnic epithet in the Achaemenid inscriptions and in the Zoroastrian Avestan tradition. "Arya an ethnic epithet in the Achaemenid inscriptions and in the Zoroastrian Avestan tradition".[dead link] Also accessed online in May, 2010.
- D. N. Mackenzie, "Ērān, Ērānšahr" in Encyclopedia Iranica. "?". Retrieved 2010.
- Dalby, Andrew (2004), Dictionary of Languages, Bloomsbury, ISBN 0-7475-7683-1
- G. Gnoli. "ēr, ēr mazdēsn". Encyclopedia Iranica.
- R. G. Kent. Old Persian. Grammar, texts, lexicon. 2nd ed., New Haven, Conn.
- Professor Gilbert Lazard: The language known as New Persian, which usually is called at this period (early Islamic times) by the name of Dari or Parsi-Dari, can be classified linguistically as a continuation of Middle Persian, the official religious and literary language of Sassanian Iran, itself a continuation of Old Persian, the language of the Achaemenids. Unlike the other languages and dialects, ancient and modern, of the Iranian group such as Avestan, Parthian, Soghdian, Kurdish, Balochi, Pashto, etc., Old Middle and New Persian represent one and the same language at three states of its history. It had its origin in Fars (the true Persian country from the historical point of view) and is differentiated by dialectical features, still easily recognizable from the dialect prevailing in north-western and eastern Iran in Lazard, Gilbert 1975, "The Rise of the New Persian Language" in Frye, R. N., The Cambridge History of Iran, Vol. 4, pp. 595–632, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- R.W. Thomson. History of Armenians by Moses Khorenat’si. Harvard University Press, 1978. Pg 118, pg 166
- MacKenzie D.N. Corpus inscriptionum Iranicarum Part. 2., inscription of the Seleucid and Parthian periods of Eastern Iran and Central Asia. Vol. 2. Parthian, London, P. Lund, Humphries 1976–2001
- N. Sims-Williams, "Further notes on the Bactrian inscription of Rabatak, with the Appendix on the name of Kujula Kadphises and VimTatku in Chinese". Proceedings of the Third European Conference of Iranian Studies (Cambridge, September 1995). Part 1: Old and Middle Iranian<Studies, N. Sims-Williams, ed. Wiesbaden, pp 79-92
- The "Aryan" Language, Gherardo Gnoli, Instituto Italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente, Roma, 2002
- Hamza Isfahani, Tarikh Payaambaraan o Shaahaan, translated by Jaf'ar Shu'ar,Tehran: Intishaaraat Amir Kabir, 1988.
- G. Gnoli. "Iranian Identity ii. Pre-Islamic Period". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 2010.
- "Avestan xᵛarǝnah-, etymology and concept by Alexander Lubotsky" — Sprache und Kultur. Akten der X. Fachtagung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, 22.-28. September 1996, ed. W. Meid, Innsbruck (IBS) 1998, 479–488. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- M. Liverani, "The Medes at Esarhaddon's Court", in Journal of Cuneiform Studies 47 (1995), pp. 57–62.
- "The Geography of Strabo" — University of Chicago. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- R. G. Kent, Old Persian: Grammar, texts and lexicon.
- R. Hallock (1969), Persepolis Fortification Tablets; A. L. Driver (1954), Aramaic Documents of the V Century BC.
- "Kurdish: An Indo-European Language By Siamak Rezaei Durroei"[dead link] — University of Edinburgh, School of Informatics. . Retrieved 4 June 2006. Archived June 17, 2006 at the Wayback Machine[dead link]
- "The Iranian Language Family, Khodadad Rezakhani" — Iranologie. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- A History of Russia by Nicholas Riasanovsky, pp. 11–18, Russia before the Russians, ISBN 0-19-515394-4 . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- The Sarmatians: 600 BC-AD 450 (Men-at-Arms) by Richard Brzezinski and Gerry Embleton, Aug 19, 2002
- "Jeannine Davis-Kimball, Archaeologist" — Thirteen WNET New York. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Report for Talysh" — Ethnologue. Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Report for Tats" — Ethnologue. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Report for Judeo-Tats" — Ethnologue. . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- The Prophet and the Age of the Caliphates by Hugh Kennedy, ISBN 0-582-40525-4 (retrieved 04 June 2006), p. 135
- Minorsky, V.; Minorsky, V. "(Azarbaijan). Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W. P. Heinrichs. Brill
- R. N. Frye. "People of Iran". Encyclopedia Iranica.
- X.D. Planhol. "Lands of Iran". Encyclopedia Iranica.
- The Columbia Encyclopedia: Azerbaijan[dead link]
- "Who are the Azeris? by Aylinah Jurabchi". The Iranian. Retrieved 2009-06-21.
- Askarov, A. & B.Ahmadov, O'zbek Xalqning Kilib Chiqishi Torixi. O'zbekiston Ovozi, 20 January 1994.
- pronounced approximately say-kay
- Kilwa chronicle
- Tanzania Ethnic Groups, East Africa Living Encyclopedia, accessed 28 June 2010
- Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.) (2005). "Report for Iranian languages". Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Fifteenth ed.) (Dallas: SIL International).
- Hamzehʼee, M. Reza. The Yaresan: a sociological, historical and religio-historical study of a Kurdish community, 1990.
- In Search of the Indo-Europeans, by J.P. Mallory, p. 112–127, ISBN 0-500-27616-1 . Retrieved 10 June 2006.
- "Pakistan — Baloch" — Library of Congress Country Studies . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "History of Iran-Chapter 2 Indo-Europeans and Indo-Iranians" — Iranologie . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- Turko-Persia in Historical Perspective, edited by Robert Canfield, ISBN 0-521-52291-9 . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Azerbaijan-Iran Relations: Challenges and Prospects" — Harvard University, Belfer Center, Caspian Studies Program . Retrieved 4 June 2006.
- "Cambridge Genetic Study of Iran" — ISNA (Iranian Students News Agency), 06-12-2006, news-code: 8503-06068 . Retrieved 9 June 2006.
- t [M. Regueiro et al. (2006), "Iran: Tricontinental Nexus for Y-Chromosome Driven Migration"]
- Y haplogroup J in Iran by Alfred A. Aburto Jr. http://archiver.rootsweb.ancestry.com/th/read/GENEALOGY-DNA/2006-06/1151592332
- Nasidze, E. Y. S. Ling, D. Quinque et al., "Mitochondrial DNA and Y-Chromosome Variation in the Caucasus," Annals of Human Genetics (2004) 68,205–221. http://www.eva.mpg.de/genetics/pdf/Caucasus_big_paper.pdf http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/118745631/PDFSTART
- R. Spencer Wells et al., "The Eurasian Heartland: A continental perspective on Y-chromosome diversity," PNAS (August 28, 2001), vol. 98, no. 18.
- Qamar, Raheel; Ayub, Qasim; Mohyuddin, Aisha; Helgason, Agnar; Mazhar, Kehkashan; Mansoor, Atika; Zerjal, Tatiana; Tyler-Smith, Chris et al. (2002). "Y-Chromosomal DNA Variation in Pakistan". The American Journal of Human Genetics 70 (5): 1107–24. doi:10.1086/339929. PMC 447589. PMID 11898125.
- Sengupta, 2006. Polarity and Temporality of High-Resolution Y-Chromosome Distributions in India Identify Both Indigenous and Exogenous Expansions and Reveal Minor Genetic Influence of Central Asian Pastoralists http://hpgl.stanford.edu/publications/AJHG_2006_v78_p202-221.pdf
- Sengupta, S; Zhivotovsky, LA; King, R; Mehdi, SQ; Edmonds, CA; Chow, CE; Lin, AA; Mitra, M et al. (2006). "Polarity and temporality of high-resolution y-chromosome distributions in India identify both indigenous and exogenous expansions and reveal minor genetic influence of Central Asian pastoralists". American journal of human genetics 78 (2): 202–21. doi:10.1086/499411. PMC 1380230. PMID 16400607.
- "Where West Meets East: The Complex mtDNA Landscape of the Southwest and Central Asian Corridor" — University of Chicago, American Journal of Human Genetics . Retrieved 4 June 2006.[dead link]
- Iran: tricontinental nexus for Y-chromosome driven migration – Regueiro M, Cadenas AM, Gayden T, Underhill PA, Herrera RJ, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, University Park, OE 304, Miami, FL 33199, USA, National Center for Biotechnology Information
- "Maziar Ashrafian Bonab"[dead link] — Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge . Retrieved 9 June 2006. Archived June 18, 2006 at the Wayback Machine[dead link]
- S. Farjadian1, A. Ghaderi (December 2007). "HLA class II similarities in Iranian Kurds and Azeris". International Journal of Immunogenetics 34 (6): 457–463. doi:10.1111/j.1744-313X.2007.00723.x. PMID 18001303.
- Encyclopædia Britannica: Iranian languages
- People of Iran
- The Changing Face of Iran a photo essay by Newsweek Magazine
- Maps and demographic information on all the people groups of Iran found at www.EveryTongue.com/iran

If we consider only the relative strength of the adversaries, the power of their weapons, the virulence of their poisons and their different modes of action, the scale would very often be weighted in favour of the Spider. Since the Pompilus always emerges victorious from this contest, which appears to be full of peril for her, she must have a special method, of which I would fain learn the secret.
In our part of the country, the most powerful and courageous Spider- huntress is the Ringed Pompilus (Calicurgus annulatus, FAB.), clad in black and yellow. She stands high on her legs; and her wings have black tips, the rest being yellow, as though exposed to smoke, like a bloater. Her size is about that of the Hornet (Vespa crabro). She is rare. I see three or four of her in the course of the year; and I never fail to halt in the presence of the proud insect, rapidly striding through the dust of the fields when the dog-days arrive. Its audacious air, its uncouth gait, its war-like bearing long made me suspect that to obtain its prey it had to make some impossible, terrible, unspeakable capture. And my guess was correct. By dint of waiting and watching I beheld that victim; I saw it in the huntress' mandibles. It is the Black-bellied Tarantula, the terrible Spider who slays a Carpenter-bee or a Bumble-bee outright with one stroke of her weapon; the Spider who kills a Sparrow or a Mole; the formidable creature whose bite would perhaps not be without danger to ourselves. Yes, this is the bill of fare which the proud Pompilus provides for her larva.

In the book, Eight Great Ideas, I talk about using music for management. TV theme songs can be used quite effectively to either initiate a procedure or time a transition. However, music is much more than just a management tool. Playing music for your students can really improve the climate of your classroom.
I've been playing music
off and on
as my students work on something and cannot believe
the effect it's had: they're calm and quiet.
Talk about music soothing the savage beast.
high school teacher
But what kind of music should you play?
Here's some info from the book College Smarts.
For over 30 years, researchers have known that Baroque music (especially slow movements where there are 60 beats per minute), accelerates learning, and enhances both short-term and long-term memory.
What, exactly, are the physiological effects of slow Baroque music on learners? Researchers have found that blood pressure lowers; heartbeat slows to a healthy rhythm; fast, beta brain waves decrease by 6%, while alpha waves of relaxation increase by an average of 6%; the right and left hemispheres of the brain become synchronized. The music produces a powerful form of alert relaxation, a state in which the body functions more efficiently on less energy, making more energy available for the brain.
Some "slow movement" Baroque music:
* Adagio in G Minor for Strings
* Largo from Harpsichord Concerto in F Minor, BWV 1056
* Largo from Harpsichord Concerto in C Major, BWV 975
* Air for the G String
* Largo from Concerto No.10 in F Major from Twelve Concerti Grossi, Op. 5
* Largo from Concerto in D Major for Guitar and Strings
* Largo from Concerto in C Major for Mandolin, Strings and Harpsichord
* Largo from "Winter" from The Four Seasons
* Canon in D
The efficacy of baroque music notwithstanding, my thought is that any music is better than no music. (That's assuming, of course, that the music being played is appropriate for students.) But choosing music can sometimes lead to problems, the main one being students complaining about the music being played. Really now, who wants to hear some version of, "I don't like that music. Play something else."
Helpful: The use of an overhead spinner will eliminate most of the complaining. (I say most because some students like to complain just for the sake of complaining.)
Check out the other links in the nav bar to the right for more suggestions on how you can incorporate music into your own classroom.
And if you come up with any new ideas, let me know. I'll add them to Music Central.

You know how when someone compares dealing with their dog to dealing with a baby and all the parents in the room give them the stink eye?
Well, the comparison might hold water.
According to a study by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, published in the journal Current Biology, when people talk to their dogs, the reaction of the pup is similar to that of a baby.
József Topál, of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, told U.K.'s The Telegraph that increasing evidence shows that humans and dogs share social skills -- and that the cognitive function of dogs resembles babies ranging from six months to two years old.
The researcher also told the paper that dogs appear to react to eye contact -- as do babies.
During the study, researchers presented dogs with video recordings of a person turning toward one of two identical plastic pots while an eye tracker captured information on the dogs' reactions, The Telegraph reported. In one instance, the person looked directly at the dog, addressing it in a high-pitched voice, saying "Hi dog!" Next, someone, speaking low and avoiding eye contact, said, "Hi dog."
The upshot? Dogs were more inclined to follow the person and look at the pot when the person was more engaging.
"Our findings reveal that dogs are receptive to human communication in a manner that was previously attributed only to human infants," Topál told The Telegraph.
This probably makes a lot of sense to anyone with a dog.

Viewed laterally the vertebral column
presents several curves, which correspond to the different
regions of the column, and are called cervical, thoracic,
lumbar, and pelvic.
The cervical curve,
convex forward, begins at the apex of the odontoid
(tooth-like) process, and ends at the middle of
the second thoracic vertebra; it is the least marked
of all the curves. The
thoracic curve, concave forward,
begins at the middle of the second and ends at the
middle of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. Its most
prominent point behind corresponds to the spinous
process of the seventh thoracic vertebra. This curve
is known as a kyphotic curve.
lumbar curve is more
marked in the female than in the male;
it begins at the middle of the last
thoracic vertebra, and ends at the
sacrovertebral angle. It is convex
anteriorly, the convexity of the lower
three vertebrae being much greater
than that of the upper two. This curve
is described as a lordotic curve.
The pelvic curve begins
at the sacrovertebral articulation, and ends at
the point of the coccyx; its concavity is directed
downward and forward.
The thoracic and pelvic curves are termed primary
curves, because they alone are present during fetal life.
In the early embryo, the vertebral column is C-shaped, and the cervical
and lumbar curvatures are not yet present in a newborn infant. The cervical
and lumbar curves are compensatory or secondary, and are developed after
birth, the former when the child is able to hold up its head (at three
or four months), and to sit upright (at nine months), the latter at twelve
or eighteen months, when the child begins to walk.
The thoracic portion of the vertebral column also has a slight
lateral curvature, the convexity of which is directed toward
the right side.
This may be produced by muscular action, most persons using the right
arm in preference to the left, especially in making long-continued efforts,
when the body is curved to the right side. In support of this explanation
it has been found that in one or two individuals who were left-handed,
the convexity was to the left side. This curvature is regarded by others
as being produced by the aortic arch and upper part of the descending
thoracic aorta – a view which is supported by the fact that in
cases of situs inversus where the viscera are transposed and the aorta
is on the right side, the convexity of the curve is directed to the left
regions (curvatures) of the vertebral column
and names of individual vertebrae.
The vertebral column seen from

Credits: STUART DRYDEN/CALGARY SUN/QMI AGENCY
There are two Christmases. One is the Christian holy day, the other a Western cultural celebration full of snowmen, chestnuts, bright lights, eggnog, warm fires, giftwrap, pop songs and cheer.
There's no denying the cultural event has its origins in the Christian holiday. Still, the cultural side is no longer inextricably bound to the religious side, if it ever was.
Within Christianity there has long been tension between the spiritual meaning of the day and its secular celebration. To this day, there are Christians who worry the commercial and cultural elements that have attached themselves to the holiday represent a re-emergence of the day's pagan origins as a winter solstice ritual to coax back the disappearing sun.
Most of our cultural Christmas traditions date only to 19th-century Victorian England. The greeting "Merry Christmas," which has become so controversial on public signs and on the lips of government clerks and store cashiers, was popularized in the 1840s by Charles Dickens and by early greeting card makers. It comes originally from a 16th-century song, "We Wish You a Merry Christmas," which sounds more like a pub tune than a church hymn with its good-natured demand for figgy pudding and "a cup of good cheer" and its insistence that "we won't go until we get some."
Indeed, the cultural side of Christmas has so overwhelmed the spiritual side in the past couple of centuries that devout Christians have sometimes felt compelled to print T-shirts and bumper stickers or erect billboards reminding others that Jesus is "the reason for the season."
So why my little sociological history of Christmas in Western countries? To demonstrate the silliness of those who seek to eradicate any and all public exhibitions and expressions of Christmas.
Take Ashu Solo of Saskatoon. He has threatened to complain to the Saskatchewan human rights commission about the flashing of "Merry Christmas!" from the route signs on the front of public buses in his city.
Solo claims to have been "extremely surprised, offended and angered," by the greeting. "This is not a Christian city ... Christmas messages on Saskatoon Transit buses make religious minorities, atheists and agnostics who do not celebrate Christmas feel excluded and like second-class citizens." He insists wishing passengers, motorists and bystanders a "Merry Christmas!" amounts to "a forcible attempt at Christian indoctrination."
Thankfully, Saskatoon city council has rejected Solo's way-off-base complaint and voted to keep the bus-front messages. It is not clear, though, whether the province's human rights busybodies would be equally sensible.
Just like the suburban Philadelphia principal who suspended a high school senior for dressing as Santa (because Santa is a saint who has no place in a public school) and the Texas school that banned candy canes because they represent shepherd's crooks (as in Jesus, the shepherd of souls), Solo misses the point.
The joyful greetings, the decorated houses, the mall Santas, candies and trees are all from the cultural side of the holiday, not the religious side. You don't have to be Christian to enjoy them, so those outward trappings are inclusive, not exclusive. I would never go to Mumbai during Diwali - the Hindu festival of lights - or a Muslim country during Eid and demand an end to those celebrations' public expression. Indeed, I would do all I could to experience and enjoy those other cultures. The Ashu Solos of the world should open-mindedly do the same at Christmas.
Christmas is a celebration. Whether it has religious significance for you or is simply a time to gather with family and friends for good food, gifts, charity and hopes of peace on earth, enjoy the day.
Have a very Merry Christmas!

New Method to Manage Stress Responses for More Successful Tumor Removal Monday, January 30, 2012
TAU-developed drug treatment in clinical trials may improve the outcome for cancer surgery patients
The week before and two weeks after surgery are a critical period for the long-term survival rate of cancer patients. Physiological and psychological stresses caused by the surgery itself can inhibit the body's immune responses, heightening vulnerability to tumor progression and spreading.
Now a new clinical trial by Prof. Shamgar Ben-Eliyahu of Tel Aviv University's School of Psychological Sciences and Dr. Oded Zmora will combine two medications originally used to treat excessive stress and inflammatory responses at Israel's Tel Hashomer Sheba Medical Center. The trial is the culmination of 15 years of research on the connection between the body's stress responses, immune functions, and tumor metastasis — the process of cancer cells spreading to new tissue. In pre-clinical studies on animal models, long-term post-operative survival rates increased by up to 300 percent.
"Given our current understanding of how psychological and physiological stress help tumor cells to spread, we can now intervene in a simple and effective manner," says Prof. Ben-Eliyahu, whose research has been published in a number of journals, including the Journal of Immunology,PLoS One, and Annals of Surgery.
The mind-body connection
Though critical for the treatment of cancerous tumors, surgery can cause untold stress on the patient. The psychological stress and anxiety surrounding the surgery itself is obvious, but physiological processes that occur due to the surgical removal of the primary tumor also cause the body to release stress hormones that markedly inhibit the functioning of the immune system.
And just when the body is lowering its defenses, tumor cells are shifting into high gear. Hormones like prostaglandins and catecholamines, which weaken the body's immune defence, also directly strengthen cancer cells, making them more aggressive and efficient in their invasion of new tissues throughout the body, Prof. Ben-Eliyahu explains. "Through selection, similar to evolutionary processes, tumor cells have acquired a mechanism to synchronize the timing of their progression when the body is more vulnerable to metastasis. When the entire body is under stress, they metastasize because they have a greater chance of surviving," he says.
Prof. Ben-Eliyahu's clinical approach addresses this problem, hindering tumor metastasis by addressing the patient's anxiety and physiological stress responses to surgery. The two-drug cocktail, which includes a generic version of a beta-adrenergic antagonist and a COX2 inhibitor — used to treat hypertension and anxiety, and to inhibit inflammation and pain — will be administered to patients over a twenty day period before, during and after surgery.
Saving on healthcare costs
For the first phase of the trial, Prof. Ben-Eliyahu and his team have already begun to recruit the 400 patients they want to include. The researchers are seeking grants and outside funding for a trial that is a crucial step in testing this treatment and hopefully making it widely available.
Typically, he says, pharmaceutical companies have strong financial incentives to support clinical trials, knowing that they could benefit from a new drug. In this case, however, the trial is based on medications that have been previously approved, are safe, inexpensive, and already widely used. Prof. Ben-Eliyahu is currently aiming to recruit the necessary funds to conduct this clinical trial without the help of commercial resources.
"In the broader scheme of health and healthcare systems, we can help save lives and a lot of money," he notes, pointing out that with this drug treatment, governments and individuals will spend less on the long-term care of cancer patients, with fewer numbers experiencing tumor recurrence.
For more cancer research news from Tel Aviv University, click here.

Tyzzer's disease is an illness that can cause cell death in the liver and intestinal tract of many small mammals including rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, and gerbils. It has also been reported less commonly in rats, mice, cats, dogs, and horses.
What causes Tyzzer's disease?
Tyzzer's disease is caused by the bacteria, Clostridium piliforme (C. piliforme), formerly called Bacillus piliformis. C. piliforme lives in the intestine and is spread from animal to animal through fecal contamination of food and water. The bacteria can produce spores, which can survive for years in the environment, and are very resistant to heat and many disinfectants. The spores are shed in the feces of infected animals.
What are the signs of Tyzzer's disease?
Animals with Tyzzer's disease often have watery diarrhea, staining around the anal area, depression, dehydration, lethargy, and scruffy hair coats. It is more frequently and likely to cause acute death (within 48 hours of the first signs) in young animals or those stressed by overcrowding, poor hygiene, extreme environmental temperatures and humidity, parasitic infections, or malnutrition.
How is Tyzzer's disease diagnosed?
Unlike most other disease-causing bacteria, C. piliforme only grows inside of cells, and therefore will not grow on routine culture media in a laboratory. A blood test is available to test for antibodies to C. piliforme, but false positive test results can occur. Diagnosis is often made post-mortem, by using specific stains on tissues of the intestine and liver and examining them microscopically. The disease can also affect the heart and central nervous system.
How is Tyzzer's disease treated?
There is no specific therapy that will kill C. piliforme, although tetracycline is often administered. Treatment is generally aimed at supportive care including fluids, good nutrition, and providing the optimal temperature and humidity. In young and stressed animals, treatment is usually unsuccessful.
How can Tyzzer's disease be prevented?
Conditions that cause stress should be avoided, especially in young animals during weaning. Extreme care should be taken to assure animals have a proper environment, diet, and treatment of any parasitic infections. Healthy animals should be separated from any animals showing signs of the disease. There is no vaccine for Tyzzer's disease. The bacteria and spores can be killed using a 1:10 dilution of household bleach and water (½ cup of bleach to 5 cups of water).

The April issue of Scientific American includes an exclusive excerpt from Bill McKibben's new book, Eaarth: Making a Life on a Tough New Planet, plus an interview that challenges his assumptions. Expanded answers to key interview questions, and additional queries and replies, appear here.
McKibben is a scholar in residence at Middlebury College in Vermont and is a co-founder of the climate action group, 350.org. He argues that humankind, because of its actions, now lives on a fundamentally different world, which he calls Eaarth. This celestial body can no longer support the economic growth model that has driven society for the past 200 years. To avoid its own collapse, humankind must instead seek to maintain wealth and resources, in large part by shifting to more durable, localized economies—especially in food and energy production.
[A Scientific American interview with McKibben follows.]
You entitled your book Eaarth, because you claim that we have permanently altered the planet. How so? And why should we change our ways now?
Well, gravity still applies. But fundamental characteristics have changed, like the way the seasons progress, how much rain falls, the meteorological tropics—which have expanded about two degrees north and south, making Australia one big fire zone. This is a different world. We underestimated how finely balanced the planet's physical systems are. Few people have come to grips with this. The perception, still, is that this is a future issue. It's not—it's here now.
Is zero growth necessary, or would "very slight" growth be sustainable?
A specific number is not part of the analysis. I'm more interested in trajectories: What happens if we move away from growth as the answer to everything and head in a different direction? We've tried very little else. We can measure society by other means, and when we do, the world can become much more robust and secure. You start having a food supply you can count on, and an energy supply you can count on, and know they aren't undermining the rest of the world. You start building communities that are strong enough to count on, so individual accumulation of wealth becomes less important.
If "growth" should no longer be our mantra, then what should it be?
We need stability. We need systems that don't rip apart. Durability needs to be our mantra. The term "sustainability" means essentially nothing to most people. "Maintenance" is not very flashy. "Maturity" would be the word we really want, but it's been stolen by the AARP. So durability is good; durability is a virtue.
In part, you're advocating a return to local reliance. How small is "local"? And can local reliance work only in certain places?
We'll figure out the sensible size. It could be a town, a region, a state. But to find the answer, we have to get the incredibly distorting subsidies out of our current systems. They send all kinds of bad signals about what we should be doing. In energy we've underwritten fossil fuel for a long time; unbelievable gifts to the "clean coal" industry, and on and on. It's even more egregious in agriculture. Most of the United States's cropland is devoted to growing corn and soybeans--not because there's an unbelievable demand to eat corn and soybeans, but because there are federal subsidies to grow them—written into the law by huge agricultural companies who control certain senators. Once subsidies wither, we can figure out what scale of industry makes sense. It will make sense to grow a lot of things closer to home.
It's plausible to "go local" in, say, your home state of Vermont, where residents have money and are forward-looking—and their basic needs are met. But what about people in poor places; don't they need outside help?
Absolutely. The rich nations have screwed up the climate. It's our absolute responsibility to figure out how to allow poor people to have something approaching a decent life. What happens to the poorest and most vulnerable people in the world? They get dengue fever. The fields they depend on are ruined by drought or flood. The glaciers that feed the Ganges will be gone, yet 400 million people depend on that water. We are not helping the poor by destabilizing the planet's systems. Meantime, what works best for them? Local, labor-intensive, low-input agriculture: It provides jobs, security, stability and food, and helps make local ecological systems robust enough to withstand the damage that's coming.
U.S. debt is rising to insane levels because the country has lived beyond its means, which supports your call to switch from growth to maintenance. But how do countries like the U.S. get out of debt without growing? Do we need a transition period where growth eliminates debt, and then we embrace durability?
My sense is that all of this will flow logically from the physics and chemistry of the world we're moving into, just like the centralized industrial model flowed logically from the physics and chemistry of the fossil-fueled world. The primary political question is: Can we make change happen fast enough to avoid all-out collapses that are plausible, even likely, under the patterns we're operating in now? How do we force global changes that move these transitions more quickly than they want to move? We have an incredibly small amount of time; we have already passed the threshold points in some respects. We best get to work.

Though not an anti-aging potion, it could improve the lives of older people.
DALLAS MORNING NEWS
DALLAS -- Scientists have identified an anti-aging hormone in mice that could one day help explain what governs the human life span.
Scientists in the United States and Japan described the hormone and the mice -- which can live to the ripe old age of 3, about a year longer than the average mouse -- in a report released online this week by the journal Science.
The findings are exciting because they support a well-documented method to slow aging in other animal species, said George Martin, a pathologist at the University of Washington who commented on the work.
"It's further evidence that there's a mechanism that's modulating life span that works throughout the living world," Martin said. "And it might even apply to us."
What it won't do
Researchers are quick to warn that the hormone will not translate into an anti-aging potion. Instead, it potentially could be useful in slowing the decline in particular tissues such as bones or the brain, thus improving the lives of the elderly.
"I'm not very positive about using it to extend life span," said Makoto Kuro-o. He is the molecular biologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas who led the study. "But it might be useful in treatment of age-related disease."
Scientists began to focus on the naturally occurring hormone several years ago. Kuro-o, then working in Japan, was studying a breed of mice that aged quickly. The accelerated aging was eventually attributed to a defect in a gene that the scientists named Klotho, after the mythical Greek goddess said to spin the thread of life.
Kuro-o reasoned that if a defect in the Klotho gene sped up aging, upping the gene's activity through genetic engineering might lengthen life.
His hunch was correct. Instead of living a normal two years, the genetically engineered mice typically lived 2 1/2 years.

(Also known as CARDINAL JULIAN)
Born at Rome, 1398; died at Varna, in Bulgaria 10 November, 1444. He was one of the group of brilliant cardinals created by Martin V on the conclusion of the Western Schism, and is described by Bossuet as the strongest bulwark that the Catholics could oppose to the Greeks in the council of Florence. He was of good family and was educated at Perugia, where he studied Roman law with such success as to be appointed lecturer there, Domenico Capranica and Nicholas of Cusa being among his pupils. When the schism was ended by the universal recognition of Martin V as pope, Giuliano returned to Rome, where he attached himself to Cardinal Branda. Suggestions of wide reform were rife, and the principles of the outward unity of the Church and its reformation from within became the ideals of his life. In 1419 he accompanied Branda on his difficult mission to Germany and Bohemia, where the Hussites were in open rebellion. The cardinal thought so highly of his services that he used to say that, if the whole Church were to fall into ruin, Giuliano would be equal to the task of rebuilding it. He had all the gifts of a great ruler, commanding intellectual powers, and great personal charm. He was a profound scholar and a devoted Humanist, while his private life was marked by sanctity and austerity. In 1426 Martin V created him cardinal and sent him to Germany to preach a crusade against the reformers who were committing grievous excesses there. After the failure of this appeal to arms Cesarini was made President of the Council of Basle in which capacity he successfully resisted the efforts of Eugene IV to dissolve the council, though later (1437) he withdrew from the opposition, when he perceived that they were more anxious to humiliate the pope than to accomplish reforms. When the reunited council assembled at Ferrara he was made head of the commission appointed to confer with the Hussites and succeeded at least in winning their confidence. In 1439, owing to a plague, the council was transferred from Ferrara to Florence, where Cesarini continued to play a prominent part in the negotiations with the Greeks. After the successful issue of the council, Cesarini was sent as papal legate to Hungary (1443) to promote a national crusade against the Turks. He was opposed to the peace with Ladislaus, King of Hungary and Poland, and signed at Szegedin with Sultan Amurath III, and persuaded the former to break it and renew the war. It was an unfortunate step and resulted in the disastrous defeat of the Christian army at Varna in 1444, when Cardinal Giuliano was slain in the flight. His two well-known letters to Aeneas Sylvius about the pope's relations to the Council of Basle are printed among the works of Pius II (Pii II Opera Omnia, Basle 1551, p. 64).
VESPASIANO DA BISTICCI, Vite di Uomini illustri, first printed at Rome, 1763; also printed in MAI, Spicilegium Romanum, I, 166-184; and in the new ed. of VESPASIANO (Bologna, 1892), I. JENKINS, The Last Crusader: The Life and Times of Cardinal Julian (London, 1861); PASTOR, History of the Popes, tr. ANTROBUS (London, 1899), I; GREGOROVIUS, History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages, tr. HAMILTON (London, 1900), VII, Part I, Bk. XIII, i, ii; CHEVALIER, Rep.: Bio bibl. (Paris, 1905-1907) gives an extensive bibliography.
APA citation. (1908). Giuliano Cesarini. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03546a.htm
MLA citation. "Giuliano Cesarini." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. <http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03546a.htm>.
Transcription. This article was transcribed for New Advent by Ted Rego.
Ecclesiastical approbation. Nihil Obstat. November 1, 1908. Remy Lafort, S.T.D., Censor. Imprimatur. +John Cardinal Farley, Archbishop of New York.
Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email address is feedback732 at newadvent.org. (To help fight spam, this address might change occasionally.) Regrettably, I can't reply to every letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback — especially notifications about typographical errors and inappropriate ads.

Tucked inside Carl Zimmer's wonderful and thorough feature on de-extinction, a topic that got a TEDx coming out party last week, we find a tantalizing, heartbreaking anecdote about the time scientists briefly, briefly brought an extinct species back to life.
The story begins in 1999, when scientists determined that there was a single remaining bucardo, a wild goat native to the Pyrenees, left in the world. They named her Celia and wildlife veterinarian Alberto Fernández-Arias put a radio collar around her neck. She died nine months later in January 2000, crushed by a tree. Her cells, however, were preserved.
Working with the time's crude life sciences tools, José Folch led a Franco-Spanish team that attempted to bring the bucardo, as a species, back from the dead.
It was not pretty. They injected the nuclei from Celia's cells into goat eggs that had been emptied of their DNA, then implanted 57 of them into different goat surrogate mothers. Only seven goats got pregnant, and of those, six had miscarriages. Which meant that after all that work, only a single goat carried a Celia clone to term. On July 30, 2003, the scientists performed a cesarean section.
Here, let's turn the narrative over to Zimmer's story:
As Fernández-Arias held the newborn bucardo in his arms, he could see that she was struggling to take in air, her tongue jutting grotesquely out of her mouth. Despite the efforts to help her breathe, after a mere ten minutes Celia's clone died. A necropsy later revealed that one of her lungs had grown a gigantic extra lobe as solid as a piece of liver. There was nothing anyone could have done.
A species had been brought back. And ten minutes later it was gone again. Zimmer continues
The notion of bringing vanished species back to life--some call it de-extinction--has hovered at the boundary between reality and science fiction for more than two decades, ever since novelist Michael Crichton unleashed the dinosaurs of Jurassic Park on the world. For most of that time the science of de-extinction has lagged far behind the fantasy. Celia's clone is the closest that anyone has gotten to true de-extinction. Since witnessing those fleeting minutes of the clone's life, Fernández-Arias, now the head of the government of Aragon's Hunting, Fishing and Wetlands department, has been waiting for the moment when science would finally catch up, and humans might gain the ability to bring back an animal they had driven extinct.
"We are at that moment," he told me.
That may be. And the tools available to biologists are certainly superior. But there's no developed ethics of de-extinction, as Zimmer elucidates throughout his story. It may be possible to bring animals that humans have killed off back from extinction, but is it wise, Zimmer asks?
"The history of putting species back after they've gone extinct in the wild is fraught with difficulty," says conservation biologist Stuart Pimm of Duke University. A huge effort went into restoring the Arabian oryx to the wild, for example. But after the animals were returned to a refuge in central Oman in 1982, almost all were wiped out by poachers. "We had the animals, and we put them back, and the world wasn't ready," says Pimm. "Having the species solves only a tiny, tiny part of the problem."
Maybe another way to think about it, as Jacquelyn Gill argues in Scientific American, is that animals like mammoths have to perform (as the postmodern language would have it) their own mammothness within the complex social context of a herd.
When we think of cloning woolly mammoths, it's easy to picture a rolling tundra landscape, the charismatic hulking beasts grazing lazily amongst arctic wildflowers. But what does cloning a woolly mammoth actually mean? What is a woolly mammoth, really? Is one lonely calf, raised in captivity and without the context of its herd and environment, really a mammoth?
Does it matter that there are no mammoth matriarchs to nurse that calf, to inoculate it with necessary gut bacteria, to teach it how to care for itself, how to speak to other mammoths, where the ancestral migration paths are, and how to avoid sinkholes and find water? Does it matter that the permafrost is melting, and that the mammoth steppe is gone?...
Ultimately, cloning woolly mammoths doesn't end in the lab. If the goal really is de-extinction and not merely the scientific equivalent of achievement unlocked!, then bringing back the mammoth means sustained effort, intensive management, and a massive commitment of conservation resources. Our track record on this is not reassuring.
In other words, science may be able to produce the organisms, but society would have to produce the conditions in which they could flourish.

Ometepe is the name of two small islands in the middle of Lake Nicaragua (Nicaragua), the largest lake in Central America. These islands were formed by the peaks of two volcanoes and connected by a short isthmus. This area is part of the Greater Nicoya subregion, one of the richest archaeological zones in Central America.
At the time of the Spanish invasion of Nicaragua, in 1524, the Greater Nicoya was occupied by three aboriginal groups: Mangue, Orotiña and Nicarao or Nicaragua. A fourth group called Bagaces occupied a smaller portion of Guanacaste, in northwestern Costa Rica. The Nicarao (a Nahuatl-speaking group, a language spoken in Central Mexico) arrived and occupied the Isla of Omotepe probably during the Postclassic period. The word Ometepe is, in fact, a Nahuatl word that means “two mountains” referring to the two volcanic peaks that dominate the islands. However, the first occupation of the island dated at least as long ago as 1300 BC, during the local Dinarte phase.
Archaeological Research at Ometepe
The first archaeological excavations in the island of Ometepe were carried out in 1881. Archaeologist J. Bransford excavated near the town of Moyogalpa, in the Luna Hacienda, recovering many funerary urns dating between 800 and 1350 AD.
At the beginning of the 1960s, archaeologists Gordon Willey and Albert Norweb excavated the site of La Cruz, finding huge amounts of ceramic fragments and turtle bones.
More long-term, systematic works were carried out in Ometepe by the German archaeologist Wolfgang Haberland, who in 1958 excavated a tomb in Moyogalpa which he considered to be the burial of a shaman. Later, with the help of Peter Schmidt, he surveyed more that 50 sites, finding many petroglyphs; carried out test excavations in 10 of the sites. One of these was the important cemetery site of Los Angeles.
Current archaeological research in the island are being carried out by the Ometepe Archaeological Project, directed by Suzanne Baker, a passionate, activist archaeologist. To date, the project has recorded more than 70 new sites with more than 1000 petroglyphs; the fieldwork has a large and established volunteer component.
Lange, Frederick W. (editor) 1996 Paths to Central American Prehistory. University of Colorado Press, Boulder.
Lange F.W. and D. Stone (eds.), The Archaeology of Lower Central America. School of American Research, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Choosing a Kitten
If you're getting a kitten, try to choose one you can see with her mother and siblings. If you can, meet the father, too, although this is often not possible. Every kitten differs somewhat from his parents and siblings, but many personality and behavioral traits are inherited, and kittens learn a lot from their mothers. If the mother is calm and friendly with people, chances are her kittens will be, too. If mama cat is shy or un-friendly, her kittens might not be very social, either.
How a kitten is handled also has a profound effect on his development and attitude. A kitten who is handled gently and frequently by different people from his first few days onward and who is exposed to other gentle animals will be more social throughout his life than kittens who are ignored or mistreated during their first few weeks. If he has been exposed to the sights, sounds, and smells of a normal household during this period, he'll be better adjusted and more confident than a kitten raised away from people.
Ever wonder how kittens within a litter can be very different in color, coat length, body style, even personality? A female cat on the loose often mates with several males when she's in heat, so it's possible for kittens within a litter to have different daddies.
Early handling doesn't negate a kitten's need to be with her mother and siblings, of course. Living in a feline family teaches a kitten to control and behave herself. She finds out that if she bites or scratches, the others retaliate or shun her. She learns that she can't always have what she wants. Kittens who are removed from their mom and siblings too early often fail to learn these lessons. Observe the kittens interacting with one another. A kitten should be confident and playful, but not a bully.
A healthy kitten …
- Is coordinated and shows no obvious physical problems.
- Is solid and well proportioned.
- Is not excessively thin for her breed.
- Is not pot-bellied (which might indicate roundworms).
- Has soft, glossy fur.
- Is free of fleas.
- Has no red, itchy, or bald spots.
- Has a clean rectal area with no sign of tapeworm or diarrhea.
- Has bright, clear eyes.
- Has pink gums and healthy-smelling breath.
- Breathes normally with no sneezing, coughing, or wheezing and has no nasal discharge.
- Has clear eyes, fully open and free of tearing and discharge.
- Has clean ears, free of odor, inflammation, dirty-looking buildup, or discharge.
- Should be curious and willing to approach you or at least to be held and cuddled if he's more reserved.
- Should show interest in a string or toy dragged or tossed on the floor.
- Is happy and playful—unless she's asleep!
A lethargic kitten might be ill, and a kitten who hides or reacts with hostility when you try to touch him will be a difficult pet. Ask the litter owner about the kittens, and be cautious if she can't tell you about each individual. That might mean the kittens haven't been handled much.
More on: Pets
Excerpted from The Complete Idiot's Guide to Getting and Owning a Cat Ã¯Â¿Â½ 2005 by Sheila Webster Boneham, Ph.D. All rights reserved including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form. Used by arrangement with Alpha Books, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
To order this book visit the Idiot's Guide web site or call 1-800-253-6476.

As with any responsible reintroduction of captive or semi-captive animals back into the wild there are certain criteria that need to be followed which reflect the best interests of the individual animals released, as well as the wild indigenous populations. This process must remain dynamic in order to adjust to the dolphins’ needs and any environmental variables but the basic principles are outlined below:
Full health assessment - ensuring that the animals are healthy enough for release and there is little or no chance of transmitting any known pathogen or disease to the wild dolphin population.
Returning Tom and Misha to their native waters and or within their home range - it is believed that both Tom and Misha were captured near Izmir. Izmir is approximately 150 miles from where the animals are currently being held and well within their home range.
Gate preparation so they are primed to depart the pen at release – this has been established by encouraging Tom and Misha to move through an artificial gate into the medical pen.
Determining if the animals can effectively hear and echolocate – we are confident in their hearing abilities and monitor echolocation through the use of hydrophones.
Establish and document that the animals can readily kill and eat live fish – transferring the dolphins’ diet from frozen fish to live fish is a slow and calculated process but essential for successful rehabilitation. Their captive diet has consisted of hand fed fish for many years and we must convert that to live fish over the coming months utilising the following process:
Developing the animals’ strength and endurance – possibly the most important aspect of the dolphins’ rehabilitation. In captivity, dolphins become dependent on humans and work very little for their food compared to being in the wild, subsequently developing behaviours such as lulling at the surface for prolonged periods. In the wild dolphins are constantly swimming, not only for food, but for predator avoidance, playing, or migration. In captivity this behaviour is rendered useless and they tend to lose their physical stamina. Wild bottlenose dolphins swim at an average speed of 1.5-1.7 m/s with bursts of speed up to 8.3 m/s and frequently hold their breath for 20-40 seconds, and at times up to 6 minutes and more.
Like a human in physical training for competition, dolphins must be muscular and fit in order to handle many different situations from attacking a school of sardines to avoiding sharks. The better shape the dolphins are in, the more likely they are to survive in the wild. Conditioning is undertaken with Misha and Tom in their sea pen by encouraging them to be constantly active, incorporating high energy actions such as bows (breaching the water), speed swims and more. As we consistently work with them on these activities they will become more fit and well-developed increasing their potential for success in the wild

Most importantly - If you, or anyone/thing else, believes they have been in contact with any poisonous materials, contact your local Poison Control Center.
The American Association of Poison Control Centers has a great website - www.aapcc.org - with information about all types of poisoning.
For the Galveston Area, the Southeast Texas Poison Control Center's (STPCC) website is www.utmb.edu/setpc.
To contact STPCC:
Mailing address: UTMB, 3.112 Trauma Building, Galveston, Tx 77555-1175
Emergency Numbers: (800)764-7661 (TX ONLY) and (409)765-1420
Animal Poison Control Center - www.napcc.aspca.org (888)426-4435
Oleanders contain a toxin called Cardenolide Glycosides. The toxin is mostly contained in the sap which is clear to slightly milky colored, and sticky. When ingested in certain quatities, this toxin can cause harm - and possibly death. The extremely bitter and nauseating taste of the sap (much like a rotten lemon) causes a mechanical reflex in the stomach which rejects and expels the vile substance. Although not impossible, a person or animal would have to have a strong stomach or no sense of taste for a dose of the toxin to be fatal.
What can I do to avoid the a possible poisoning when working with Oleanders? Wash hands (and arms) thoroughly when finished working with the plant. Do not chew on any part of the plant. And do NOT use it as a skewer for food (or as a toothpick!).
Are the fumes from burning Oleanders hazardous? Yes! The fumes from a burning Oleander is still very hazardous. Steer clear of the fumes and NEVER use the branches as firewood!
What do I do if I accidently ingest some of the sap? Call the poison control center nearest you.
What do I do if I see my pet chewing on the plant?Call your veterinarian immediately!
What do I do if I see my pet chewing on the plant? Call your veterinarian immediately!
What are some other poisonouse plants? Azaleas - Roman soldiers were poisoned from honey of azalea pontica. Rhododendrons - The poisonous compound is Actylandromdal found in the nectar, and produces depression of blood pressure, shock, and finally death

September 14, 2004 > Celebrating Hispanic Heritage Month
Celebrating Hispanic Heritage Month
by Susana Nuñez
September 15 marks the beginning of National Hispanic Heritage Month, a month dedicated to raising public awareness and appreciation of Hispanic/ Latino culture. The observation was initiated in 1968 when Congress authorized President Lyndon B. Johnson to proclaim a week in September as National Hispanic Heritage Week. In 1988, the observance was expanded to include the entire 31-day period.
The month, which runs through October 15, focuses directly on the ingenuity, creativity, cultural, and political experiences of Hispanic Americans. In addition, September 15 celebrates the anniversary of independence for five Latin American countries: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Also, Mexico declared its independence on September 16, and Chile on September 18.
As a people who have contributed greatly to American culture, Hispanics/Latinos are the largest ethnic minority. According to a United States Census release, as of July 1, 2003, Hispanics/Latinos make up 13.7 percent of the United States population. That's over 39.9 million! By 2050, the percentage is expected to rise to 24 percent, at 102.6 million. Around the bay, activities for everyone to enjoy with their Hispanic/Latino friends and neighbors will be held in the following weeks. For a taste of what's to come, the following is a list of events to celebrate and enhance your knowledge of this influential culture.
Alameda County Library Presents Latino Cultural Arts Series
Event Location: Alameda County Library (check for local branch)
Time: library hours
US Bank graciously provided funding to the Foundation for a series of programs honoring National Hispanic Heritage Month. The programs feature a variety of wonderful family-oriented events at Alameda County Library Branches. Mr. Juan L. Sanchez entertains audiences with Musica de Las Americas/Music of the Americas, a bilingual program of songs and stories from all over the Americas. Ms. Olga Loya, a master storyteller, with stories full of mystery, suspense and humor. Joe and Ronna Leon delight audiences with their popular Caterpillar Puppets and PINATA program. For more information, contact the Library at (510) 745-1514.
Viva Las Americas
Saturday, September 18
Event Location: Pier 39, San Francisco
Time: 12-5 PM
This festive event showcases music and dance performances commemorating the artistry of Mexico, Central and South America. Mariachis strumming their guitars serenade visitors as they stroll throughout PIER 39. Fun for children includes traditional Latin American craft making and face painting. For further information, call Pier 39 at (415) 705-5500.
Tardeada Latina Silent Auction Fundraiser
Saturday, September 18
Event Location: Duran Foundation 1035 Carleton Street, Berkeley
Time: 2 PM
The Bay Area Institute for Advancement, Inc. will be holding its fourth annual Silent Auction fundraiser to benefit its bilingual (Spanish/English) childcare centers (Centro VIDA & Bahia School Age Program). BAHIA's mission is to provide quality bilingual and multi-cultural early childhood education, particularly serving low-income Latino families of Northern Alameda County, enabling them to improve the quality of life for their children. Sponsorship opportunities are available. Featuring DJ José Ruiz; Catering provided by Cancun Sabor Mexicano of Berkeley and Tlaloc Sabor Mexicano of San Francisco. Tickets: $50/person, $75/couple. For more info: (510) 525-1463, CentroVIDA1975@aol.com
A Talk by Dr. Solimar
Sunday, September 19
Event Location: 34007 Alvarado Niles Rd., Union City
Time: 3 PM
Vernice Solimar, PhD is here to talk about the values of the indigenous people ion the Amazonian rainforest and how these values can be helpful today in our own lives.
During her three-week stay in Quito and the Ecuadorian Rainforest, Vernice directly experienced the spiritual depth, beauty and living presence of Pachamama, the sacred Earth Mother. She is here to share the experience of her journey through slides and discussion of indigenous wisdom.
2nd Annual Dunsmuir Mariachi Festival
Sunday, September 19
Event Location: 2960 Peralta Oaks Court, Oakland (off of Highway 580)
Time: 12-6 pm
The historic Dunsmuir Estate in Oakland is once again planning to bring a touch of Mexico to Oakland. This year's event will feature Mariachi bands and Ballet Folklorico dancers. There will be cultural exhibits, crafts and entertainment for all ages. Tickets are $20; at the door, $25. For more information, call (510) 615-5555 x7 http://www.dunsmuir.org.
Festival Cine Latino (Latino Theater)
Friday- Sunday, September 17-19
Event Location: Presentation Theater, 2350 Turk Street, University of California San Francisco
See films directed by US and Latin American filmmakers and cutting-edge videographers at the 12th Annual Festival ÁCine Latino! hosted by Cine Accién. Over 40 films will be shown. Tickets are $8, general admission and $5 for Cine Accién members, students and seniors. For more information, call (415) 553-8135, email@example.com, http://www.cineaccion.com.
A Speech by Author, Activist Elizabeth Martinez
Thursday, September 23
Event Location: Toland Hall, UC Hall, 533 Parnassus Ave., University of California San Francisco
Time: 12-1:00 PM
Elizabeth "Betita" Martinez will be the keynote speaker for the Hispanic Heritage Month celebration. The topic of her talk is "Multicultural Alliances in Building the Road to Educational Justice." She is best known for her bilingual volume 500 Years of Chicano History in Pictures, which became the basis for a video that she co-directed. Her latest book is De Colores Means All of Us: Latina Views for a Multi-Colored Century. All are invited to the event, which is sponsored by the Latin American Campus Association. Light refreshments will be available.
Benefit Fashion Show - Tarde Internacional del Rebozo
Friday, September 24
Event Location: The Mexican Heritage Plaza at 1700 Alum Rock Ave, San Jose
Time: 5:30-8:30 PM
The rebozo from Santa Maria del Rio, San Luis Potosi, Mexico, is a pre-Hispanic accessory that is now considered a piece of art because they are still weaved by hand! This event will feature "rebozo" dances by the Ballet Folklorico Mexicano de Carlos Moreno, highlighting the traditions from various states in Mexico, modeling, arts and crafts, displays, music by Juanita Ulloa and more. Tickets are $20 in advance, $25 at the door. For more information, check out http://www.palaciosproductions.com.
San Jose Tamale Festival
Saturday, October 23
Event Location: Emma Prusch Park, San Jose (at Story & King Rd.)
Time: 10 AM-4:30 PM
Hot Tamales, anyone? This year's San Jose Tamale Festival was designed with a few things in mind. To promote, preserve, celebrate and share the Mexican Heritage and Culture with the communities of the Bay Area with a healthy family environment of goodwill, music, dance, and of course, tamales! Free admission. For more information, contact Roger Hooks at (408) 617-2520, firstname.lastname@example.org, www.sanjosetamalefestival.com.
Casa de los Esp’ritus: The Paul Sherrill Days of the Dead Collection
September 8- November 27
Event Location: The Mexican Museum of San Francisco; Marina Boulevard and Buchanan St. Fort Mason, Building D, San Francisco
Time: Wednesday to Saturday 11 AM to 5 PM (Gallery hours)
The Paul Sherrill Days of the Dead Collection is drawn from the prized art collection of the late San Francisco architect, Paul Sherrill, who over his lifetime gathered more than 600 pieces of popular Mexican art. For more information, call (415) 202-9700 or visit www.mexicanmuseum.org. Museum admission: Members and children 12 and under free, adults $3.00, students and seniors $2.00, group tours $25.00, first Wednesday of every month free!

MAKE A WORD SEARCH JR
Make your own Word Search Puzzle - Junior! Children can practice spelling by making a Word Search Puzzle to search for words! At home or in school children can make their own puzzles and have fun learning to spell. You can print or play the word search online.
Recommended for Grades: K,1

The first issue of the English florins, so called because the
letters D.G. (“by God's grace”) were omitted for want of room. It
happened that Richard Lalor Sheil, the master of the Mint, was a
Catholic, and a scandal was raised that the omission was made on
religious grounds. The florins were called in and re-cast. (See
Mr. Sheil was appointed by the Whig ministry Master of the Mint in
1846; he issued the florin in 1849; was removed in 1850, and died at
Florence in 1851, aged nearly 57.
Source: Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, E. Cobham Brewer, 1894
More on Graceless Florin from Infoplease:
- Graceless Florin - Graceless Florin The first issue of the English florins, so called because the letters D.G. ...
- Godless Florin - Godless Florin (The). Also called “The Graceless Florin.” In 1849 were issued florins ...
- Florin - Florin An English coin representing 2s., or the tenth of a sovereign, issued in 1849. Camden ...
- Defender of the Faith - Defender of the Faith A title given by Pope Leo X. to Henry VIII. of England, in 1521, for a Latin ...
- Dei Gratia - Dei Gratia By God's grace. Introduced into English charters in 1106; as much as to say, ...
24 X 7
||24 x 7 Tutor Availability
||Unlimited Online Tutoring

Russian family of architects and urban planners. The brothers Leonid Aleksandrovich Vesnin (b Nizhny Novgorod, 10 Dec 1880; d Moscow, 8 Oct 1933), Viktor Aleksandrovich Vesnin (b Yur’evets, 9 April 1882; d Moscow, 17 Sept 1950) and Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Vesnin (b Yur’evets, 16 May 1883; d Moscow, 7 Nov 1959) worked independently on occasion but are best known for their collaborative projects. After the Revolution of 1917 they had a central role in formulating and developing Constructivism, which became the dominant form of architectural Modernism in the USSR in the 1920s. Aleksandr Vesnin, the most active and innovative of the brothers, also had a significant early career as a painter and theatre designer.
© 2009 Oxford University Press

Limehouse was the site of a short-lived porcelain factory founded by George Wilson in 1746. It was one of many attempts to make a British version of the beautiful, white ceramic that was flooding into London from the Far East. Limehouse porcelain looked Chinese but was made in East London. You can see examples of this porcelain at the Museum of London.
One hundred years later, a small community of Chinese sailors settled at Limehouse Causeway. This was one of two small, East End Chinese communities. The other was in Pennyfields in Poplar, where Chinese sailors from Shanghai had settled. Virtually all were single men, some of whom married British women.
By 1914, there were around 30 businesses and 300 people living in these small East End communities. Limehouse and Pennyfields became known as Chinatown, and many of its inhabitants made a living by running laundries.
During the Second World War, the Docklands area, including Chinatown, was badly damaged and many Chinese people moved out. In the 1950s, the market for Chinese food grew and restaurants and stalls began to spring up in Gerrard Street and Lisle Street. This was the start of the Chinatown we know today in Soho.

Noryl is a blend of polyphenylene oxide (PPO) and polystyrene (PS) which was developed in 1966 by General Electric Plastics (now owned by SABIC). It is a rare example of a homogeneous mixture of two polymers. Most polymers are incompatible with one another, so tend to produce separate phases when mixed. The compatibility of the two polymers in Noryl is caused by the presence of a benzene ring in the repeat units of both chains.
The addition of polystyrene to PPO increases the glass transition temperature above 100 °C, owing to the high Tg of PPO, so Noryl is stable in boiling water. The precise value of the transition depends on the exact composition of the grade being used. There is a smooth linear relation between weight content of polystyrene and the Tg of the blend. Noryl has good electrical resistance, so is widely used for switch boxes. However, product design is important in maximising the strength of the product, especially in eliminating sharp corners and other stress concentrations. Injection molding must ensure that moldings are stress-free.
Like most other amorphous thermoplastics, Noryl is sensitive to environmental stress cracking when in contact with many organic liquids. Compounds such as gasoline, kerosine and methylene chloride may initiate brittle cracks which lead to product failure.
Noryl has numerous applications in electronics, electrical equipment, coating, machinery, etc.
Noryl has possible applications in the production of hydrogen, where it could serve as cost-effective electrodes in an electrolyzer, replacing expensive rare elements. It is highly resistant against the alkaline potassium hydroxide. For conductivity the plastic is sprayed with a nickel-based catalyst.

(En español: Conjuntivitis)
Is your eye looking pink and not so pretty? Sounds like conjunctivitis, sometimes called pinkeye. This can happen when the conjunctiva, the covering of your eye and inside your eyelids, gets infected. Your eye may feel itchy and like you have a grain of sand caught in it. Your eye may be teary or gunky, especially when you wake up in the morning. Although sometimes pinkeye will get better on its own, some kids will need special eye drops to make their conjunctivitis disappear.

Alabama 4th District
The Appalachian Mountains’ corduroy ridges, dividing the Atlantic coast from the interior, are America’s coal-and-steel industrial spine, from the black coal country of western Pennsylvania to the red hill country of northern Alabama. Here rose America’s two premier steel cities, Pittsburgh and Birmingham. Around both, and for many miles in between them, is countryside settled by feisty Scots-Irish farmers in the years between the Revolution and the Civil War. In valley land accessible to railroads, great steel factories were built in the 80 years after the Civil War, along with smaller factories that produced underwear and tires, glass and chemicals, socks and butchered chickens. Northern Alabama was solidly Democratic through the 1950s. It was populist on economics, conservative on cultural issues. Since then, the region has moved toward the Republicans, even though it has benefited from massive federal public works programs. The movement is most pronounced in counties close to Birmingham and along the interstates.
2008 Presidential Vote
|Cook Partisan Voting Index|
Alabama’s 4th Congressional District is a collection of small towns—Cullman, Jasper, Russellville, Fort Payne, and Albertville. The last is the home of a military helicopter plant and other aerospace facilities. Gritty Gadsden (pop. 37,000) is the biggest city, with a large Goodyear tire plant built in 1929. Sandwiched between Huntsville to the north and Birmingham to the south, the 4th District crosses the state and the Appalachian ridges, from the Georgia state line to the Mississippi state line. Decades of coal mining scarred 150 square miles of landscape, about one-fourth of which has been reclaimed. This is Alabama’s premier Scots-Irish district, with the lowest African-American percentage of the state’s seven congressional districts. Though family income is low and poverty above national averages, high marriage rates give some social stability. There are few vestiges of its Democratic heritage. George Bush won here with 71% in 2004. John McCain won many of these counties with over 70% of the vote in 2008.

CRUISER DUELS: The Konigsberg vs. the Pegasus at Zanzibar
The German ships
The Konigsberg was a small light cruiser with ten 105mm guns.
These German light cruisers were reliable, beautiful, durable ships, but were often pitted against newer or much larger British adversaries resulting in a high rate of loss. This battle was
one of the few occasions where a German raider met an opponent
of the same type.
The British ships
The Pegasus was also a small light cruiser with 8 4-inch guns.
It was slightly older than the German ship and the German
105mm (4.1-inch) guns were much superior weapons. Two other
British cruisers had been hunting the Konigsberg also, but the
Pegasus, stopped at Zanzibar for repairs, faced its enemy alone.
Return to main list

From her earliest days in school, Professor Jana Gevertz was beguiled by the elegance and precision of mathematics. But as her experience widened, she also felt the pull of biology, a powerful, hands-on force in such critical arenas as health care.
“I love how beautifully logical math is. You can’t fight me on a proof—there is no bias. What I love about biology is its ability to impact people and how we live our lives. I’m drawn to the human side of it. So for me, the ideal career was one that used math to benefit people in society,” she says.
Her eureka moment came during her junior year in college when she took the course Differential Equations in Biology and realized “it was possible to work at the interface of math and biology.” That discovery led her to cancer research, where mathematicians, scientists, and clinicians are teaming up to exploit reams of new data—much of it at the molecular level—to advance their understanding of cancer growth and treatments.
As a specialist in mathematical biology, Gevertz, an assistant professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, devises equations that model the progression of tumors. To date, she has focused on glioblastoma, a complex and deadly form of brain cancer that poses a persistent challenge to researchers and clinicians.
“When I first started researching in this field, mean survival times for these patients hadn’t budged since the 1970s, while we were seeing progress in treating other types of cancer. While tons of data was being gathered about glioblastoma, it was not translating into improved clinical outcomes for patients. So much remained unknown about the disease,” she recalled.
Gevertz was particularly drawn to an aspect of cancer progression that was not well understood: the interactions between different elements of a tumor and the surrounding healthy tissue that lead to its growth. These elements include the genes expressed by cancer cells, the blood vessels that give the tumor oxygen, the stiffness of the surrounding healthy tissue, and immune system responses. While the tumor is initially constrained by its host, it works to reshape its environment so it can thrive.
“Imagine a scenario in which a 17th-century scientist finds a modern-day computer,” she says, by way of analogy. “The scientist would try to understand how each component functions, for instance, the hard drive, the keyboard, and the mouse. But even if the function of each computer part were understood, the scientist would still need to figure out how these pieces interact to produce a functioning computer.
Increasingly, researchers are focusing on pinpointing the interactions that allow the tumor to overcome normal physiological defenses against cancer and coming up with ways to inhibit them. A primary goal of the field, she adds, is to develop a “virtual patient,” a computer program that would use specific information about a patient’s disease to predict how their particular tumor will grow and what treatments would be most effective.
“Patients with the same cancer respond differently. Some people are cured by chemotherapy and some are not. Some people have awful side effects, others none,” she says. “The holy grail of the field is to obtain clinical data on a singular patient, plug that into a computer, and be able to figure out how best to treat them. This is what we call individualized medicine, and it’s something many are striving for in all branches of medicine.”
The relationship between math and biology is not new, Gevertz notes. She points to Gregor Mendel, often called the father of modern genetics, who used comparatively simple math in the 1800s to derive his laws of inheritance, based on breeding experiments with pea plants. The partnership between the two fields has become increasingly productive, however, in recent years.
“There was a boom in the 1990s when biologists began gathering large amounts of data, necessitating a more quantitative approach to their field,” she says. Advances in molecular biology had given them the ability to identify the genes that are mutated in cancer, as well as the proteins expressed by these genes that abet tumor growth. A leap in computing power gave mathematicians powerful new analytical tools.
On occasion, math-based insights can seem counterintuitive, she notes, citing an example in which her equations suggested that using an on/off schedule for a drug that prevents a tumor from growing its own blood supply was more effective than deploying the drug continuously, at full-blast.
“Sometimes you learn things you weren’t expecting to be true,” she says.Supported in graduate school by National Science Foundation and Burroughs Wellcome Fund fellowships, Gevertz comes to her career with a research-intensive background. But she discovered earlier in her academic life that teaching was also important to her.
“What sold me on a career in math ultimately was tutoring. I love working with people and communicating complicated ideas in a way that others can understand,” said Gevertz, who teaches courses ranging from introductory calculus to upper-level classes in applied mathematics. She is thrilled to see her students embracing interdisciplinary subjects as well.
“Students’ interest in fields like mathematical biology is growing rapidly,” she says, noting that her course on the topic next semester is already over-enrolled.
This summer, she will be working on research projects with two of her TCNJ students: a physics major who will study the way cancer cells invade normal tissue and a math major looking at the interactions between a tumor and the body’s immune system. Both students will be using mathematical and computational techniques to tackle challenging biological problems.
“I’m excited that these students are engaging in real scientific research, and also pleased that they will come away from it appreciating that there are multiple ways to approach these important problems,” she says.

If you are what you eat, you might be having an identity crisis.
A new study on food fraud was released Wednesday morning by U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention (USP), a scientific nonprofit organization that helps set standards for the "quality, safety and benefit" of foods and medicines. The group runs a searchable online database of food fraud reports at foodfraud.org and nearly 800 new records were added as part of the study - a 60% increase from last year.
Food fraud, as defined by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), is the adulteration, dilution or mislabeling of goods. USP further defines food fraud in the study as "the fraudulent addition of nonauthentic substances or removal or replacement of authentic substances without the purchaser's knowledge for economic gain to the seller."
The new records show that the most commonly fraudulent products are olive oil, milk, saffron, honey and coffee.
Tea, fish, clouding agents (used in fruit juices, like lemon, to make products look freshly squeezed), maple syrup and spices (turmeric, black pepper and chili pepper) were also top imposters.
Most of the reported food fraud was committed by producers adding fillers (i.e. other plant leaves to tea leaves), mixing in less expensive spices with high value spices or watering down liquids. Olive oils were often replaced and/or diluted with cheaper vegetable oils. Clouding agents were found in 877 food products from 315 different companies. Another popular target: Pomegranate juice, often made with grape skins and grape and pear juices.
Tips to combat food fraud
Editor’s note: For more on fake ingredients in food, don’t miss “Sanjay Gupta, MD” on Saturday at 4:30 p.m. ET and Sunday at 7:30 a.m. ET.
From around the web

The name ἀντίχριστος signifies an opposer of Christ. It is used only by John in his first and second epistles, though those opposed to Christ are referred to by others under different names. It is important to distinguish between an antichrist and the antichrist. John says, "as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists;" whereas "he is the antichrist that denieth the Father and the Son." 1 John 2:18, 22. He is the consummation of the many antichrists. To deny Jesus Christ come in the flesh is the spirit or power of the antichrist, but it eventuates in a departure from the special revelation of Christianity: 'they went out from us.' 1 John 2:19; 1 John 4:3; 2 John 7. Now this clears the ground at once of much that has obscured the subject. For instance, many have concluded that Popery is the antichrist, and have searched no farther into the question, whereas the above passage refutes this conclusion, for Popery does not deny the Father and the Son; and, in Revelation 17, 18, Popery is pointed out as quite distinct from 'the false prophet,' which is another name for the antichrist. It is fully granted that Popery is anti-christian, and a Christ-dishonouring and soul-deceiving system; but where God has made a distinction we must also do so. Besides Popery there were and there are many antichrists, which, whatever their pretensions, are the enemies of Christ, opposers of the truth, and deceivers of man.
As to the Antichrist, it should be noticed that John makes another distinction between this one and the many. He speaks of the many as being already there, whereas the one was to come; and if we turn to 2 Thess. 2:3-12 we read of something or some one that hinders that wicked or lawless one being revealed, although the mystery of iniquity was already at work. Now there has been no change of dispensation since this epistle was written, and John wrote much later, from which we learn that the revelation of the antichrist is still future, though doubtless the mystery of iniquity is getting ripe for his appearing; that which hindered and still hinders the manifestation of the antichrist is doubtless the presence of the Holy Spirit on earth. He will leave the earth at the rapture of the saints.
This passage in Thessalonians gives us further particulars as to this MAN OF SIN. His coming is after the working of Satan, that is, he will be a confederate of Satan, and be able to work signs and lying wonders with all deceit of unrighteousness in them that perish. Those that have refused the truth will then receive the lie of this wicked one. We get further particulars in Rev. 13:11-18, where the anti-christian power or kingdom is described as a beast rising out of the earth, having two horns as a lamb, but speaking as a dragon. Here again we read that he will do great wonders, making fire come down from heaven, with other signs or miracles.
In the description in Thessalonians he opposeth himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped, and sits down in the temple of God, and sets forth himself as God. The Jews will receive him as their Messiah, as we read in John 5:43. In the above passage in the Revelation this counterfeit of Christ's kingdom is openly idolatrous. He directs the dwellers on the earth to make an image of the beast (named in ver. 1, the future head of the resuscitated Roman empire) to which image he gives breath, that it should speak, and persecutes those who will not worship the image. He also causes all to receive a mark on their hand or their forehead that they may be known to be his followers; and that none else should be able to buy or sell. We thus see that in the Revelation the anti-christian power called also 'the false prophet' will work with the political head, and with Satan — a trinity of evil — not only in deceiving mankind, but also, in Rev. 16:13-16, gathering together by their influence the kings of the earth to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. The three are cast into the lake of fire Rev. 19:20; Rev. 20:10.
In the O.T. we get still another character of this wicked one. In Dan. 11:36-39 he is called 'king.' Here he exalts himself and speaks marvellous things against the God of gods. He will not regard the God of his fathers (pointing out that he will be a descendant of Israel, probably from the tribe of Dan, cf. Gen. 49:17), nor "the desire of women" (i.e. the Messiah, of whom every Jewess hoped to be the mother): he exalts himself above all. Here again he is an idolater, honouring a god that his fathers knew not. In Zech. 11:15-17 he is referred to as the foolish and idol shepherd, who cares not for the flock, in opposition to the Lord Jesus the good Shepherd.
This man of sin will 'do according to his own will' — just what the natural man ever seeks to do. In contrast to this the blessed Lord was obedient, and came not to do His own will. May His saints be ever on the watch against the many false prophets in the world, 1 John 4:1, and be loyal to their absent Lord, behold His beauty in the sanctuary, and reproduce Him more down here in their earthen vessels.
Strictly, those opposed to the inculcation of good works from a perverted view of the doctrines of grace; but the term is also falsely applied to those who know themselves free through the death of Christ from the law as given by Moses. Rom. 7:4; Gal. 2:19. One has but to read carefully the epistle to the Galatians to see that for Gentile believers to place themselves under the law is to fall from grace; and Paul exhorted them to be as he was, for he was (though a Jew by birth) as free from the law by the death of Christ as they were as Gentiles. They had not injured him at all by saying he was not a strict Jew, Gal. 4:12: in other words, they may have called him an antinomian, as others have been called, whose walk has been the most consistent. To go back to the law supposes that man has power to keep it. For a godly walk the Christian must walk in the Spirit, and grace teaches that, "denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world." Titus 2:12. On the other hand, there have been, and doubtless are, some who deny good works as a necessary fruit of grace in the heart: grace, as well as everything else, has been abused by man. See LAW.
Antioch in Pisidia. [An'tioch in Pisid'ia]
A Roman colony of Phrygia in Asia Minor, founded by Seleueus Nicator. Its ruins are now called Yalobatch or Yalowaj. Paul's labour here was so successful that it roused the opposition of the Jews and he was driven to Iconium and Lystra; but he returned with Silas. Acts 13:14; Acts 14:19-21; 2 Tim. 3:11.
Antioch in Syria. [An'tioch in Syria]
This is memorable in the annals of the church as the city where the disciples were first called Christians, Where an assembly of Gentiles was gathered, and from which Paul and his companions went forth on their missionary journeys, and to which they twice returned. It formed a centre for their labours among the Gentiles, outside the Jewish influence which prevailed at Jerusalem; yet the church in this city maintained its fellowship with the assembly at Jerusalem and elsewhere. Acts 6:5; Acts 11:19-30; Acts 13:1; Acts 14:26; Acts 15:22-35; Acts 18:22; Gal. 2:11.
Antioch was once a flourishing and populous city, the capital of Northern Syria, founded by Seleueus Nicator, B.C. 300, in honour of his father Antiochus. It was afterwards adorned by Roman emperors, and was esteemed the third city was eventually the seat of the Roman proconsul of Syria. It stood on a beautiful spot on the river Orontes, where it breaks through between the mountains Taurus and Lebanon. It is now called Antakia 36 12', 36 10' E. It has suffered from wars and earthquakes, and is now a miserable place. Comparatively few antiquities of the ancient city are to be found, but parts of its wall appear on the crags of Mount Silpius.
There were several kings bearing this name who ruled over Syria, and though they are not mentioned by name in scripture, some of their actions are specified. These are so clear and definite that sceptics have foolishly said that at least this part of the prophecy of Daniel must have been written after the events! The Greek kingdom, the third of the four great empires, was, on the death of Alexander the Great, divided among his four generals, and this resulted principally in a series of kings who ruled in Egypt bearing the general name of PTOLEMY, and are called in scripture 'Kings of the South;' and another series, called 'Kings of the North,' who bore the general name of either SELEUCUS or ANTIOCHUS. Both the Ptolemies and the Seleucidae began eras of their own, and some of the kings of each era had to do with Palestine and the Jews. The following is a list of the kings, with the dates when they began to reign, noticing the principal events that were prophesied of them in Daniel 11.
320 Ptolemy I, Soter. He takes Jerusalem. Era of the Ptolemies begins.
312 SELEUCUS I, Nicator. He re-takes Palestine. Era of the Seleucidae begins.
283 Ptolemy II, Philadelphus. The O.T. translated into Greek.
280 ANTIOCHUS I, Soter.
261 ANTIOCHUS II, Theos. He was at war with Ptolemy, but peace was restored on condition that Antiochus should put away his wife Laodice and marry Berenice the daughter of Ptolemy. This was done, but on the death of Philadelphus he restored Laodice; but she, fearing another divorce, poisoned her husband, and then caused the death of Berenice and her son. See Dan. 11:6.
247 Ptolemy III, Euergetes. He revenged his sister's death, being 'a branch of her roots;' and carried off 40,000 talents of silver, etc. 'Shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north,' and carry away their precious vessels of silver and gold. Dan. 11:7-9.
246 SELEUCUS II, Callinicus.
226 SELEUCUS III, Ceraunus.
223 ANTIOCHUS III, the Great.
222 Ptolemy IV, Philopater. War between Ptolemy and Antiochus. Ptolemy recovers Palestine. Dan. 11:10-12.
205 Ptolemy V, Epiphanes (5 years old). Antiochus seized the opportunity of the minority of the king to regain the country. Dan. 11:16. He also joined with Philip of Macedonia to capture other portions of the dominions of Ptolemy. But Rome was now growing in power, and on being appealed to by Egypt for protection, Antiochus was told he must let Egypt alone. In the meantime an army from Egypt had re-taken Palestine; but Antiochus, on his return, again obtained the mastery there. Wishing to extend his dominions in the west he proposed that Ptolemy should marry his daughter Cleopatra, that she might serve her father's ends; but she was faithful to her husband. Daniel thus speaks of it: "He shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her, but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him." Dan. 11:17. Antiochus took many maritime towns, but after many encounters he was compelled by Rome to quit all Asia on that side of Mount Taurus, give up his elephants and ships of war and pay a heavy fine. Antiochus had great difficulty in raising the money, and on attempting to rob a temple at Elymais he was killed. Dan. 11:18, 19.
187 SELEUCUS IV, Philopator, succeeded. His principal work was the raising of money to pay the war-tax to Rome. He ordered Heliodorus to plunder the temple; but Heliodorus poisoned him. He was thus 'a raiser of taxes,' and was 'destroyed neither in anger, nor in battle.' Dan. 11:20. Heliodorus seized the crown but was destroyed by Antiochus IV.
181 Ptolemy VI, Philometor. He was a minor, under his mother and tutors.
175 ANTIOCHUS IV, Epiphanes. He was not the rightful heir. He 'obtained the kingdom by flatteries.' He called himself Epiphanes, which is 'illustrious;' but he was such 'a vile person' that people called him Epimanes, 'madman.' Dan. 11:21-24. He invaded Egypt and was at first successful: cf. Dan. 11:25, 26. The two kings entered into negotiations, though neither of them was sincere in what they agreed to: their hearts were to do mischief, and they 'tell lies at one table.' Dan. 11:27. Then Antiochus returned to his land with great riches: his heart was 'against the holy covenant,' and he entered Jerusalem and even into the sanctuary and took away the golden altar, the candlestick, the table of showbread, the censers of gold, and the other holy vessels and departed. 'At the appointed time he shall return and come toward the South,' Dan. 11:29; but he was stopped by Rome; 'ships of Chittim,' ships from Macedonia, came against him; and in great anger he returned and vented his wrath on Jerusalem.
He sent an army there with orders to slay all the men and sell the women and children for slaves. This was to a certain extent carried out. The walls were also thrown down and the city pillaged and then set on fire. He then decreed that the Jews should forsake their religion, and all should worship the heathen gods. To ensure this at Jerusalem with the few that still clung to the place, an image of Jupiter Olympius was erected in the temple and on an altar sacrifices were offered to this god. This was in B.C. 168 on the 25th of the month Chisleu. Daniel relates "They shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate." Dan. 11:31: cf. also Dan. 8:9-12 where the 'little horn' refers to Antiochus Epiphanes.
Bleek, Delitzsch, and others consider that in Dan. 8:14, the 2,300 'evening, morning,' margin, refer to the daily sacrifice, which is spoken of in Dan. 8:11, 12, 13; and that by 2,300 is meant 1,150 days: cf. also Dan. 8:26. The dedication of the temple was on the 25th of Chisleu, B.C. 165, and the desecration began some time in the year 168.
Dan. 11:32b, 33-35 refer to the change that soon took place under Judas Maccabeus and his brothers, commencing B.C. 166, and in 165 the temple was re-dedicated. In B.C. 164 ANTIOCHUS V. Eupator succeeded to the throne; and in 162 DEMETRIUS SOTER; but they were not powerful against Judaea, and in B.C. 161 an alliance was made by Judaea with Rome. The historical notices in Daniel end at Dan. 11:35.
It will be seen by the above that the records of history agree perfectly with the prophecy, as faith would expect them to do. It is only unbelief that has any difficulty in God foretelling future events. Without doubt some of the acts of Antiochus Epiphanes are types of the deeds of the future king of the North — referred to in other prophecies as 'the Assyrian' — in respect to the Jews and Jerusalem.
1. A Christian of Pergamos, who was martyred. Rev. 2:13.
2. Son of Herod the Great, but not called Antipas in the N.T. See HEROD.
The town to which Paul was taken in the night from Jerusalem on his way to Caesarea. Acts 23:31. It was built by Herod the Great in a well-watered spot surrounded by a wood, and named after his father. At Ras el-Ain, 32 6' N, 34 56' E, are ruins which are held to mark the spot. This is 5 or 6 miles nearer Jerusalem than Kefr Saba, which some associate with Antipatris, because Josephus says it was called Kapharsaba before its name was altered by Herod. The former place being nearer to Jerusalem removes the difficulty that some have felt as to the distance of Antipatris being too far to reach in a night ; this reduces it to about 36 miles, and it would be even less by cross roads.
The word antitype does not occur in the A.V., but the Greek word ἀντίτυπον occurs in Heb. 9:24, translated 'figures,' and in 1 Peter 3:21, translated 'like figure.' It is that which answers to a type, as a wax impression answers to a seal: if the device is sunk, the impression will be raised, or vice versa. To take a simple but beautiful example, a lamb was offered up for a burnt offering both morning and evening under the law; and in the N.T. we read, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." It is plain that the morning and evening lamb in Israel were types and the death of the Lord Jesus was the antitype. In Heb. 9:23, the 'heavenly things' are the type, and 'holy places,' Heb. 9:24, the antitype, or what corresponded to the pattern. In 1 Peter 3:21, eight souls were saved through water, of which baptism is the figure, or what answers to it. Doubtless there are many other antitypes in the N.T., but every antitype must have a type to which it corresponds, though the correspondence may not lie on its surface. Where scripture is silent as to types and antitypes the teaching of the Holy Spirit is needed, or grievous error may result in associating two things together which have no spiritual connection, though names and words may seem to correspond.
A tower or fortress built by Herod the Great near the temple at Jerusalem in which he placed a guard to watch over the approaches to the sacred edifice. Josephus (Wars v. 5, 8) says it was situated "at the corner of two cloisters of the court of the temple; of that on the west, and that on the north; it was erected upon a rock fifty cubits in height and was on a great precipice." Where this precipice was is not known, for it is a much disputed question upon what part of the temple area the temple was built. There is a tower, now called Antonia, on the N.W. angle, and there are indications of a similar one having stood on the S.E. angle.
A descendant of Benjamin. 1 Chr. 8:24.
Son of Coz, of the posterity of Judah. 1 Chr. 4:8.
The ape is not indigenous to Palestine; they were brought in the days of Solomon, with gold, silver, ivory and peacocks by the ships of Tarshish. The word goph may signify any of the monkey tribe. 1 Kings 10:22; 2 Chr. 9:21.
A Christian of Rome saluted by Paul as 'approved in Christ.' Rom. 16:10.
Apharsachites, Apharsathchites. [Aphar'sachites, Aphar'sathchites]
Some unknown Assyrian tribe sent as colonists to Samaria under Asnapper. Ezra 4:9; Ezra 5:6; Ezra 6:6.
An unknown Assyrian tribe as the preceding. Ezra 4:9.
1. Royal city of the Canaanites, the king of which was killed by Joshua, Joshua 12:18: probably the same as APHEKAH in Joshua 15:53. Not identified.
2. City in the north border of Asher, from which in the time of Joshua the inhabitants were not expelled. Joshua 13:4; Joshua 19:30: called APHIK in Judges 1:31. Identified with Afka at the foot of the Lebanon between Baalbek and Byblus.
3. Place where the Philistines encamped when Israel was defeated. 1 Sam. 4:1.
4. Where the Philistines encamped when Saul and Jonathan were killed. 1 Sam. 29:1. Perhaps the same as No. 3.
5. City, the wall of which falling killed 27,000 of the Syrians, 1 Kings 20:26, 30; 2 Kings 13:17. It is identified with Fik, 32 47' N, 35 41' E, on the great road between Damascus and Jerusalem.
A 'mighty man of power,' an ancestor of Saul. 1 Sam. 9:1.
The margin of Micah 1:10 explains the name as 'house of dust,' so that there is a play upon the word 'dust:' 'in the house of dust roll thyself in the dust.' The LXX read 'the house in derision.' It may refer to OPHRAH in Joshua 18:23; 1 Sam. 13:17, a city in the tribe of Benjamin.
Head of the eighteenth course of priests for service in the temple. 1 Chr. 24:15.
Another name for the REVELATION, q.v., being its Greek title ἀποκάλυψις.
The name given to those Books which were attached to the MSS copies of the LXX, but which do not form a part of the canon of scripture. The term itself signifies, 'hidden,' 'secret,' 'occult;' and, as to any pretence of being a part of scripture, they must be described as 'spurious.' There are such writings connected with both the Old and the New Testament, but generally speaking the term 'Apocrypha' refers to the O.T. (for those connected with the N. Test. see APOSTOLIC FATHERS. The O.T. books are:
1 I. Esdras.
2 II. Esdras.
5 Chapters of Esther, not found in the Hebrew nor Chaldee.
6 Wisdom of Solomon.
7 Jesus, son of Sirach; or Ecclesiasticus; quoted Ecclus.
8 Baruch, including the Epistle of Jeremiah.
9 Song of the Three Holy Children
10 The History of Susanna.
11 Bel and the Dragon.
12 Prayer of Manasseh.
13 I. Maccabees.
14 II. Maccabees.
The Council of Trent in A.D. 1546, professing to be guided by the Holy Spirit, declared the Apocrypha to be a part of the Holy Scripture. The above fourteen books formed part of the English Authorised Version of 1611, but are now seldom attached to the canonical books. Besides the above there are a few others, as the III., IV., and V. Maccabees, book of Enoch, etc., not regarded by any one as a part of scripture. It may be noticed
1. That the canonical books of the O.T. were written in Hebrew (except parts of Ezra and Daniel which were in Chaldee); whereas the Apocrypha has reached us only in Greek or Latin, though Jerome says some of it had been seen in Hebrew.
2. Though the Apocrypha is supposed to have been written not later than B.C. 30, the Lord never in any way alludes to any part of it; nor do any of the writers of the N.T., though both the Lord and the apostles constantly quote the canonical books.
3. The Jews did not receive the Apocrypha as any part of scripture, and to 'them were committed the oracles of God.'
4. As some of the spurious books were added to the LXX Version (the O.T. in the Greek) and to the Latin translation of the LXX, some of the early Christian writers were in doubt as to whether they should be received or not, and this uncertainty existed more or less until the before mentioned Council of Trent decided that the greater part of the Apocrypha was to be regarded as canonical. Happily at that time the Reformation had opened the eyes of many Christians to the extreme corruption of the church of Rome, and in rejecting the claims of that church they were also freed from its judgement as to the Apocryphal books.
5. The internal evidences of the human authorship of the Apocrypha ought to convince any Christian that it can form no part of holy scripture.
Expressions of the writers themselves show that they had no thought of their books being taken for scripture. There are also contradictions in them such as are common to human productions. Evil doctrines also are found therein: let one suffice: "Alms doth deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin." Tobit 12:9. The value of holy scripture as the fountain of truth is such that anything that might in any way contaminate that spring should be refused with decision and scorn. Some parts of the Apocryphal books may be true as history, but in every other respect they should be refused as spurious. Nor can it be granted that we need the judgement of the church, could a universal judgement be arrived at, as to what is to be regarded as the canon of scripture. The Bible carries its own credentials to the hearts and consciences of the saints who are willing to let its power be felt.
City of Macedonia, in the district of Mygdonia, some 28 miles from Amphipolis and 35 from Thessalonica, through which Paul and Silas passed. Acts 17:1.
A convert from Alexandria, an eloquent man and mighty in the scriptures, who, when only knowing the baptism of John, taught diligently the things of Jesus. At Ephesus he was taught more perfectly by Priscilla and Aquila. He laboured at Corinth, following the apostle Paul, who could hence say 'I have planted, Apollos watered,' and subsequently he greatly desired Apollos to revisit Corinth. His name is associated with that of Paul in connection with the party spirit at Corinth, which the apostle strongly rebuked; but from his saying he had 'transferred these things to himself and to Apollos,' it would appear that the Corinthians had local leaders, under whom they ranged themselves, whom he does not name; and that he taught them the needed lesson, and established the general principle by the use of his own name and that of Apollos rather than the names of their leaders. Acts 18:24; Acts 19:1; 1 Cor. 1:12; 1 Cor. 3:4-22; 1 Cor. 4:6; 1 Cor. 16:12; Titus 3:13.
The Greek translation of the Hebrew name ABADDON, which signifies 'destroyer.' He is king of the locusts of the bottomless pit, and ruler over the destroying agents that proceed from thence: it is one of the characters of Satan. Rev. 9:11.
Though the word 'apostasy' does not occur in the A.V., the Greek word occurs from which the English word is derived. In Acts 21:21 Paul was told that he was accused of teaching the Jews who were among the Gentiles to apostatise from Moses. Paul taught freedom from the law by the death of the Christ and this would appear to a strict Jew as apostasy. The same word is used in 2 Thess. 2:3, where it is taught that the day of the Lord could not come until there came 'the apostasy,' or the falling from Christianity in connection with the manifestation of the man of sin. See ANTICHRIST.
Though the general apostasy there spoken of cannot come till after the saints are taken to heaven, yet there may be, as there has been, individual falling away. See, for instance, Heb. 3:12; Heb. 10:26, 28, and the epistle of Jude. There are solemn warnings also that show that such apostasy will be more and more general as the close of the present dispensation approaches. 1 Tim. 4:1-3. Now a falling away necessarily implies a position which can be fallen from, a profession has been made which has been deliberately given up. This is, as scripture says, like the dog returning to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire. It is not a Christian falling into some sin, from which grace can recover him; but a definite relinquishing of Christianity. Scripture holds out no hope in a case of deliberate apostasy, though nothing is too hard for the Lord.
The Greek word ἀπόστολος signifies 'a messenger,' 'one sent,' and is used in this sense for any messenger in 2 Cor. 8:23; Phil. 2:25; and as 'one sent' in John 13:16. It is also used in a much higher and more emphatic sense, implying a divine commission in the one sent, first of the Lord Himself and then of the twelve disciples whom He chose to be with Him during the time of His ministry here. The Lord in His prayer in John 17:18 said, "As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world." He was the Sent One, and in Heb. 3:1 it is written "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Jesus."* They were to consider this One who had been faithful, and who was superior to Moses, to the Aaronic priests, and to angels, and was in the glory. The ordering of a dispensation depended on the apostolic office as divinely appointed.
* The word 'Christ' is omitted by the Editors.
APOSTLES, THE TWELVE. The Lord appointed these "that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out demons," and also to carry out the various commissions given by Christ on earth. It will be seen by the lists that follow that Lebbaeus, Thaddaeus and Judas are the same person; and that Simon the Canaanite (Cananaean) and Simon Zelotes are the same; Peter is also called Simon; and Matthew is called Levi.
1 Peter and
3 James and
5 Philip and
7 Thomas and
10 and Lebbaeus.
11 Simon the Cananean and
12 Judas Iscariot.
12 Judas I.
11 Simon Zelotes.
12 Judas I.
11 Simon Z.
Peter is always named first; he with James and John was with the Lord on the mount of transfiguration and also with the Lord at other times, though no one apostle had authority over the others: they were all brethren and the Lord was their Master. Judas Iscariot is always named last. In Matthew the word 'and' divides the twelve into pairs, perhaps corresponding to their being sent out two and two to preach. Bartholomew and Simon Zelotes are not mentioned after their appointment except in Acts 1.
When the Lord sent the twelve out to preach He bade them take nothing with them, for the workman was worthy of his food: and on their return they confessed that they had lacked nothing. Their mission was with authority as the sent ones of the Lord; sicknesses were healed and demons cast out; and if any city refused to receive them it should be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgement than for that city. Matt. 10:5-15.
They received a new mission from the Lord as risen: see Luke 24; John 20. And before the ascension the apostles were bidden to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high. This was bestowed at the descent of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. They are also viewed first among the gifts with which the church was endowed by the Head of the body when He ascended up on high. Eph. 4:8-11. These gifts were for "the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." The mystery hitherto hid in God was now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit, namely, that the Gentiles should be joint heirs, and a joint body, and partakers of His promise in Christ Jesus. Eph. 3. Paul was the special vessel to make known this grace. His apostleship occupies a peculiar place, he having been called by the Lord from heaven, and being charged with the gospel of the glory. See PAUL.
On the death of Judas Iscariot, Matthias, an early disciple, was chosen in his place, for there must be (irrespective of Paul, who, as we have seen, held a unique place) twelve apostles as witnesses of His resurrection, Acts 1:22; Rev. 21:14 as there must still be twelve tribes of Israel. James 1:1 ; Rev. 21:12. At the conference of the church in Jerusalem respecting the Gentiles 'the apostles' took a prominent part, with the elders. Acts 15. How many apostles remained at Jerusalem is not recorded: we do not read of 'the twelve' after Acts 6. Tradition gives the various places where they laboured, which may be found under each of their names. Scripture is silent on the subject, in order that the new order of things committed to Paul might become prominent, as the older things connected with Judaism vanished away: cf. 2 Peter 3:15, 16.
There were no successors to the apostles: to be apostles they must have 'seen the Lord.' Acts 1:21, 22; 1 Cor. 9:1; Rev. 2:2. The foundation of the church was laid, and apostolic work being complete the apostles passed away, there remain however, in the goodness of God, such gifts as are needed "till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." Eph. 4:12, 13.
This designation is applied to the early Christian writers, who had known the apostles, or had known those who had been acquainted with them.
1. BARNABAS; 2. CLEMENT; 3. HERMAS; are supposed to be the persons so named in the N.T.: see under their respective names.
4. POLYCARP, Bishop of Smyrna. He wrote an epistle to the Philippians about A.D. 125, Irenaeus says Polycarp was "instructed by the apostles, and was brought into contact with many who had seen Christ." He died a martyr's death. An ancient letter gives a particular account of his martyrdom.
5. IGNATIUS, Bishop of Antioch. Seven epistles are supposed to have been written by him, but they have been grossly interpolated; eight or nine others are wholly spurious. He was a martyr.
6. PAPIAS, Bishop of Hierapolis in Phrygia. He is said to have heard the apostle John. Various writings are attributed to him, but of which only fragments remain. He also died a martyr.
7. An unknown author of an eloquent and interesting epistle to Diognetus. Nearly all the above writings are very different from the scripture except where that is quoted. There is a deep dark line of demarcation between them and the writings which are inspired. Some of them however are found at the end of some of the Greek Testaments and were formerly read in the churches. Happily all these are now eliminated from any association with the N.T. Besides the above there are six apocryphal 'Gospels,' a dozen 'Acts,' four 'Revelations,' the 'Passing away of Mary,' etc.
This term is not used in scripture in the modern sense of a compounder of drugs for medicine; but in that of a compounder of ointments, etc., such as would now be called a 'perfumer,' as it is rendered in the margin of Ex. 30:25, where the holy anointing oil is an ointment compounded "after the art of the apothecary." The same was said of the holy incense. Ex. 30:35; Ex. 37:29. Asa was buried in a tomb filled with sweet odours and spices prepared by the apothecaries' art. 2 Chr. 16:14: cf. also Neh. 3:8. Spices were also carried to the tomb of the Lord to embalm His body.
Son of Nadab, of the tribe of Judah. 1 Chr. 2:30, 31.
It would appear from the arrangements made by Moses that some of the judges were accounted as judges of appeal, but that Moses himself, as having the mind of God, was the ultimate judge. Ex. 18:13-26. It is not probable, when the kingdom was established, that all causes were tried at Jerusalem; but only cases of appeal from the tribal judges; and it was such that Absalom alludes to in 2 Sam. 15:2, 3: see also Deut. 16:18. It is evident from Deut. 17:8-12 that the mind of God was to be sought where He put His name, if the matter was too hard for the judges. The Jewish writers say that before and after the time of Christ on earth, appeals could be carried through the various courts to the Grand Sanhedrim at Jerusalem.
In the case of Paul appealing to Caesar, it was not an appeal from a judgement already given, as is the case in what is now called an appeal; but Paul, knowing the deadly enmity of the Jews, and the corruption of the governors, elected to be judged at the court of Caesar, which, as a Roman, he had the right to do. Acts 25:11. There is One who "cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity." Ps. 98:9.
Appearing of Christ.
This is to be distinguished from Christ coming for His saints, though intimately connected with it, for He will bring them with Him. "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory." Col. 3:4. Here it is the manifestation of Christ with His own, to be followed by the setting up of His kingdom and the apportionment of rewards to His saints. 2 Cor. 5:10. The Lord's servant is exhorted by His appearing and His kingdom to preach the word, etc. 2 Tim. 4:1, 2. The saints will be associated with Christ in His judgements at His appearing. Jude 14, 15. Christ will execute judgement on the Beast and the False Prophet and the western powers. Also on the Assyrian and the eastern powers that will oppress the Jews. The Jews and the ten tribes will be restored to their land in blessing, ushering in the Millennium. See ADVENT, SECOND.
Probably the wife of Philemon, whom Paul addresses in that epistle, ver. 2.
Appii Forum. [Ap'pii For'um]
Station on the Appian Way, the main road from Rome to the Bay of Naples, where brethren went to meet Paul though 43 miles from Rome. Acts 28:15. The road was 18 to 22 feet wide, and parts of the ancient paving stones may still be seen. It was constructed by Appius Claudius, hence its name.
Apple, Apple Tree.
This is generally supposed to refer to the citron but apples grow in Palestine, and the Arabic name for the apple (tuffuh) differs little from the Hebrew word, tappuach. Others believe the quince is alluded to, which is fragrant and of a golden colour. Cant. 2:3, 5; Cant. 7:8; Cant. 8:5; Joel 1:12. In Prov. 25:11 "a word fitly spoken" is like some elegant device, as "apples of gold in pictures [or baskets] of silver."
Apple of the Eye.
1. ishon. Gesenius says this word signifies 'little man' and then 'the little man of the eye; 'that is, "the pupil of the eye in which, as in a mirror, a person sees his own image reflected in miniature." He says "this pleasing image is found in several languages." It is the part of the eye specially to be guarded: God preserved His own as the apple of His eye. Deut. 32:10; Ps. 17:8. His law should be kept as a precious thing. Prov. 7:2.
2. babah, the black or pupil of the eye, or, as others, 'the gate of the eye.' To touch God's people is touching the apple of His eye. Zech. 2:8.
3. bath, daughter. The sense is, Let not the apple (the daughter) of thine eye cease to shed tears. Lam. 2:18. In all places 'the apple of the eye' is a beautifully figurative expression for that which must be tenderly cherished as a most choice treasure.
The word chagorah signifies 'anything girded on.' When Adam and Eve had sinned they discovered that they were naked, and sewed fig-leaves together and made aprons, Gen. 3:7; but were soon conscious that this did not cover their nakedness, for when God called to them they owned that they were naked, and hid behind the trees. This teaches that nothing that man can devise can cover him from the eye of God. God clothed Adam and Eve with coats of skins; it was through death, typical of Christ Himself. In Acts 19:12 the word is σιμικίνθιον, and occurs but that once; it signifies a narrow apron or linen covering.
A converted Jew of Pontus, husband of Priscilla, whom Paul first met at Corinth. Acts 18:2. He and Paul worked together as tent-makers. Aquila and Priscilla had been driven from Rome as Jews by an edict of the emperor Claudius. They travelled with Paul to Ephesus, where they were able to help Apollos spiritually. Acts 18:18-26. They were still at Ephesus when Paul wrote 1 Corinthians (1 Cor. 16:19); and were at Rome when the epistle to the saints there was written, in which Paul said they had laid down their necks for his life, and that to them all the churches, with Paul, gave thanks. Rom. 16:3, 4. In Paul's last epistle he still sends his greeting to them. 2 Tim. 4:19.
A chief city in the Moabite territory. In Jerome's time it was called Areopolis. It is identified with Rabba,, 31 19' N, 35 38' E, about 10 miles from the Dead Sea. Num. 21:15, 28; Isa. 15:1. In other passages the name Ar appears to include the land of the Moabites. Deut. 2:9, 18, 29.
Son of Jether, of the tribe of Asher. 1 Chr. 7:38.
City in the hill country of Judah. Joshua 15:52. Identified with er-Rabiyeh, 31 26' N, 35 2' E.
This occurs as a proper name only once in the A.V. where it should read 'the Arabah,' Joshua 18:18; but it occurs in many other passages where it is translated 'a plain' or 'the plain,' and is also translated 'desert,' 'wilderness,' etc. It refers to the plain situated between two series of hills that run from the slopes of Hermon in the north to the Gulf of Akaba in the far south. It is in this plain that the Jordan runs, and in which is the Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea, also called 'the Sea of the Plain.' About 7 miles south of the Dead Sea the plain is crossed by some hills: all north of this is now called el-Ghor, but the plain south of it retains the name of the Wady-el-Arabah. This latter part is about 100 miles in length, and the northern part about 150, so that for nearly 250 miles this wonderful plain or valley extends.
It might naturally be thought that the Jordan had at some time, after running into the Dead Sea, continued to run south until it poured itself into the Gulf of Akaba. But this is not probable, for the Dead Sea is nearly 1,300 feet below the sea, and the southern part is from end to end higher than the Ghor, The width of the Arabah is in some parts about 15 miles, but further south not more than 3 or 4. The southern end is also called the Wilderness of Zin, and it was in this part of the Arabah that a good deal of the wanderings of the people of Israel took place, before they turned to the east and left the plain on their left.
There can be no doubt that scripture uses the name 'Arabah' for the whole of the plain, both north and south. The northern part is referred to in Deut. 3:17; Deut. 4:49; Joshua 3:16; Joshua 12:3; Joshua 18:18: and the southern part in Deut. 1:1; Deut. 2:8. In other passages, especially in the prophetic books, the plain in general may be alluded to. It extends nearly due north and south, but bears toward the west before it reaches the Gulf.
A very large country is embraced by this name, lying south, south-east, and east of Palestine. It was of old, as it is now by the natives, divided into three districts.
1. Arabia Proper, being the same as the ancient Arabia Felix, embraces the peninsula which extends southward to the Arabian Sea and northward to the desert.
2. Western Arabia, the same as the ancient Arabia Petraea, embraces Sinai and the desert of Petra, extending from Egypt and the Red Sea to about Petra.
3. Northern Arabia, which joins Western Arabia and extends northward to the Euphrates.
1 Kings 10:15; 2 Chr. 9:14; Isa. 21:13; Jer. 25:24; Ezek. 27:21; Gal. 1:17; Gal. 4:25. See ARABIANS.
We read that Abraham sent the sons of Keturah and of his concubines "eastward, to the east country." Gen. 25:6. There were also the descendants of Ishmael and those of Esau. Many of these became 'princes,' and there can be no doubt that their descendants still hold the land. There are some who call themselves Ishmaelite Arabs, and in the south there are still Joktanite Arabs. We read of Solomon receiving gifts or tribute from the kings of Arabia. 1 Kings 10:15. So did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 17:11 ; but in the days of Jehoram they attacked him, plundered his house, and carried away his wives and some of his sons, 2 Chr. 21:17; 2 Chr. 22:1. They were defeated by Uzziah. 2 Chr. 26:7.
During the captivity some Arabians became settlers in Palestine and were enemies to Nehemiah. Cf. Neh. 2:19; Neh. 4:7; Neh. 6:1. Among the nations that had relations with Israel, and against whom judgement is pronounced are the Arabians. Isa. 21:13-17; Jer. 25:24. And doubtless they will be included in the confederacies that will be raised against God's ancient people when Israel is again restored to their land. Cf. Ps. 83.
In the N.T. 'Arabians' were present on the day of Pentecost, but whether they were Jews or proselytes is not stated. Acts 2:11.
1. A royal city of the Canaanites, in the south, near Mount Hor, whose king fought against Israel, but who was by the help of God destroyed, both he and his people. Num. 21:1-3; Num. 33:40; Joshua 12:14; Judges 1:16. (In the two passages in Numbers read 'the Canaanite king of Arad.') It is identified with Tell Arad, 31 17' N, 35 7' E.
2. Son of Beriah, a descendant of Benjamin. 1 Chr. 8:15.
1. Son of Ulla, a descendant of Asher. 1 Chr. 7:39.
2. Father of a family who returned from exile. Ezra 2:5; Neh. 7:10.
3. A Jew whose grand-daughter married Tobiah the Ammonite, who greatly hindered the building of the city Neh. 6:18.
1. Son of Shem. Gen. 10:22, 23; 1 Chr. 1:17.
2. Son of Kemuel, Abraham's nephew. Gen. 22:21.
3. Son of Shamer, of the tribe of Asher. 1 Chr. 7:34.
4. Son of Esrom, and father of Aminadab. Matt. 1:3, 4; Luke 3:33: called RAM, Ruth 4:19; 1 Chr. 2:9, 10.
5. Place in the land of Gilead, east of the Jordan, which Jair captured. 1 Chr. 2:23.
This is the name of a large district lying north of Arabia, north-east of Palestine, east of Phoenicia, south of the Taurus range, and west of the Tigris. It is generally supposed that the name points to the district as the 'Highlands,' though it may be from Aram the son of Shem, as above. The word occurs once untranslated in Num. 23:7, as 'Aram' simply, from whence Balaam was brought, 'out of the mountains of the east;' but it is mostly translated Syria or Syrian. Thus we have -
1. ARAM-DAMMESEK, 2 Sam. 8:5, translated 'Syrians of Damascus,' embracing the highlands of Damascus including the city.
2. ARAM-MAACHAH, 1 Chr. 19:6, translated 'Syria-maachah,' a district on the east of Argob and Bashan.
3. ARAM-BETH-REHOB, 2 Sam. 10:6, translated 'Syrians of Beth-rehob: cf. Judges 18:28, a district in the north, near Dan.
4. ARAM-ZOBAH, 2 Sam. 10:6, 8, translated 'Syrians of Zoba,' a district between and Damascus, but not definitely recognised.
5. ARAM-NAHARAIM signifying 'Aram of two rivers,' Gen. 24:10; Deut. 23:4; Judges 3:8; 1 Chr. 19:6, translated 'Mesopotamia.' The two rivers are the Euphrates and the Tigris. The district would be the highlands from whence the rivers issue to the plain, and the district between the two rivers without extending to the far south.
This word occurs 2 Kings 18:26; Ezra 4:7; and Isa. 36:11, where it is translated 'the Syrian language' or 'tongue;' also in Dan. 2:4, where it is 'Syriack.' Aramaic is the language of Aram, and embraces the language of Chaldee and that of Syria. Mesopotamia, Babylonia and Syria were its proper home. The first time we meet with it in scripture is in Gen. 31:47, where Laban called the heap of witness 'Jegar-sahadutha,' which is Chaldee; whereas Jacob gave it a Hebrew name, 'Galeed.' In 2 Kings 18:26; Isa. 36:11 the heads of the people asked Rab-shakeh to speak to them in Aramaic that the uneducated might not understand what was said. In Ezra 4:7 the letter sent to Artaxerxes was written in Aramaic, and interpreted in Aramaic, that is, the copy of the letter and what follows as far as Ezra 6:18 is in that language and not in Hebrew. So also is Ezra 7:12-26.
In Daniel 2:4 the Chaldeans spoke to the king in Aramaic, the popular language of Babylon, and what follows to the end of chap. 7: is in that language, though commonly called Chaldee. This must not be confounded with the 'learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans' in Dan. 1:4, which is the Aryan dialect and literature of the Chaldeans, and probably the ordinary language which Daniel spoke in the court of Babylon. Jer. 10:11 is a verse in Aramaic.
This language differs from the Hebrew in that it avoids the sibilants. Where the Hebrew has ז z, שׁ sh, צ tz, the Aramaic has ד d, ת th, and ט t. Letters of the same organ are also interchanged, the Aramaic choosing the rough harder sounds. The latter has fewer vowels, with many variations in the conjugation of verbs, etc.
When the ten tribes were carried away, the colonists, who took their place, brought the Aramaic language with them. The Jews also who returned from Babylon brought many words of the same language. And, though it doubtless underwent various changes, this was the language commonly spoken in Palestine when our Lord was on earth, and is the language called HEBREW in the N.T., and is the same as the Chaldee of the Targums. In the ninth century the language in Palestine gave way to the Arabic, and now Aramaic is a living tongue only among the Syrian Christians in the district around Mosul.
A female belonging to Aram. 1 Chr. 7:14.
Descendant of Seir the Horite. Gen. 36:28; 1 Chr. 1:42.
A kingdom which was called upon by God, in conjunction with Medes, Persians, and others, under one captain, Cyrus, to punish Babylon in revenge of Israel. Jer. 51:27. It is identified with Urartu or Urardhu of the Assyrian inscriptions, a district in Armenia, in which is Mount Ararat, on some part of which the ark of Noah rested. Gen. 8:4. The mount is situate 39 45' N, 44 28' E, and its extreme height is about 17,000 feet above the sea, covered with perpetual snow. Objection has been taken to its great height, but it may not have been on its highest part that the ark rested.
The Jebusite from whom David purchased the place on which to build the altar of the Lord. 2 Sam. 24:16-24. Called ORNAN in 1 Chr. 21:15-28. In Samuel it is stated that David bought the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. He there built an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, without anything being said of his building a house for the Lord on the spot: whereas in Chronicles David gave to Ornan 600 shekels of gold by weight for the place. In 2 Chr. 3:1, 2 we learn that the threshing floor was on Mount Moriah, and that the site was prepared by David for the temple, which was built by Solomon. Doubtless therefore 'the place' included a much larger area than was needed for David's altar, and perhaps included the homestead of Araunah. This no doubt formed a part of what is now called the Temple area, or Mosque enclosure, in the S.E. of Jerusalem, but on what part of that area the temple was built is not known.
Arba, Arbah. [Ar'ba, Ar'bah]
Father of Anak, head of the Anakim, who were also giants. Num. 13:33. Their city was Hebron. Gen. 35:27; Joshua 14:15; Joshua 15:13; Joshua 21:11. The 'city of Arba' is elsewhere called KIRJATH-ARBA, which was afterwards called HEBRON.
Native of the northern Arabah, or el-Ghor. 2 Sam. 23:31; Chr. 11:32.
Designation of Paarai, one of David's mighty men. 2 Sam. 23:35.
The word elam occurs only in Ezek. 40:21-36, and in the A.V. is translated 'arch;' but this is judged not to be its meaning, though it is not at all certain as to what it really refers. In the margin it reads, 'galleries' or 'porches,' elsewhere 'vestibule,' and again 'projection.'
Son of Herod the Great by Malthace, a Samaritan. He succeeded his father as Ethnarch of Idumea, Judaea, Samaria, and the maritime cities of Palestine. From his known oppressive character Joseph feared to bring back the infant Jesus into his territory, and turned aside to Galilee, which was under the jurisdiction of his brother Antipas. Matt. 2:22. He reigned 10 years. Josephus relates that soon after his accession he put to death 3,000 Jews: eventually, for his tyranny to the Jews and the Samaritans he was deposed and banished to Vienne in Gaul.
People removed from Assyria to Samaria. They joined in the petition to Artaxerxes against the Jews. Ezra 4:9. The origin of the name is unknown.
City on the border of Ephraim. Joshua 16:2. Identified with Ain Arik, 31 54' N, 35 8' E.
A Christian teacher at Colosse, whom Paul calls his fellow soldier, and exhorts to fulfil his ministry. Col. 4:17; Philemon 2.
The designation of Hushai, David's friend. 2 Sam. 15:32; 2 Sam. 16:16; 2 Sam. 17:5, 14; 1 Chr. 27:33.
The word ash or aish has always been a difficult one to translate, the versions differing much; but it is now pretty well agreed that the allusion is not to the star known as Arcturus, but to the constellation known as the Great Bear; 'his sons' are supposed to be the stars in the tail of the bear. In the northern hemisphere this constellation is seen all the year round, with its apparent ceaseless motion around the north star, which none but the mighty God can guide. Job 9:9; Job 38:32. It is translated 'the Bear' in the R.V.
1. Son of Benjamin. Gen. 46:21.
2. Son of Bela, son of Benjamin (called ADDAR in 1 Chr. 8:3), whose descendants are ARDITES. Num. 26:40.
Son of Caleb, son of Hezron. 1 Chr. 2:18.
Areli, Arelites. [Are'li, Are'lites]
Son of Gad, and his descendants. Gen. 46:16; Num. 26:17.
One connected with the court of Areopagus at Athens, where Dionysius heard Paul and "clave to him and believed." Acts 17:34.
Areopagus, or Mars Hill. [Areop'agus, or Mars' Hill]
The hill of Ares, or Mars. Here was held the highest and most ancient and venerable court of justice in Athens for moral and political matters. It was composed of those who had held the office of Archon unless expelled for misconduct. Paul, who had been disputing daily in the market place, was conducted by some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers to Mars' Hill, not for any judicial purpose, but doubtless that they might hear him more quietly. Here he delivered his address respecting God, so suited to the heathen philosophers who heard him, and which was not without its fruit. Acts 17:19. The Greek words are Areios-pagos, but are translated Mars' Hill in Acts 17:22. The court was situate on a rocky hill opposite the west end of the Acropolis. Sixteen stone steps still lead up to the spot.
The common appellation (like Pharaoh for Egyptian kings) of the Arabian kings of the northern part of Arabia. The deputy of Aretas in Damascus sought to arrest Paul. 2 Cor. 11:32. This king, who was father-in-law to Herod Antipas, made war against him for divorcing his daughter, and defeated him. Vitellius, governor of Syria was ordered to take Aretas dead or alive; but Tiberius died before this was accomplished. Caligula, who succeeded to the empire, banished Antipas. He made certain changes in the East, and it is supposed that Damascus was detached from the province of Syria and given to Aretas.
1. A district lying to the south of Damascus and which formed a part of Bashan, where the giants resided. It had at one time 60 cities, which were ruled over by Og. Its name signifies 'stony' and it forms a remarkable plateau of basalt, which rises some 30 feet above the surrounding fertile plain, and extends 22 miles N. and S. and 14 miles E. and W., the boundary line being marked by the Bible word chebel, which signifies 'as by a rope.' Og was conquered by Moses, and Jair of Manasseh took the fortified cities, and it became a part of Manasseh's lot. Later it was called Trachonitis, and is now known as el-Lejah. There are many houses still in the district which, because of their massive proportions, are supposed to have been built by the giants. Deut. 3:3, 4, 13, 14; 1 Kings 4:13.
2. One, apparently in the service of Pekahiah, killed by Pekah. 2 Kings 15:25.
Son of Haman, slain and hanged. Esther 9:9.
Son of Haman, slain and hanged. Esther 9:8.
One, apparently in the service of Pekahiah, killed by Pekah. 2 Kings 15:25.
1. Symbolical name of Jerusalem, signifying 'Lion of God,' probably in reference to the lion being the emblem of Judah. Isa. 29:1, 2, 7. In the margin of Ezek. 43:15, the altar is called the 'lion of God;' but the word is slightly different and is translated by some the 'hearth of God,' the place for offering all sacrifices to God.
2. One whom Ezra sent to Iddo at Casiphia. Ezra 8:16.
3. In 2 Sam. 23:20; 1 Chr. 11:22, we read that Benaiah slow two 'lion-like men,' which some prefer to translate 'two [sons] of Ariel.' The Hebrew is literally 'two lions of God.'
The city of Joseph, the 'honourable counsellor,' who was permitted by Pilate to take down the body of the Lord and bury it in his own new to tomb. Matt. 27:57; Mark 15:43; Luke 23:51; John 19:38. It has not been identified, but has been supposed to be the same as Ramah, the birth-place of Samuel.
1. King of Ellasar in the East. Gen. 14:1, 9.
2. Captain of Nebuchadnezzar's guard. Dan. 2:14, 15, 24, 25.
Son of Haman the Agagite, slain and hanged. Esther 9:9.
A Macedonian of Thessalonica, companion of Paul on several journeys and on his way to Rome. Paul once calls him 'my fellow prisoner.' Acts 19:29; Acts 20:4; Acts 27:2; Col. 4:10; Philemon 24.
A resident at Rome whose household Paul saluted Rom. 16:10.
Ark of God.
This is also called 'ARK OF THE COVENANT,' 'ARK OF THE TESTIMONY,' 'ARK OF JEHOVAH.' The sacred chest belonging to the Tabernacle and the Temple. It was made of shittim wood, overlaid within and without with pure gold. It was 2-1/2 cubits long, 1-1/2 cubits in breadth, and the same in height, with a crown or cornice of gold. On each side were rings of gold in which were inserted the staves by which it was carried. Its lid, on which were the two cherubim made wholly of gold, was called the MERCY-SEAT, q.v. The ark was typical of Christ, in that it figured the manifestation of divine righteousness (gold) in man; the mercy-seat was Jehovah's throne, the place of His dwelling on earth. In the ark were placed the two tables of stone (the righteousness demanded by God from man), and afterwards the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded. For the place of the ark and the manner of its being moved see the TABERNACLE.
In the first journey of the children of Israel from Mount Sinai the ark of the covenant went before them to "search out a resting place for them," type of God's tender care for them. When the ark set forward Moses said, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered;" and when it rested he said, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel." Num. 10:33-36. When they arrived at Jordan, the ark was carried by the priests 2000 cubits in front of the host that they might know the way they must go, Joshua 3:3, 4, and the ark remained on the shoulders of the priests in the bed of the river, until all had passed over. Joshua 3:17. This typifies association with Christ's death and resurrection.
The ark accompanied them in their first victory: it was carried by the priests around Jericho. It is only in the power of Christ in resurrection that the saint can be victorious. The tabernacle was set up at Shiloh, and doubtless the ark was placed therein, Joshua 18:1, though it may have been carried elsewhere. In Eli's days when Israel was defeated they fetched the ark from Shiloh that it might save them, but they were again defeated, and the ark, in which they had placed their confidence instead of in Jehovah, was seized by the Philistines. 1 Sam. 5:1. When put into the house of their god Dagon the idol fell down before it on two occasions, and on the second was broken to pieces. Subsequently it was taken from Ashdod to Gath, and from Gath to Ekron, and the people were smitten by the hand of God in each city.
After seven months a new cart was made, to which two milch kine were yoked, and the ark sent back to the Israelites with a trespass offering to the God of Israel. The kine, contrary to nature, went away from their calves, and went direct to Beth-shemesh, for it was God who restored the ark. There God smote the men of the place for looking into the ark. It was then taken to Kirjath-jearim and placed in the house of Abinadab. 1 Sam. 6; 1 Sam. 7:1, 2. See ABINADAB.
In after years David fetched the ark from thence on a new cart, but the ark being shaken, Uzzah put forth his hand to steady it, and was smitten of God. This frightened David and the ark was carried aside to the house of Obed-edom. The law had directed how the ark was to be carried, and the new cart was following the example of the Philistines: Uzzah disregarded God's plain direction and heeded not the sacredness of that which represented the presence of God. David however, hearing that God had blessed the house of Obed-edom, again went for the ark, and now it was carried by the Levites according to divine order, and with sacrifices and rejoicing it was placed in the tabernacle or tent that David had pitched for it. 2 Sam. 6.
When Solomon had built the temple, the ark was removed thither, and the staves by which it had been carried were taken out: the ark had now found its resting place in the kingdom of Solomon, whose reign is typical of the millennium. It is significant too that now there were only the two tables of stone in the ark, 1 Kings 8:1-11: the manna had ceased when they ate of the old corn of the land, which is typical of a heavenly Christ; and the witness of Aaron's rod was no longer needed now they were in the kingdom. The wilderness circumstances, in which the manna and the priesthood of Christ were so necessary, were now passed. These are both mentioned in Heb. 9:4, for there the tabernacle, and not the temple is in contemplation.
No further mention is made of the ark: it is supposed to have been carried away with the sacred vessels to Babylon, and to have never been returned: if so there was no ark in the second temple nor in the temple built by Herod, nor do we read of the ark in connection with the temple described by Ezekiel. In Rev. 11:19 the ark of God's covenant is seen in the temple of God in heaven: symbol here of the resumption of God's dealings with His earthly people Israel.
Ark of Noah.
The vessel constructed by the command of God, by which Noah and his household and some of every living creature of the earth were saved when the world was destroyed by the flood. Precise instructions were given by God as to the construction of the ark. It was to be made of 'gopher' wood, a kind known at the time, but which cannot now be identified with certainty; and it was to be pitched within and without with pitch, or bitumen, to make it water-tight.
Its proportions were to be 300 cubits long, 50 cubits broad, and 30 cubits high. If the cubit be taken at 18 inches, its length would have been 450 feet, its breadth 75 feet and its height 45 feet. If the cubit used had been 21 inches, the dimensions would be one-sixth larger.
A window was to be made to the ark. Gen. 6:16. The word tsohar signifies 'a place of light' and was probably placed in the roof, and may have served in some way for ventilation as well as for giving light. Another word for window is used in Gen. 8:6 (challon) which could be opened from the inside. This word is used for the windows or casements of houses, and would give ventilation. In Gen. 6:16, after speaking of the window, it says, "and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above;" it is a question whether this refers to the size of the window or whether the word 'it' refers to the ark. It has been said that the feminine suffix, which is rendered 'it' cannot refer to the word window, which is masculine: so that it is possible the cubit refers to the roof; that the middle of the roof should be raised, giving a cubit for the pitch of the roof. A door was to be made in the side of the ark; and the ark was to be divided into three stories. 'Rooms,' or 'nests' (margin) are also mentioned. Gen. 6:14.
Such is the description given us of the form of the ark. It was by faith Noah prepared the ark, by which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. Heb. 11:7. It is thus referred to in 1 Peter 3:20, 21, "into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water: which figure also now saves you, [even] baptism, not a putting away of [the] filth of flesh, but [the] demand as before God of a good conscience, by [the] resurrection of Jesus Christ."
It may just be added that the form of the ark was not intended for navigation amid storms and billows, but it was exactly suited for the purpose for which it was constructed. A ship for freight was once made in like proportions, to be used in quiet waters, and was declared to be a great success.
Various questions have been raised as to the veracity of the Bible account of the Deluge, for which see FLOOD.
Ark of Bulrushes.
The little boat or cradle in which Moses was placed by his mother. It was made of bulrushes, or rather paper-reeds or papyrus which grew in the river Nile. It was daubed with slime and with pitch, that is, most probably first covered with wet earth or clay, and then with bitumen. Ex. 2:3, 5. Some of the heathen writers speak of the papyrus-woven craft of the Nile. God answered the faith of the parents, and Moses was drawn out of the water to be the saviour of His people.
Tribe descended from Canaan, son of Ham; it probably resided in Arca, in the north of Phoenicia, about 15 miles north of Tripoli, now called Tell Arka. Gen. 10:17; 1 Chr. 1:15.
The member of the body which is capable of lifting burdens and defending the person: it is used symbolically for the power and strength of God on behalf of His saints. Ex. 15:16; Ps. 77:15; Isa. 51:9; Isa. 53:1. The arm of Jehovah is often spoken of in the O.T. It redeemed, Ex. 6:6; etc.; gathers His own, Isa. 40:11; and rules for Him, Isa. 40:10, as in the kingdom. It is a holy arm, Isa. 52:10; Ps. 98:1; and it is a glorious arm, Isa. 63:12. The arm of the Lord is revealed to souls where there is repentance and faith in the report which God sends. Isa. 53:1; Rom. 10:16. It is to be trusted in even by the isles of the Gentiles, that is, by sinners everywhere in creation. Isa. 51:5.
The Hebrew name of the place where the kings of the earth and of the whole world will be gathered together to make war against the Lord Jesus in the great day of Almighty God. Rev. 16:16. There seems to be an allusion to the great battle field of Palestine in the Esdraelon, and to the Megiddo mentioned in Judges 5:19; 1 Kings 4:12; 2 Kings 23:29, 30. The word itself is translated 'the mountain of slaughter,' and may be used symbolically for the destruction that will surely fall upon the enemies of the Lord Jesus.
This name occurs in the A.V. in 2 Kings 19:37; Isa. 37:38, as the place to which two sons of Sennacherib fled after killing their father; but in both these passages the Hebrew word is Ararat. Armenia occurs in the LXX in the passage in Isaiah. Armenia lies west of the Caspian Sea, and extends northward of 38 N. lat. It is now partly in the Russian and partly in the Turkish empires.
Son of Saul and Rizpah, hanged by the Gibeonites. 2 Sam. 21:8.
None of the Hebrew words translated 'armour' refer definitely to what is understood now by armour worn on the person. Saul armed David with his 'armour,' 1 Sam. 17:38, but the word used is also translated 'clothes,' etc., and it may refer to Saul's warrior-dress. The articles named are somewhat more definite.
1. Saul put on David a 'HELMET of brass.' These were raised a little above the head, as may be seen by some of the sculptures from Nineveh. 1 Sam. 17:38; Ezek. 23:24: the word is qoba. Another word, koba, meaning the same, is found in 1 Sam. 17:5; 2 Chr. 26:14; Isa. 59:17; Jer. 46:4; Ezek. 27:10; Ezek. 38:5.
2. COAT OF MAIL. Saul put on David a 'Coat of Mail,' shiryon. 1 Sam. 17:5, 38. This word is translated 'HABERGEON ' in 2 Chr. 26:14 ; Neh 4:16, which also signifies 'coat of mail,' and there is a similar word in Job 41:26. It was made of brass scales fastened together. The weight of Goliath's coat of mail was 5,000 shekels.
3. GREAVES. The giant wore Greaves of brass upon his legs. 1 Sam. 17:6. The word is mitschah, and occurs nowhere else.
4. TARGET. He had a Target of brass between his shoulders, 1 Sam. 17:6: the word is kidon, and is elsewhere translated both 'shield' and 'spear.' In this case it was probably a small spear carried between the shoulders.
5. SHIELD. A Shield was carried before him. This was a tsinnah, a shield of large size to protect the whole body, with a large boss in the centre rising to a point which could be used as a weapon. It is employed figuratively for God's protecting care of His people. Ps. 5:12; Ps. 91:4. The same word is translated BUCKLER. Ps. 35:2; Ezek. 23:24; Ezek. 26:8, etc.
Another word is used for a smaller shield, magen, and this is the word which occurs most commonly in the O.T., especially in the Psalms, referring to God's protection, as Ps. 28:7; Ps. 33:20; Ps. 84:11; Ps. 119:114, etc. The same word is translated BUCKLER. 2 Sam. 22:31; 1 Chr. 5:18; Cant. 4:4; Jer. 46:3, etc.
The word shelet is translated Shield, but is also applied to Shields of gold, 2 Sam. 8:7, and those suspended for ornament. Ezek. 27:11. It occurs also in 2 Kings 11:10; 1 Chr. 18:7; 2 Chr. 23:9; Cant. 4:4; Jer. 51:11.
In the N.T. 'armour' is used symbolically.
1. ὅπλα in contrast to 'the works of darkness' we are exhorted to put on 'the armour of light.' Rom. 13:12. Paul and his fellow-labourers commended themselves as God's ministers by the "armour, or arms, of righteousness on the right hand and on the left." 2 Cor. 6:7.
2. πανοπλία, 'whole armour.' One stronger than Satan takes away all his 'armour.' Luke 11:22. The Christian is exhorted to put on the 'whole armour of God,' the panoply, that he may stand in the evil day in his conflict with the spiritual powers of wickedness in the heavenlies. Eph. 6:11, 13. See BREASTPLATE, HELMET, etc.
An attendant on a warrior, filling a place of trust and honour. When Saul loved David he made him his armourbearer. 1 Sam. 16:21. On Saul being wounded, his armourbearer refused to kill him; but when Saul was dead the armourbearer fell upon his sword and died also. 1 Sam. 31:5.
In Neh. 3:19 the word is nesheq also translated 'armour.' In Cant. 4:4 it is talpiyyoth, 'armoury' or heap of swords. In Jer. 50:25 it is otsar, signifying 'treasury.'
The offensive arms found in the O.T. are:
1. The SWORD, for which several Hebrew words are used: a. baraq, often translated 'lightning;' it is 'glittering sword' in Job 20:25. b. chereb, a sword, as laying waste. It is the word commonly used in the O.T. for sword (everywhere indeed except in the references given here under the other words): it was a straight tapering weapon, with two edges and a sharp point. Ps. 149:6; Isa. 14:19. It is used metaphorically for keen and piercing words, as in Ps. 57:4; Ps. 64:3. c. retsach, an undefined slaying weapon, translated 'sword' only in Ps. 42:10. d. shelach, a missile of death, as a dart. Job 33:18; Job 36:12; Joel 2:8. e. pethichoth, from 'to open,' is translated 'drawn sword' in Ps. 55:21.
2. SPEARS. a. chanith, thus named as being flexible: it is the word mostly used for the spear. 1 Sam. 13:19; Ps. 57:4. It is this weapon that will be beaten into pruning hooks. Isa. 2:4; Micah 4:3. b. kidon, a smaller kind of lance, or javelin. Joshua 8:18, 26; Job 41:29; Jer. 6:23. c. tselatsal, harpoon. Job 41:7. d. qayin, lance, 2 Sam. 21:16. e. romach, spear used by heavy-armed troops, the iron head of a spear. Judges 5:8, etc. The pruning hooks are to be beaten into spears in the time of God's judgements. Joel 3:10.
3. BOW, from which arrows are discharged, qesheth, generally made of wood, but sometimes of steel or brass. Job 20:24. It is constantly found in the O.T. from Genesis to Zechariah. It is used to express punishment from God, Lam. 2:4; Lam. 3:12; and of men to show their power to injure. Ps. 37:14, 15. 'A deceitful bow' expresses a man who fails just when his aid is most needed, as when a bow breaks suddenly. Ps. 78:57; Hosea 7:16.
4. The SLING, by which stones are discharged, qela. It was by means of this that David smote Goliath. 1 Sam. 17:40, 49, 50. Of the Benjamites there were 700 men lefthanded; "every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss." Judges 20:16. (In Prov. 26:8 occurs another word for sling margemah, but the passage is considered better translated "as he that putteth a precious stone in a heap of stones," as in the margin.)
5. 'ENGINES,' with which Uzziah shot arrows and great stones. 2 Chr. 26:15.
It must be remembered that Israel were the hosts of Jehovah, keeping His charge and fighting His battles. Ex. 12:41; Joshua 5:14. It appears that all who reached the age of twenty years were contemplated as able to bear arms, Num. 1:3; and they marched and encamped in 4 divisions of 3 tribes each, with a captain over every tribe. The subdivisions were into thousands and hundreds, Num. 31:14, and into families. Joshua 7:17. There were also trumpet calls, Num. 10:9 (cf. 1 Cor. 14:8), and all the appearance of careful organisation. Until the time of the kings this natural or tribal organisation seems to have been usual, but in the time of Saul there was a body guard, 1 Sam. 13:2, and a captain of the host, 1 Sam. 17:55. In David's days those heroes who were with him in the cave of Adullam formed the nucleus of his 'mighty men.' 2 Sam. 23:8-39. They were devoted to the service of God's king. David afterwards organised a monthly militia of 24,000 man under 12 captains. 1 Chr. 27:1-15.
The general gradation of ranks was into privates; 'men of war;' officers; Solomon's 'servants;' captains or 'princes;' and others variously described as head captains, or knights or staff officers; with rulers of his chariots and his horsemen. 1 Kings 9:22. It may be noticed that horses having been forbidden, Deut. 17:16, it was not until Solomon's time that this was organised, though David had reserved horses for a hundred chariots from the spoil of the Syrians. 2 Sam. 8:4. Solomon, trading with Egypt, 1 Kings 10:28, 29, enlarged their number until the force amounted to 1,400 chariots, and 12,000 horsemen, 1 Kings 10:26; 2 Chr. 1:14. Every able man being a soldier gave David the immense army of 1,570,000 men that 'drew sword.' 1 Chr. 21:5. After the division, Judah under Abijah had an army of 400,000 'valiant men,' and Israel at the same time of 800,000 'chosen men.' Afterwards Asa had 580,000 'mighty men of valour;' and Jehoshaphat, who had waxed great exceedingly, had as many as 1,160,000 men, besides those left in the fenced cities. 2 Chr. 17:14-19.
In the N.T. a few references are made to the Roman army. A 'Legion' was a body that contained within itself all the gradations of the army. It might be called under the empire, in round numbers, a force of not more than 6,000 men. Every legion at times contained 10 cohorts of 600 each; every cohort 3 maniples of 200; and every maniple 2 centuries of 100: hence the name of centurion or commander of 100 men, as found in Acts 10:1, 22, etc. Each legion was presided over by 6 chiefs, χιλίαρθος, each commanding 1,000 men, mostly translated 'chief captain,' as in Acts 21:31-37, etc.: it is 'high captain' in Mark 6:21; and 'captain' in John 18:12; Rev. 19:18. A cohort, σπεῖρα, is translated 'band' in Acts 10:1; Acts 21:31, etc. A 'quaternion' embraced 4 soldiers. Acts 12:4.
The head quarters of the Roman troops was at Caesarea, with a cohort at Jerusalem; but at the time of the feast, when, alas, the mutinous disposition of the Jews was sure to appear, additional troops were present in the city but without their standards of the eagle, etc., which were especially obnoxious to the Jews. Though the Romans were God's rod to punish them, their stiff necks could not bow, nor receive the punishment as from Jehovah.
Descendant of David. 1 Chr. 3:21.
Ravine or wady with its mountain torrent, which formed the border between Moab and Ammon, now known as Wady Mojib. It has sources both north and south which unite, and its stream running nearly east and west, rushes through a deep ravine and falls into the Dead Sea at about its centre north and south. Num. 21:13-28; Num. 22:36; Deut. 2:24, 36; Judges 11:13-26; Isa. 16:2; Jer. 48:20; etc.
Arod, Arodi, Arodites. [A'rod, Aro'di, Aro'dites]
Son of Gad, and his descendants. Gen. 46:16; Num. 26:17.
1. City 'before Rabbah,' that is, near Rabbath Ammon, in the valley of the Jabbok, built or rebuilt by the tribe of Gad. Num. 32:34; Joshua 13:25; 2 Sam. 24:5.
2. Moabite city on the north bank of the Arnon. Deut. 2:36; Joshua 13:9, 16; Judges 11:26; 2 Kings 10:33. Identified with Arair, 31 27' N, 35 43' E.
3. District near Damascus. Isa. 17:2.
4. City in Judah, S.E. of Beersheba. 1 Sam. 30:28. Identified with Ararah, 31 11' N, 34 56' E.
Designation of Hothan, father of two of David's captains. 1 Chr. 11:44.
Arpad, Arphad. [Ar'pad, Ar'phad]
Fortified city near Hamath. 2 Kings 18:34; 2 Kings 19:13; Isa. 10:9; Isa. 36:19; Isa. 37:13; Jer. 49:23.
Son of Shem, born two years after the flood, from whom Abraham descended. Gen. 10:22, 24; Gen. 11:10-13; 1 Chr. 1:17,18, 24. Stated as the father of Cainan in Luke 3:36. See CAINAN.
With the bow, a common weapon of the ancients. We know not of what wood the arrows of the Israelites were made. Apparently the arrows were sometimes poisoned. Job 6:4; Ps. 120:4; Num. 24:8; Deut. 32:23, etc. Arrows are used metaphorically for the judgements of God, Ps. 38:2; Ps. 45:5: also for anything sharp and painful, as smiting by the tongue. Jer. 9:8.
1. Persian king, identified as the magian impostor who pretended to be Smerdis the brother of Cambyses. When appealed to by the adversaries of the Jews, he stopped the building of the temple. He was slain after a reign of eight months. Ezra 4:7, 8, 11, 23.
2. Another Persian king identified as Artaxerxes Longimanus B.C. 474-434, son of Xerxes, the Ahasuerus of Esther. He greatly favoured both Ezra and Nehemiah; he beautified the temple or bore the expense of its being done, Ezra 7:27, and under his protection the wall of the city was finished. Ezra 6:14; Ezra 7:1-21; Ezra 8:1; Neh. 2:1; Neh. 5:14; Neh. 13:6. It was in the 20th year of this king that the command to build the city was given, from which began the dates of the prophecy of the Seventy weeks of Daniel, which is fixed by Usher and Hengstenburg at B.C. 454-5. For the succession of the Persian kings see PERSIA.
Companion of Paul at Nicopolis. Titus 3:12.
Name of the heathen goddess Diana, as given in the Greek of Acts 19:24-35: she was regarded as presiding over the productive and nutritive powers of nature.
A general name for skilled artisans, whether in metal, stone, or wood. Tubal-cain was the first named as an artificer in brass and iron. Jubal was the father of all such as handled, or invented and made, the harp and the organ. Cain also built a city. Gen. 4:17, 21, 22. In the above we see the application of the arts by man at a distance from God to promote their own welfare in independence of God. In after times the spirit of wisdom was given to Bezaleel for the work of the tabernacle in "all manner of workmanship." Ex. 35:31: cf. also 1 Chr. 29:5; 2 Chr. 34:11. It would seem that the Jews never afterwards lost this skill, as the remains of the walls of Jerusalem indicate. Nebuchadnezzar carried off all the craftsmen (same word as artificers) and smiths from Jerusalem, 2 Kings 24:14, and he may have made use of their skill to adorn Babylon.
A general term for tools, armour, etc. In 1 Sam. 20:40 it refers to the bow and arrows Jonathan had used.
The third commissariat district of Solomon, probably the rich corn-growing country in the Shephelah or low hills of Judah. 1 Kings 4:10.
City or district apparently near Shechem, the abode of Abimelech. Judges 9:41. Identified with el-Ormeh, 32 9' N, 35 19' E.
Island on the Phoenician coast: now called Ruad, about 34 51' N, 35 52' E. Ezek. 27:8, 11.
Family name of one of the sons of Canaan. Gen. 10:18; 1 Chr. 1:16: doubtless connected with the island of Arvad.
Steward of Elah, king of Israel. 1 Kings 16:9.
1. Great grandson of Solomon and king of Judah, B.C. 955-914. "Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, as did David his father." He removed the idols his fathers had made, 1 Kings 15:11, and he deposed Maachah, his mother, or perhaps grandmother, from being queen because she favoured idolatry. On the country being invaded by the Ethiopians with a million troops and 300 chariots, he cried to the Lord, who fought for him, and the enemy was smitten. He was counselled by Azariah not to forsake the Lord, which led to the spoil being offered to God, and to the king and his people entering into a covenant to seek the Lord.
Subsequently Asa was threatened by Baasha king of Israel who began to build Ramah, a fortified city only a few miles from Jerusalem. To stop this Asa paid a large sum of money to Benhadad king of Syria to invade Israel. This was for the time successful: the building of Ramah was stopped, and Asa carried away the stones thereof and built Geba and Mizpah.
This recourse for aid to the king of Syria, who was an idolater, was very displeasing to God, and the king was rebuked by Hanani the seer. While Asa trusted in the Lord he had deliverance, but having relied on the king of Syria, he should have war all his days. Asa, alas, did not humble himself, but put Hanani in prison, and oppressed some of the people. He was disciplined in his person, for he was diseased in his feet, and the disease increased exceedingly; yet he sought not the Lord, but to the physicians (perhaps these were healers by magic arts in connection with idolatry, on which God's blessing could not be asked) and he died after a reign of 41 years. 1 Kings 15.; 2 Chr. 14, 15, 16.; Matt. 1:7, 8.
2. A Levite, the father of Berechiah. 1 Chr. 9:16.
1. Nephew of David, being son of his sister Zeruiah; he was a valiant man and one of David's captains; was slain by Abner while pursuing him. 2 Sam. 2:18-32; 2 Sam. 3:27, 30; 1 Chr. 11:26; 1 Chr. 27:7.
2. Levite sent by Jehoshaphat to teach the law in the cities of Judah. 2 Chr. 17:8.
3. Levite in Hezekiah's time, an overseer of tithes, etc. 2 Chr. 31:13.
4. Father of Jonathan who returned from exile. Ezra 10:15.
Asahiah, Asaiah. [Asahi'ah, Asai'ah]
1. An officer sent by Josiah to Huldah the prophetess after the book of the law had been found. 2 Kings 22:12, 14; 2 Chr. 34:20.
2. Descendant of Simeon. 1 Chr. 4:36.
3. Descendant of Merari. 1 Chr. 6:30.
4. A Shilonite who became a dweller in Jerusalem. 1 Chr. 9:5.
5. Descendant of Merari who assisted in bringing up the ark from Obed-edom's house, 1 Chr. 15:6, 11 (possibly the same as No. 3).
1. A leader of the choir in David's time, and once called a 'seer.' 2 Chr. 29:30. He was descended from Gershom the Levite. 1 Chr. 6:39; 1 Chr. 15:17, 19; 1 Chr. 16:5, 7, 37, etc. Twelve psalms are attributed to him, namely, 50, 73 to 83. His office seems to have been hereditary. Ezra 2:41; Ezra 3:10; Neh. 7:44, etc.
2. Father of Joah recorder to Hezekiah. 2 Kings 18:18, 37; Isa. 36:3, 22.
3. A Levite, whose descendants dwelt in Jerusalem after the exile. 1 Chr. 9:15.
4. A Korhite, whose posterity were porters in the tabernacle in the time of David. 1 Chr. 26:1.
5. An officer, probably a Jew, controller of the forests of king Artaxerxes in Judaea. Neh. 2:8.
Son of Jehaleleel, a descendant of Judah. 1 Chr. 4:16.
Son of Asaph appointed by David to the service of song. 1 Chr. 25:2. Supposed by some to be the same as JESHARELAH in 1 Chr. 25:14, as noted in the margin; and by others to be the same as AZAREEL in 1 Chr. 25:18.
This term is constantly applied to the return of the Lord Jesus Christ to heaven from whence He came. John 3:13. Leading His eleven apostles out as far as Bethany, on the eastern slope of the Mount of Olives, in the act of blessing them He ascended up to heaven, and a cloud hid Him from their sight. Mark 16:19; Luke 24:50, 51; Acts 1:9. The ascension of the Lord Jesus is a momentous fact for His saints: the One who bore their sins on the cross has been received up in glory, and sits on the right hand of God.
As forerunner He has entered into heaven for the saints, and has been made a high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Heb. 6:20. His ascension assured, according to His promise, the descent of the Holy Spirit, which was accomplished at Pentecost. John 16:7; Acts 1:4, 8; Acts 2:1-47. As ascended He became Head of His body the church, Eph. 1:22, and gave gifts to men, among which gifts are evangelists who preach to the world, and pastors and teachers to care for and instruct the saints. Ps. 68:18; Eph. 4:8-13.
His ascension is a demonstration through the presence of the Holy Spirit that sin is in the world and righteousness in heaven, for the very One they rejected has been received by the Father into heaven. John 16:10. The ascension is also a tremendous fact for Satan: the prince of this world has been judged who led the world to put the Lord to death; and in His ascension He led captivity captive, having broken the power of death in which men were held, Eph. 4:8, for He had in the cross spoiled principalities and powers and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. Col. 2:15.
Above all, the ascension is a glorious fact for the blessed Lord Himself. Jehovah said unto Him, "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool." Ps. 110:1. He has taken His place as man where man never was before, and He is also glorified with the glory which He had before the world was, besides the glory which He graciously shares with His saints. John 17:5, 22.
Daughter of Poti-pherah, priest of On, wife of Joseph, and mother of Manasseh and Ephraim. Gen. 41:45, 50; Gen. 46:20.
The particular tree pointed out by the Hebrew word oren is not known. Isa. 44:14. The LXX and the Vulgate call it 'pine.'
1. Levitical city in Judah. Joshua 15:42; 1 Chr. 6:59: not identified.
2. City in Simeon. Joshua 19:7; 1 Chr. 4:32. See AIN.
A family apparently descended from Shelah who 'wrought fine linen.' 1 Chr. 4:21.
Ashbel, Ashbelites. [Ash'bel, Ash'belites]
Son of Benjamin and family descended from him. Gen. 46:21; Num. 26:38; 1 Chr. 8:1.
One of the five chief cities of the Philistines. It was assigned to Judah, but was not subdued by them, and thus became a thorn in their sides. Num. 33:55. It was to this city that the ark was taken by the Philistines, and where Dagon their fish-god fell before it. 1 Sam. 5:1-7. Uzziah broke down its wall, and built cities near it. 2 Chr. 26:6. It was on the high road from Palestine to Egypt which doubtless led Sargon king of Assyria to take it by his general, about B.C. 714. Isa. 20:1. Herodotus records that Psammetichus, king of Egypt, besieged it for 29 years. Jeremiah speaks of Ashdod as one of the places which was made to drink of the fury of God. Jer. 25:15-20. The Maccabees destroyed the city, but Gabinius rebuilt it at the time of the conquest of Judaea by the Romans, B.C. 55, and it was afterwards assigned on the death of Herod the Great to his sister Salome. It was situated about 3 miles from the Mediterranean, and midway between Gaza and Joppa. It is now called Esdud, or Esdood, 31 46' N, 34 40' E, and is wretched in the extreme, though lying in a fertile plain. It is called in the N.T. AZOTUS, where Philip was found after baptising the eunuch. Acts 8:40. Its inhabitants are referred to as ASHDODITES, ASHDOTHITES. Joshua 13:3; Neh. 4:7.
This is once translated 'springs of Pisgah,' pointing it out as a place from whence water issued, being the sides of the mountain called Pisgah, or it may apply to the range of mountains on the east of the Dead Sea, of which Pisgah was a part. Deut. 3:17; Deut. 4:49; Joshua 12:3; Joshua 13:20. It lies due east of the north end of the Dead Sea, and is now called Ayun Musa.
Asher, Aser. [Ash'er, A'ser]
Eighth son of Jacob by Zilpah, Leah's handmaid. Gen. 13. The signification of the name as in the margin is 'happy.' His posterity formed one of the twelve tribes. Its portion in the land was in the extreme north, extending northward from Mount Carmel. It was bounded on the east by Naphtali, and on the south east by Zebulon. It was doubtless intended that their west border should have been the Great Sea, but we read that they did not drive out the inhabitants of Accho, Zidon, Ahlab, Achzib, Helbah, Aphik and Rehob; but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites. Judges 1:31, 32. This left a tract of land on the sea coast unoccupied by Asher.
When Jacob called his sons about him to tell them what should befall them in the last days, he said of Asher, "Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties." Gen. 49:20. When Moses ordained that certain of the tribes should stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people, and certain others on Mount Ebal to curse, Asher was one of those chosen to stand on the latter. Deut. 27:13. And when Moses blessed the tribes before he died, he said of Asher, "Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil. Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be." Deut. 33:24, 25.
In Jacob's prophecy as to this tribe there is depicted the future blessing of all Israel after the salvation of the Lord has come in, announced at the close of Dan's apostasy. In Deuteronomy, what is future also as to Israel, is probably presented, but connected rather with the government of God in His hands who is King in Jeshurun.
When Deborah and Barak went to the war they had to lament in their song that Asher abode by the sea coast, and came not to their aid, Judges 5:17; but when subsequently the Midianites and the Amalekites invaded the land Asher responded to the call of Gideon. Judges 6:35; Judges 7:23. At the secession of the ten tribes Asher became a part of Israel, and very little more is heard of this tribe. When Hezekiah proclaimed a solemn passover and sent invitations to the cities of Israel as well as to Judah, though many laughed the messengers to scorn, divers of Asher humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 2 Chr. 30:11.
When numbered at Sinai there were 41,500 able to go forth to war, and when near the promised land they were 53,400; but when the rulers of the tribes are mentioned in the time of David, Asher is omitted. Num. 1:41; Num. 26:47; 1 Chr. 27:16-22. The tribe is twice referred to in the N.T. as ASER. In Rev. 7:6, twelve thousand of Asher will be sealed, and in Luke 2:36, Anna a prophetess, of the tribe of Asher, gave thanks in the temple at the birth of the Saviour. Asher is one of the tribes still to come into blessing, and have a portion in the land. Ezek. 48:2, 3. See THE TWELVE TRIBES
One of the tribe of Asher. Judges 1:32.
Ashes, mostly from burnt wood, were used as a sign of sorrow or mourning, either put on the head, 2 Sam. 13:19, or on the body with sackcloth, Esther 4:1; Jer. 6:26; Lam. 3:16; Matt. 11:21; Luke 10:13; or strewn on a couch on which to lie, Esther 4:3; Isa. 58:5; Jonah 3:6. To eat ashes expresses great sorrow, Ps. 102:9; and to be reduced to them is a figure of complete destruction, Ezek. 28:18; Malachi 4:3; to feed on them tells of the vanities with which the soul may be occupied. Isa. 44:20. 'Dust and ashes' was the figure Abraham used of himself before Jehovah, Gen. 18:27; and Job said he had become like them by the hand of God. Job 30:19. For the ashes of the Red Heifer see HEIFER.
An idol introduced into Samaria by the colonists sent from Hamath by the king of Assyria. 2 Kings 17:30.
Ashkelon, Askelon. [Ash'kelon, As'kelon]
One of the five principal cities of the Philistines. It fell to the lot of Judah, who took Askelon and the coasts thereof, Judges 1:18, but they did not really subdue it, for it was in the hands of the Philistines when Samson, with the Spirit of the Lord upon him, slew thirty men in the city and took their spoil, Judges 14:19, and that it remained so we see from 1 Sam. 6:17, and 2 Sam. 1:20. The judgements of God were denounced against this city, Jer. 25:20; Jer. 47:5, 7; Amos 1:8; Zech. 9:5; and the remnant of Judah should dwell there. Zeph. 2:4, 7.
The city was situated on the sea coast, midway between Gaza and Ashdod: it is now called Askulan or Askalan, 31 40' N, 34 33' E. In modern times the city was held by the Crusaders, and within its walls Richard of England held his court: the walls which this king aided with his own hands to repair may, it is thought, still be traced, and masses of masonry and broken columns of granite still lie about. By the Mahometan geographers it was called the Bride of Syria.
Ashkenaz, Ashchenaz. [Ash'kenaz, Ash'chenaz]
Son of Gomer, the son of Japheth, and his descendants, who settled in the vicinity of Armenia. Gen. 10:3; 1 Chr. 1:6; Jer. 51:27.
1. Town in the west of Judah near Dan. Joshua 15:33. Identified with Hasan, 31 47' N, 34 59' E.
2. Town in the low hills of Judah, probably to the S.W. of Jerusalem. Joshua 15:43.
Prince of the eunuchs under Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 1:3.
Descendant of Manasseh. 1 Chr. 7:14. See ASRIEL.

CureVac and the German Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute (FLI), Germany, reported that mRNA vaccines could induce balanced, long-lived, and protective immunity to influenza A virus infections in various animal models.
In the paper (published in Nature Biotechnology on November 25), the authors described studies showing that an mRNA vaccine encoding full-length influenza A/PuertoRico/8/1934 (PR8HA) hemagglutinin (HA) was immunogenic and induced anti-influenza B- and T-cell responses in mice. They also reported that they targeted additional influenza A virus strains by sequence-matched, HA-specific vaccines, and that all vaccines induced full protection against lethal infections, including H1N1pdm09 swine flu and H5N1 bird flu virus.
The mRNA vaccine was immunogenic and provided long-term protection in newborn as well as in aged mice. Further, the immunized mice were protected through an antibody-dependent mechanism against death and disease upon challenge with the influenza virus. In ferrets and pigs, mRNA vaccines induced immunological correlates of protection, and protective effects similar to those of a licensed influenza vaccine in pigs.
This synthetic vaccine was developed based on CureVac’s RNActive® technology. Each vaccine comprises several different mRNAs encoding for virus-specific antigens, or tumor antigens for cancer treatment. According to the company, modified mRNA, when administered intradermally, becomes incorporated by various cells and translated into protein. Protein fragments are presented as antigens to the immune system, eliciting a balanced T-cell and B-cell immune response as observed in preclinical settings as well as in clinical trials. CureVac is currently evaluating its vaccines in clinical trials for prostate and non-small-cell lung cancers.
Commenting on the potential advantages of mRNA-based vaccines, Ingmar Hoerr, Ph.D., CureVac’s CEO, said, “The synthetic nature of our RNActive vaccines reduces production time dramatically and allows for sequence-matched vaccines that can be produced quickly and reliably in a scalable process. Additionally, our vaccines can be stored at room temperature, thereby avoiding the cold-chain in contrast to all other vaccines on the market and making worldwide distribution of our vaccines logistically and financially attractive.”

Characteristics | Technology
| Wonder Qualities| Natural
- Located in northwestern Arizona,
- The canon was cut by the Colorado
- The widths of the gorges range
from one-tenth of a mile to 18 mi.
- The Canon wall have a wide range
of colors, including red, gray, green, pink, brown, and violet.
- A wide assortments of plant
and animal life can be found in the canyon.
- The Colorado River flowing through
the high plateaus forms the mile-deep gorge we now call the Grand
- This remarkable depth was caused
by the fast speed, large amount of water, and large quantities of
mud, sand, and gravel of the Colorado River.
- The Colorado River carries rocks
at a speed of about a half a million tons a day.
- The Grand Canyon has the most
extensive geological records.
- The rocks at the bottom of the
canyon date back to 4 billion years ago.
- Fossils inside the rocky slopes
date back to primitive algae that predate the dinosaurs.

This study utilized the electronic medical records of six veterinary hospitals (operated by Banfield, The Pet Hospital®) in the vicinity of Fairburn, Georgia, to assess the health of dogs and cats following the unintentional release of propyl mercaptan from a waste-processing facility.
Standardized electronic medical records were used to define clinical syndromes (eye inflammation, gastrointestinal, respiratory, fever, general weakness/change in mental state) in dogs and cats. The frequency and geographic distribution of each syndrome was evaluated before, during, and after the chemical release, using control charts, density maps, change in average mean distance from a suspected point source of chemical release, space-time statistics, and autoregressive integrated moving averages.
No consistent pattern of change in syndromic events was observed following the suspected release of propyl mercaptan. Some syndromes, including respiratory syndrome in cats, gastrointestinal syndrome in dogs, and eye inflammation syndrome in both cats and dogs, showed a change in time and spatial patterns following the release of propyl mercaptan into the community. These changes were consistent with clinical signs observed in people during a previous propyl mercaptan release in California as well as the release in Fairburn.
A systematic review of electronic medical records of dogs and cats exposed to release of propyl mercaptan showed no conclusive and consistent evidence of adverse health effects. Methods for the use of medical records of pets for detecting environmental hazards require further development and evaluation.

People with migraines may feel like time passes a bit more slowly than it actually does, if a small study is correct.
The difference in time perception seems subtle - it's seen in people's perception of milliseconds. But the findings help validate the common complaint of migraine sufferers that they feel a bit "off" at times, according to a neurologist not involved in the study.
The new research, reported online in Headache, involved 27 adults with migraines and 27 age-matched controls. All of them took a test of time perception in which they estimated the amount of time a series of rectangles appeared on their computer screen.
Sometimes the image appeared for 600 msec (six tenths of a second), sometimes for three seconds and other times five seconds.
Migraine affects cognitive function
In general, people with migraines overestimated the 600-msec time window. They thought it lasted twice as long - about 1.2 seconds, on average - while the non-migraine group gave an estimate of about 0.9 seconds.
That's a small gap. But the findings support the idea that "migraine does indeed affect cognitive function," write Dr Kai Wang and colleagues at Anhui Medical Center in Hefei, China.
Dr Jennifer Kriegler, a neurologist at the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, agreed.
"A lot of people who have migraines report that when they are in a bad headache period, they just feel like they are in a fog," said Dr Kriegler, who was not involved in the current study. "They don't feel like they're processing information as clearly."
An extreme and very rare version of this effect, dubbed Alice in Wonderland Syndrome, has been seen in migraine and epilepsy sufferers. It involves distorted time perception and a sense of disconnection from reality and even self.
The current time perception study was small, Dr Kriegler said, but it was well done. And it suggests that the foggy feeling migraine sufferers report is not just due to the pain.
"It may be because of differences in brain processing," Dr Kriegler said.
Study too small
In this study, migraine sufferers were different in their perception of the 600-msec time frame, but not the longer, three- to five-second windows.
It's not clear what to make of that. Dr Kriegler said that since the study was so small more research is needed to see whether it really is only the millisecond arena where people with migraines differ.
She also said it was significant that the migraine patients were not actively having headaches during the testing. So even in between migraines, Dr Kriegler said, there's a difference in brain functioning.
"Is this something that's going to affect people's daily functioning? Probably not," Dr Kriegler said. Or at least not in the short term, she added.
One unanswered question is what kind of treatment people with migraines in the study were taking. The researchers note that 21 patients "received medicine," and the majority took painkillers for headaches.
But there is no indication they were on drugs that prevent migraines - which people with recurrent migraines often take. (Dr Wang, the senior researcher, did not respond to an email seeking comment.)
So it's not clear whether preventive medications might have any effect on time perception, according to Dr Kriegler.
Also unclear is whether any cognitive differences might have implications for migraine sufferers' long-term brain health. Right now, there is no evidence that people with migraines have, for example, a faster mental decline as they age or a higher risk of Alzheimer's, Dr Kriegler said.
The current findings, she said, offer some "validation" to people who have felt their migraines put them "off their game."
Doctors, she noted, may brush off such complaints. "But," she said, "that patient knows there's something wrong."
(Reuters Health, August 2012)
Migraines tied to coeliac disease
Hormonal changes trigger migraines

Considerations for giving feedback on skill performance
When giving athletes extrinsic feedback about their technical skills, you can either tell them what you saw (descriptive feedback) or tell them what you think they need to do based on what you saw (prescriptive feedback).
Guidelines for helping athletes develop tactical skills
It has been said that “experience is knowledge acquired too late.” As a coach you want to do all you can to speed up your athletes’ learning of tactical skills rather than wait for them to learn by experience.
Sport Skill Instruction for Coaches is designed to help current and aspiring coaches teach the skills athletes need in order to perform at their best. Written from a real-world perspective primarily for high school coaches, this practical, user-friendly text addresses the who, what, and how questions facing every coach: Who are the athletes I’m coaching? What are the skills I need to teach? How do I teach the skills effectively?
Coaches will address these questions by thoroughly examining such concepts as individual differences exhibited by athletes; technical, tactical, and mental skills athletes need to learn; content and structure of skill practice; the art of providing feedback; and the preparation of athletes for competition. This exploration prepares coaches to work with athletes competently and confidently.
The easy-to-follow format of the text includes learning objectives that introduce each chapter, sidebars illustrating sport-specific applications of key concepts and principles, chapter summaries organized by content and sequence, key terms, chapter review questions, activities that challenge readers to apply concepts to real-world situations, and a comprehensive glossary.
ASEP Silver Level Series Preface
Part I Foundations of Skill Instruction
Chapter 1 Basics of Good Teaching
Differences Between Learning and Performing
Three Basic Ingredients of Skill Instruction
Process-Focused Approach to Providing Sport Skill Instruction
Chapter 2 It All Starts With the Athlete
Difficulties in Predicting Future Performance Success
Part II Skills Your Athletes Need
Chapter 3 Technical Skills
What Are Technical Skills?
Classifications of Technical Skills
Chapter 4 Tactical Skills
Understanding Tactical Skills
Identifying Important Tactical Skills
Helping Your Athletes Develop Their Tactical Skills
Creating a Blueprint of Tactical Options
Chapter 5 Mental Skills
Emotional Arousal in Athletic Performance
Attention During Sport Competition
Connection Between Arousal and Attention
Memory in Performance Preparation
Using Mental Skills to Maximize Performance
Combining Mental and Physical Rehearsal
Part III Designing Practice Sessions
Chapter 6 Skill Analysis: Deciding What to Teach
Identifying the Skills Your Athletes Need to Learn
Analyzing Technical Skills
Identifying Target Behaviors
Chapter 7 Deciding on the Content and Structure of Practice
Games Approach to Skill Practice
Establishing Two-Way Communication
Instructions, Demonstrations, and Guidance
Modifications of Technical Skill Rehearsal
Developing Athletes’ Anticipation
Games Approach to Practicing for Competition
Chapter 8 Providing Feedback
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Feedback
Verbal and Visual Feedback
Outcome and Performance Feedback
Program and Parameter Feedback
Descriptive and Prescriptive Feedback
Practical Considerations for Giving Feedback
Chapter 9 Combining the Practice of Technical, Tactical, and Mental Skills
Planning Effective Practices
Creating Practice Activities
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Practice Activities
A Final Comment
Appendix A: Answers to Review Questions
Appendix B: Answers to Practical Activities
About the Author
High school coaches; also for college undergraduates pursuing professions as coaches, physical education teachers, and sport fitness practitioners.
Craig A. Wrisberg, PhD, is a professor of sport psychology in the department of exercise, sport, and leisure studies at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville, where he has taught since 1977. During the past 30 years he has published numerous research articles on the topics of anticipation and timing in performance, knowledge of results and motor learning, and the role of cognitive strategies in sport performance. He is also the coauthor (with Richard Schmidt) of the popular text Motor Learning and Performance, published by Human Kinetics. In 1982 he received the Brady Award for Excellence in Teaching and in 1994 the Chancellor's Award for Research and Creative Achievement.
A former president of the Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP) and the North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity, Dr. Wrisberg is a fellow of both AASP and the American Academy of Kinesiology and Physical Education.
In addition to teaching and conducting research, Dr. Wrisberg provides mental training services for student-athletes in the men's and women's athletics departments at Tennessee. In his work with athletes, he applies many of the important concepts and principles covered in Sport Skill Instruction for Coaches.
Dr. Wrisberg enjoys several outdoor activities, including tennis, canoeing, and hiking in the Great Smoky Mountains.

Name: Mara N.
I have a spider in my house that is in a cocoon. Can you
please tell what it is doing? Is it laying eggs that in turn will create
more spiders? Please help. Thank you.
Spiders do not pupate in cocoons like insects, as far as I know the only stage of a spider life cycle
that includes a cocoon-like structure is the egg case, which the adult forms around the eggs. Yes,
they will hatch into more spiders!
The spider in question may be the sac spider.
"These spiders hide in silken tubes or sacs that resemble
cocoons during the day and hunt at night. They will bite humans
even when unprovoked. These bites are rather painful, but generally
not life-threatening." Thaks Pamela!
Click here to return to the Zoology Archives
Update: June 2012

Alternative treatments for Asthma are many…from herbs to homeopathy, from breathing exercises to meditation, etc….But most of the ‘accepted’ Western medical doctors are hesitant to accept the possibility that these methods can help in conjunction with their prescriptions, let alone do the job alone! There is insufficient research done on any of these possible treatments for most doctors to endorse their use; and as long as there is insufficient research being funded and conducted it will remain the same! Also the research needs more than funding and conducting …it also needs to be accomplished by people who are not prejudiced before hand by Western medicine to keep the results pure!
Dietary Changes: There have been limited numbers of studies that show that diet influences Asthma significantly. Therefore fixing specific issues could contribute just as significantly to its treatment!
- Increase Water consumption: Drinking water may seem a little too simple, but…..water will help thin out the mucous secretions that increase during an asthma attack, making it easier to clear the lungs and bronchial tubes.
- Milk elimination: Milk has been shown to be one of the leading dietary causes of allergies, which are one of the leading triggers of an asthma attack! When I was growing up it was considered general knowledge that consumption of milk (or other milk products) could increase mucous production!
- Coffee may help in an attack: Because coffee (black coffee no sugar or milk added) is a stimulant it can often encourage the lungs to function more normally. It will help to break up the mucous and alleviate the tightness in the chest and throat. But this is not necessarily recommended for daily use!
- Ensure daily consumption of magnesium in the diet: Magnesium has bronchio-dilating effect in the body. Studies have shown that magnesium levels are often low in people experiencing Asthma. Food sources of Magnesium are: almonds, spinach, cashews, soybeans, peanuts (including peanut butter), potato, blackeyed peas, pinto beans, brown rice, lentils, kidney beans, bananas, etc.
- Supplement with Omega-3: Omega-3’s are believed to decrease inflammation. You can increase the Omega-3’s in your diet by eating it in Salmon, scallops, cauliflower, broccoli, spinach, walnuts, almonds, kale, tofu, shrimp, tuna, mussels, sardines, etc.’
- Increase antioxidants in the diet: Antioxidants tend to stimulate free radical activity; they in turn help to decrease inflammation! These can be found in the Vitamins A, C, and E among other sources! Some dietary sources include…blueberries, blackberries, strawberries, cranberries, Kidney beans, pinto beans, avocados, pineapple, cherries, kiwi, plums, artichokes, spinach, red cabbage, sweet potatoes, broccoli, green tea, walnuts, pecans, hazelnuts, and oat products (like oatmeal)
Increase Exercise: Often exercise can cause an asthma attack, but in good asthma management the goal is to return the patient back to normal or near normal activity, and that includes exercise. Just try to tell a child they cannot run, and jump, and ride their bike! I dare you! Regular exercise helps the Asthmatic in multiple ways including, but not limited to the following benefits: stress reduction, increased energy, and sleep improvements. Exercise also lowers your risk for obesity and heart disease, common problems with adult asthmatics!!
- Recommended types of exercise include: volleyball, gymnastics, baseball and wrestling, and any other exercise that allows occasional breaks in the activity!
- Use of precautions: Use common sense when exercising….never exercise when you feel ‘off,’ and use some of the following suggestions to prepare for each session: Stretching exercises to help warm up, avoid allergen areas (…use an exercise pad when working out on carpet, avoid areas where there is high pollen or car exhaust). Breath through your nose, rather than your mouth.
Move: This may seem extreme, but if you live in a very moist, humid location moving to a dry, hot atmosphere may just seem to cure your asthma! Try vacationing in different locals….desert southwest, mountainous areas, by the sea, in a city, out in the country. Where are you the most comfortable? Consider if this dramatic a change may just be worth the expense! In lieu of an actual move try some of these ideas:
- Find a good, dry exercise area, such as a local gym
- Avoid high allergen areas
- Make sure you sleep with your chest and head elevated!
Acupuncture: Acupuncture has been used to treat Asthma because it balances the positive and negative flows of energy in the body, and that is precisely how Acupuncture is believed to work. Asthma is believed to be an imbalance of these opposing energies, with acupuncture restoring the stability to normal levels.
It is believed by many to restore lung function and to reduce the severity of an asthma attack should it occur. Research however has not been able to prove the effectiveness of acupuncture in asthma, but rather the results are inconclusive. The most recent Cochrane Collaborative Review feels that the information thus far does not allow recommendation of this treatment.
Aromatherapy: Essential oil blends can reduce the severity and occurrence of asthma attacks, and help relieve them once they commence! The best time for aromatherapy treatments is between attacks since you do not want the scent to make the problem a worse issue.
E.O.’s to use:
To reduce Bronchial Spasms: chamomile, lavender, rose, geranium and marjoram
Decongestant and Antihistamine: peppermint and ginger
To Encourage deep breathing and to allow lung expansion: Frankincense and marjoram
These Essential oils can be incorporated into chest rubs, steams, humidifiers, the bath or in massage oils.
Biofeedback: Biofeedback is the use of electronic devices to help the patient control or influence normally automatic body functions such as heartbeat and breathing. In controlled studies it has shown to have benefit for most patients, where they maintain control of their asthma while reducing their inhaled steroids.
Herbal Medicine: Many herbs will decrease the inflammation and relieve bronchio-spasms.
Homeopathy: Homeopathy uses very small amounts of natural substance to stimulate the body’s immune function and natural defenses. Each person, and each asthma attack is different so the choices here are prescribed as a tailored approach to each patients needs.
Massage: Massage is believed effective due to the relaxation in the whole being that can be achieved. It can be done using aromatherapy massage oils to enhance its effectiveness. Massage can retrain the muscles to a state of relaxation and reduced stress. Although not well studied, massage can be beneficial by relieving a known trigger for asthma attacks, stress. Additional research is needed in this area.
Pulmonary Therapy (Breathing Exercises): It has been demonstrated that people with asthma that use Breathing Exercises can reduce their use of medications by up to 86%. At Sydney’s Woolcock Institute of Medical Research and Melbourne’s Alfred Hospital conducted this research and released their findings in the August, 2006 edition of Thorax.
Relaxation Techniques – Meditation: It has been found that people who practice meditation and the resulting relaxation have a marked decrease in asthma symptoms and attacks. Meditation can eve help to bring an active attack under control. Often the fear of the attack will trigger panic which will make everything worse. The meditation can counteract this phenomenon.
Yoga: Through gentle stretching and exercise Yoga helps to relax the body and the mind, allowing improvement in circulation and respiration. It will relieve tension and assist the body in its own healing.
Folklore: These are for entertainment only!
Own a Chihuahua: in Mexican Folk Medicine it is believe to cure asthma!
To cure asthma: Drill a hole into a black-oak tree at the height of the patient’s head. Place a lock of hair in the hole, and drive a wooden peg into the hole to hold the hair in place. Now cut the peg and hair flush with the tree bark. When the bark has grown over the peg and hair, hiding it from sight and the hair has re-grown, the asthma will be cured!
Asthma could be cured by tying a live frog to the patient’s throat. When the frog died the disease was “completely absorbed” by the frog.
Kill a steer, cut open its gut, and place the patient’s feet into the abdomen. When the entrails have cooled the asthma will be cured.
Boil the comb of a hornet’s nest and sweeten it with honey, take to cure asthma!
Chihuahua for Asthma

Matching Utility Loads with Solar and Wind Power in North Carolina: Dealing with Intermittent Electricity Sources
by John Blackburn, Ph.D.
Professor of Economics Emeritus, Duke University
with a Foreword by Arjun Makhijani
GROUNDBREAKING STUDY FINDS SOLAR, WIND, OTHER RENEWABLE POWER SOURCES COULD MEET NEARLY ALL NORTH CAROLINA ELECTRICITY NEEDS
Takoma Park, Maryland, and Durham, North Carolina, March 4, 2010: Solar and wind power can supply the vast majority of North Carolina’s electricity needs, according to a major report released today. Combined with generation from hydroelectric and other renewable sources, such as landfill gas, only six percent of electricity would have to be purchased from outside the system or produced at conventional plants.
“Even though the wind does not blow nor the sun shine all the time, careful management, readily available storage and other renewable sources, can produce nearly all the electricity North Carolinians consume,” explained Dr. John Blackburn, the study’s author. Dr. Blackburn is Professor Emeritus of Economics and former Chancellor at Duke University.
“Critics of renewable power point out that solar and wind sources are intermittent,” Dr. Blackburn continued. “The truth is that solar and wind are complementary in North Carolina. Wind speeds are usually higher at night than in the daytime. They also blow faster in winter than summer. Solar generation, on the other hand, takes place in the daytime. Sunlight is only half as strong in winter as in summertime. Drawing wind power from different areas — the coast, mountains, the sounds or the ocean — reduces variations in generation. Using wind and solar in tandem is even more reliable. Together, they can generate three-fourths of the state’s electricity. When hydroelectric and other renewable sources are added, the gap to be filled is surprisingly small. Only six percent of North Carolina’s electricity would have to come from conventional power plants or from other systems.”
Jim Warren, Executive Director of the North Carolina Waste Awareness and Reduction Network (NC WARN), added, “Utilities and their allies are pressing policy-makers to allow construction of expensive and problem-ridden nuclear reactors – with ratepayers and taxpayers absorbing enormous financial risks. Prof. Blackburn’s groundbreaking study demonstrates that such risks are not necessary. Solar, wind and other renewable sources can meet nearly all of North Carolina’s energy needs.”
Dr. Arjun Makhijani, President of the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research (IEER), explained why his center published Dr. Blackburn’s report. “This is a landmark case study of how solar and wind generation can be combined to provide round-the-clock electric power throughout the year. North Carolina utilities and regulators and those in other states should take this template, refine it, and make a renewable electricity future a reality.” Dr. Makhijani is the author of Carbon-Free and Nuclear-Free: A Roadmap for U.S. Energy Policy.
You can download Dr. Blackburn’s report, Matching Utility Loads with Solar and Wind Power in North Carolina: Dealing with Intermittent Electricity Sources, by entering your contact information below, if you haven’t already provided it elsewhere on this site. You will receive an email with the download link.
Download is free, donations are welcome.

International Perspectives on Food and Fuel
Agricultural Marketing Resource Center
Co-Director – Ag Marketing Resource Center
Iowa State University
(Second in a series)
Last month we provided perspectives on the food and fuel debate from the viewpoint of U.S. consumers. This article provides world perspectives on the debate.
When discussing food issues, we must preface the discussion with the understanding that food is the most personal of all consumer purchases. We can do without or find ways to circumvent the need for most consumer products. But the specter of not having enough food is a basic need and elicits an emotional response. Although this specter is foreign to U.S. consumers, it is very real for millions of people around the world.
Dwindling Grain Reserves
Although grains used for biofuels have impacted world grain usage in recent years, the conditions for limited supplies and higher prices were already in motion. Over the last ten years, world grain reserves have been dwindling. As shown in Figure 1, world stocks-to-use ratios for wheat and coarse grains have fallen by half. In 1998/99 we had reserves equal to 30% of a year’s usage (about 3.5 months). While not large, these reserves could cushion the impact of a sudden disruption in grain supplies (e.g.widespread drought). Also, these reserves were large enough to substantially dampen the price of grains. For example, the Iowa average corn price in 1998/99 was $1.87 per bushel. These low prices provided ample incentive for farmers to search for new uses for grains like biofuels to strengthen grain prices. They also discouraged expanding grain production.
Source: Foreign Ag Service, USDA
However, grain prices were already on the way up, regardless of biofuels. We had entered a period when grain usage outstripped production. Non-biofuel grain usage was growing faster than production. The deficit was covered by drawing down reserves. Today’s world reserves are only 15 percent of a year’s usage, of which a significant portion is needed to smoothly transition from one year to the next. So we cannot continue to cover the deficit by drawing down reserves. The result is high prices that will ration existing supplies and stimulate future production.
While dwindling grain reserves and higher prices have an adverse impact on consumers, it has a positive impact on producers. Around the world, 2.5 billion people depend on agriculture for their livelihood (FAO). This is close to 40% of the world’s population. So higher prices have both negative and positive implications.
Adverse Crop Events
We experienced adverse crop events at precisely the time when the world’s grain situation was most vulnerable to supply shocks. Periods of low production can easily upset the delicate balance between surplus and shortage, especially when reserves are low. Adverse crop events in 2007 were a driving factor in grain price increases. It was the second consecutive year of a drop in average yields around the world.
An overview of 2007 crop problems is shown below.
- Australia – multi-year drought
- U.S. winter wheat – late freeze
- Northern Europe – dry spring & wet harvest
- Southeast Europe – drought
- Ukraine and Russia – drought
- Canada – summer hot and dry
- Northwest Africa – drought
- Turkey – drought
- Argentina – late freeze & drought followed by flooding in parts of the corn-soybean belt.
Most of the world’s grains are consumed in the country in which they are produced. A relatively small amount is traded on the international market, as shown in Table 1. However, if trade is disrupted, this small amount can have a significant impact on food distribution and prices, especially during periods of low reserves.
Table 1. Percent of World Consumption from International Trade
Source: What’s Driving Food Prices, Farm Foundation, 2008
Although unknown in this country in recent years, it is not uncommon for countries to impose restrictions such as “export taxes” or “export embargoes” on agricultural commodities sold to other countries. These restrictions become increasingly common when world shortages and high prices appear. These policies are meant to discourage exports and keep food within the country for domestic consumers. Essentially, the restriction means that “our citizens eat first”, if there is anything left over, your citizens can have it.
A prominent example is Argentina, a large producer of agricultural commodities such as soybeans. Argentina already had a 35 percent export tax and in March its president, Christina Fernandez de Kirchner, increased the tax. The decision led to riots and demonstrations by Argentina’s farmers. In July the measure was narrowly rescinded by Argentina’s Senate.
These trade distortions can take many forms in addition to export taxes. Below is a listing of policies that have recently been implemented by both exporting and importing countries due to high food prices and food shortages.
- Export Bans - Ukraine, Serbia, India, Egypt, Cambodia, Vietnam, Indonesia, Kazakhstan
- Export Restriction (quantitative) – Argentina, Ukraine, India, Vietnam
- Export Taxes – China, Argentina, Russian, Kazakhstan, Malaysia
- Eliminate Export Subsidies – China
- Reduced Import Tariffs – India, Indonesia, Serbia, Thailand, EU, Korean, Mongolia
- Subsidize Consumers – Morocco, Venezuela
The long-term implications of export restrictions are negative to the world’s consumers and world agriculture. It distorts trade in agriculture commodities at the precise time when there should be no distortion. It greatly increases the vulnerability of poor countries that are net food importers. It penalizes long-term agricultural development and growth in exporting countries.
Commodity Price Impact on Food Budgets
Although notable exceptions exist, most hunger situations are not caused by an actual shortage of food. Rather hunger is caused by the financial inability to buy food. So how do high food prices this impact the food consumers in low-income, food deficit countries?
As we discussed last month, the average U.S. consumer spends only 10 percent of his/her disposable income on food (although food expenditures for low-income consumers are substantially higher). And the food the consumer buys is highly processed, packaged and often ready to eat. So, of the money spent on food, only 20 percent goes to farmers for producing basic commodities like wheat, milk, meat, etc.
The situation is much different for consumers living in low-income, food-deficit countries. An illustrative example is shown in Table 2. Half of a consumer’s disposable income may be spent on food. And this is primarily for staples (basic commodities). People in developing countries tend to buy basic staples and prepare them rather than buying processed/prepared food. In our example, 70 percent of their food expenditures are for staples compared to 20 percent in high income countries. If the prices of staples increase by 50 percent, the amount of disposable income spent by consumers in high income countries will only increase by one percentage point, going from 10 percent to 11 percent, or a 10 percent increase ((11 – 10)/10). However, the amount spent by consumers in low income countries increases by 18 percentage points, going from 50 percent to 67.5 percent, or a 35% increase ((67.5 – 50)/50). So, people in low income countries, who already spend a disproportionately large amount on food, are the hardest hit by increased commodity prices.
Table 2. Impact of Higher Commodity Prices on Food Budgets *
|High-income Countries||Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries|
|Food Cost as % of Income||10%||50%|
|Staples as % of total food spending||20%||70%|
|Expenditures on staples||$800||$280|
|50% price increase in staples|
|Increase in cost of staples||$400||$140|
|New cost of staples||$1,200||$420|
|New total food costs||$4,400||$540|
|Food Cost as % of Income||11%||67.5%|
|Percent increase in food cost||10%||35%|
* These are illustrative food budgets that characterize the situations for consumers in high- and low-income countries.
Source: Based on information from Global Agricultural Supply and Demand: Factors Contributing to the Recent Increase in Food Commodity Prices/WFS-0801, July, 2008. Economic Research Service, USDA.
Future Demand Growth
The demand for grains will continue to grown in the future. One of the driving factors is expanding world population. From 2000 to 2005, world population grew by more than the entire population of the United States. As shown in Table 3, 85 percent of the growth occurred in Asia and Africa. The population of Europe actually declined. So, most of the growth is occurring in developing countries.
Table 3. World Population Growth (2000 to 2005)
In combination with population growth, the expanding world “middle class” is demanding high value food products that put additional demands on world agricultural production. A future article titled “China on a Western Diet” will address this topic.
The Impact of Biofuels
A reason commonly given for the current high world food prices is the diversion of cropland acreage away from food production to energy production. In the U.S. ethanol is made from corn. As shown in Table 4, U.S. corn acreage increased substantially in 2007 from its 2003-06 average. The majority of those acres were taken from soybean production. In 2008, corn acreage retreated and soybean acreage rebounded to its 2003-06 level.
Corn and soybeans are used primarily for livestock feed. For example, only about 10 percent of U.S. corn production is processed directly into food products. Most is fed to livestock that are mostly consumed by high income consumers. However, U.S. feed corn prices have driven up food corn prices in Africa and Mexico, where corn goes directly into the human food chain. Moreover, soybean oil is an important staple in the Far East. In China, almost everything is cooked in soybean oil or other vegetable oil.
Table 4. U.S. Planted Acreage of Major Crops
1/ Represents 59% of world corn acreage
2/ Represents less than 10% of world wheat acreage
3/ Represents less than 1% of world rice acreage
The basic staples of many poor countries are grains that can be consumed directly like wheat and rice.
Although world wheat price increased substantially in 2007 and early 2008, it was not due to the encroachment of corn for U.S. biofuels production. As shown in Table 1, U.S. wheat acreage actually increased in 2007 from the 2003-06 average, and increased again in 2008. However, in the absence of corn for biofuels production, wheat acres may have expanded more or the actual expansion may have been achieved at lower wheat prices. Moreover, the need for expanded corn acreage in the future will place continued pressure on wheat acreage and the wheat price need to main existing acreage.
The small U.S. rice acreage is on land that is not designed for the production of traditional grains. The threat of substitution is limited.
On a worldwide basis, about 35 million acres of land were used for biofuels in 2004. This is about one percent of total arable land. The Energy Information Administration predicts this will increase to 2 to 3.5 percent by 2030.
While the biofuels industry (U.S. and worldwide) is a contributing factor, it is not the only cause of rising world commodity food prices. The precise impact is difficult to assess. In next month’s article we will attempt to provide some comparison scenarios of food supplies and prices if the biofuels industry did not exist.
Most of the popular press reports about the food and energy situation focus on actions we can take to solve the situation immediately. However, if we are to be successful, we must also take a holistic and long-term view of the situation and implement policies and programs that will impact the long-term causes of the problem. Below we address the situation from a short-, intermediate- and long-term perspective.
There is no good short-term solution to the situation we face today. Many of the programs and policies we implement today will not produce results until the intermediate and long term time periods. However, if you are one of the millions without enough to eat, solutions that provide help next year or in the next decade provide little comfort.
Programs that provide immediate food aid and other assistance are required to meet the current needs. However, these programs need to provide assistance without competing with the local agricultural sector. If the problem is the high price of food rather than an actual shortage of food, buying food locally at world prices and providing it to residents at a discounted price provides food for local residents while supporting local agriculture. Conversely, bringing in food staples from outside competes directly with local farmers and impedes the country’s ability to be self-sustaining in food production in future years.
Higher agricultural prices stimulate farmers around the world to increase production. This is a powerful force that is often neglected in discussions about the current food situation. The payoff from using better seed varieties, more fertilizer and other production inputs is magnified when grain prices are high.
However, this will not impact today’s situation. At least one production cycle is required to increase production. And this assumes that farmers have access to production inputs and the money to purchase them. So, programs that provide access and funding are important for increased production in the coming years.
Moreover, policies that limit commodity price increases within countries must be avoided. Developing countries are under pressure to limit price increases in an effort to ease the domestic short-term situation. However, high prices are necessary to stimulate increased domestic production. So, short term programs and policies need to be designed that provide immediate food assistance without depressing or limiting prices.
Increased funding for agricultural research and education is the long-term solution to the situation. New seed varieties, new and improved production inputs, better cultural practices, increased knowledge of how to apply these practices, and an array of other research efforts have the ability to significantly increase world agricultural production.
Although research programs are of little value in the short-term, their cumulative impact over five, ten or more years can be enormous. However, the challenge will be great. The combined forces of:
- continued world population growth,
- increased demand for higher quality food by the world’s expanding “middle class”, and
- the need to provide both food and fuel,
require careful monitoring by the international community and substantial worldwide investment in agricultural research and application. And this agricultural expansion needs to be done in a sustainable manner while adapting to the impacts of climate change on the world’s agricultural production capacity in the near term and mitigating climate change in the long term.
References and Further Reading
Issue Report: What's Driving Food Prices? - Farm Foundation, July 2008.
Global Agricultural Supply and Demand: Factors Contributing to the Recent Increase in Food Commodity Prices/WFS-0801, July, 2008. Economic Research Service, USDA.
Rising Food Prices and Global Food Needs: The U.S.Response, Congressional Research Service, May 2008.
Rising Food Prices: Policy Options and World Bank response , World Bank, 2008.
Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in Low-income Countries, World Bank, April, 2008.
Impact of High Food and Fuel Prices on Developing Countries—Frequently Asked Questions. International Monetary Fund, April, 2008.
The High-Level Conference on World Food Security: the Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy, Food and Agriculture Organization, June 2008.
Biofuels and Sustainable Development, Executive Session on Grand Challenges of the Sustainability Transition, May 2008.

Additional Investments in Family Planning Would Save Developing Countries More Than $11 Billion a Year — Access to family planning is an essential human right that unlocks unprecedented rewards for economic development, says new UNFPA report. – UNFPA REPORT
TAKE A BOW Secretary Clinton, who began this push in 1995 as first lady when she declared human rights are women’s rights, which begins with planning your family. The UNFPA report is non-binding and won’t impact law internationally, but the statement is a start in a new direction, however long it takes to manifest.
The U.N. Population Report declares in it’s title “BY CHOICE, NOT BY CHANCE,” a call for self-determination, empowerment and reproductive freedom for women across the globe.
The caterwauling from the right will begin in 3,2..
“Family planning has a positive multiplier effect on development,” Dr. Babatunde Osotimehin, executive director of the fund, said in a written statement. “Not only does the ability for a couple to choose when and how many children to have help lift nations out of poverty, but it is also one of the most effective means of empowering women. Women who use contraception are generally healthier, better educated, more empowered in their households and communities and more economically productive. Women’s increased labor-force participation boosts nations’ economies.”
The report effectively declares that legal, cultural and financial barriers to accessing contraception and other family planning measures are an infringement of women’s rights.
This declaration, the statement itself, is the most important move in women’s self-determination globally since Hillary Rodham Clinton’s speech in China so many years ago. It’s why her statement of human rights are women’s rights begins the book I wrote about her 20-year rise and the difficulties she had making her mark.
It is not by accident that this report came during Secretary Clinton’s tenure at the State Department, which was empowered by President Obama, who, even with his faults on putting politics above science in the importance of Plan B to young women especially, as well as the damage of codifying the Hyde Amendment into law, remains on the whole a great champion of women’s self-determination.
It’s the Hillary Effect.

16th-century Peruvian convent and its historic art eyed for restoration
LIMA, Peru (CNS) — Half-hidden behind palm trees at the end of a once elegant avenue in a now rundown neighborhood, the Convento de los Descalzos — the Convent of the Barefoot Friars — has witnessed half a millennium of Peruvian history.
Age, economic woes and benign neglect have taken their toll, and the convent has fallen on hard times. But Alberta Alvarez, the director of a foundation established less than a year ago to revitalize the convent, is trying to change that.
With about 500 artworks hanging throughout its seven cloisters and tucked away in storerooms, the building that once housed Franciscan missionaries offers “a journey through three centuries of religious art, all in one place,” Alvarez said.
During colonial times, Spanish clergy used paintings and statues of religious figures and scenes for evangelization. The convent’s 16th-, 17th- and 18th-century art represent styles known as the Cuzco, Lima and Quito schools, which reflect the melding of European and indigenous artistic styles.
Built at the foot of St. Christopher’s Hill, a Lima landmark that provides a panoramic view of the city, the convent itself is a work of art. Founded in the late 1500s by Franciscan friars who sought to live more simply — and whose practice of going without shoes or wearing only sandals gave the Convent of Saint Mary of the Angels its popular name — the place became a museum in the 1980s.
Graceful arched porticos around the convent’s seven cloisters provide a refuge from the loud rush-hour traffic outside. But some pillars cracked in recent earthquakes, electrical wiring is exposed to the elements, and saints, angels and early Franciscan missionaries stare down from the walls through layers of mold and grime.
“The museum has many needs,” said Alvarez, a native of Spain who first traveled to Lima to volunteer in Franciscan mission work and now heads the fledgling museum foundation.
Protecting and restoring the artwork is a priority, but restoration experts are in short supply in Peru, she said. The few who do graduate from National University of San Marcos or Lima’s Fine Arts School are snapped up by art museums or better-funded organizations.
As a first step, Alvarez organized a seminar on colonial art restoration in May, inviting Pilar Sedano, director general of cultural heritage for the city of Madrid and former head of restoration and conservation at the Museo Nacional del Prado, Spain’s national art museum.
The seminar drew more than 100 participants, including many students from towns in the interior of the country.
“Everyone asked if they could sign up for the next one,” said Alvarez, who hopes future events can include more hands-on training.
She estimates that it would cost about $200,000 to establish a workshop in the convent where half a dozen professional art restorers could work on a rotating basis with six art school graduates on fellowships. That amount is currently beyond the museum’s reach, but the seminar gave Alvarez and her colleagues a chance to test restoration techniques on a painting from the convent’s collection.
The surface was so dark that details were unclear, and Alvarez thought it was probably a painting of St. Francis of Assisi. But an X-ray image — made with a machine borrowed from the parish clinic next door — revealed the head of a violin beneath the saint’s left arm, a symbol associated with the Franciscan missionary St. Francis Solano.
As they began to clean and restore the painting, the violin scroll and other details came into view.
“It’s exciting when you start to work and people appear on the canvas,” Alvarez said.
Although it is now in the middle of Peru’s sprawling capital, the convent originally was outside the city, surrounded by fields and vineyards. Behind the refectory, where the walls are lined with images of saints and early Franciscan missionaries, a wine cellar still holds huge wooden barrels for aging wine.
Up a flight of stairs, apothecary jars and equipment from the 19th century are on display in a room in an adjoining courtyard, and Alvarez said she hopes to plant medicinal plants the friars used in the garden. Another room holds old printing equipment.
Alvarez would like to create displays recounting the missionary history of the Franciscans, who were among the first to venture into the Peruvian Amazon, using the museum’s old maps. They also need preservation and restoration work, however, as does a set of choral books.
“Every day, you see more opportunities,” Alvarez said. “We have the documentation, but someone has to sit down and review it, pull out the information, and think about how the museum can be organized.”
For now, her biggest challenge is finding a way to launch an ambitious project on a shoestring budget.
“We need everything,” she said. “We’re just beginning.”

Culture of poverty
|Part of a series on|
|Economic, applied and development
|Social and cultural anthropology|
||This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. (July 2010)|
The culture of poverty is a social theory that expands on the cycle of poverty. It attracted academic and policy attention in the 1960s, but has largely been discredited by academics around the turn of the century (Goode and Eames, 1996; Bourgois, 2001; Small M.L., Harding D.J., Lamont M., 2010). Although the idea is experiencing a "comeback" current scholars recognize racism and isolation, rather than the "values" of the poor as the reason for potentially mal-adaptive behaviors of the poor. It offers one way to explain why poverty exists despite anti-poverty programs; critics of the culture of poverty argument insist that structural factors rather than individual characteristics better explain the persistence of poverty (Goode and Eames, 1996; Bourgois, 2001; Small M.L., Harding D.J., Lamont M., 2010).
Early proponents of this theory argued that the poor are not simply lacking resources, but also acquire a poverty-perpetuating value system. According to Oscar Lewis, "The subculture [of the poor] develops mechanisms that tend to perpetuate it, especially because of what happens to the world view, aspirations, and character of the children who grow up in it.” (Moynihan 1969, p. 199). Later scholars have noticed that the poor do not have different values. The term "subculture of poverty" (later shortened to "culture of poverty") made its first appearance in the ethnography Five Families: Mexican Case Studies in the Culture of Poverty (1959) by anthropologist Oscar Lewis. Lewis struggled to render "the poor" as legitimate subjects whose lives were transformed by poverty. He argued that although the burdens of poverty were systemic and therefore imposed upon these members of society, they led to the formation of an autonomous subculture as children were socialized into behaviors and attitudes that perpetuated their inability to escape the underclass.
Lewis gave some seventy characteristics (1996 , 1998) that indicated the presence of the culture of poverty, which he argued was not shared among all of the lower classes.
The people in the culture of poverty have a strong feeling of marginality, of helplessness, of dependency, of not belonging. They are like aliens in their own country, convinced that the existing institutions do not serve their interests and needs. Along with this feeling of powerlessness is a widespread feeling of inferiority, of personal unworthiness. This is true of the slum dwellers of Mexico City, who do not constitute a distinct ethnic or racial group and do not suffer from racial discrimination. In the United States the culture of poverty that exists in the Negroes has the additional disadvantage of racial discrimination. People with a culture of poverty have very little sense of history. They are a marginal people who know only their own troubles, their own local conditions, their own neighborhood, their own way of life. Usually, they have neither the knowledge, the vision nor the ideology to see the similarities between their problems and those of others like themselves elsewhere in the world. In other words, they are not class conscious, although they are very sensitive indeed to status distinctions. When the poor become class conscious or members of trade union organizations, or when they adopt an internationalist outlook on the world they are, in my view, no longer part of the culture of poverty although they may still be desperately poor. (Lewis 1998)
Although Lewis was concerned with poverty in the developing world, the culture of poverty concept proved attractive to U.S. public policy makers and politicians. It strongly informed documents such as the Moynihan Report (1965) and the War on Poverty more generally.
The culture of poverty also emerges as a key concept in Michael Harrington's discussion of American poverty in The Other America (1962). For Harrington, the culture of poverty is a structural concept defined by social institutions of exclusion which create and perpetuate the cycle of poverty in America.
Since the 1960s critics of culture of poverty explanations for the persistence of the underclasses have attempted to show that real world data do not fit Lewis' model (Goode and Eames, 1996). In 1974, anthropologist Carol Stack issued a critique of it, calling it "fatalistic" and noticing the way that believing in the idea of a culture of poverty does not describe the poor so much as it serves the interests of the rich. She writes, "The culture of poverty, as Hylan Lewis points out, has a fundamental political nature. The ideas matters most to political and scientific groups attempting to rationalize why some Americans have failed to make it in American society. It is, Lewis (1971) argues, 'an idea that people believe, want to believe, and perhaps need to believe.' They want to believe that raising the income of the poor would not change their life styles or values, but merely funnel greater sums of money into bottomless, self-destructing pits." 
Thus, she demonstrates the way that political interests to keep the wages of the poor low create a climate in which it is politically convenient to buy into the idea of culture of poverty (Stack 1974). In sociology and anthropology, the concept created a backlash, pushing scholars to look to structures rather than "blaming-the-victim" (Bourgois, 2001). Since the late '90s, the culture of poverty has witnessed a resurgence in the social sciences, although most scholars now reject the notion of a monolithic and unchanging culture of poverty and attribute destructive attitudes and behavior not to inherent moral character but to sustained racism and isolation (Small M.L., Harding D.J., Lamont M., 2010).
- Cohen, Patricia, ‘Culture of Poverty’ Makes a Comeback, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/18/us/18poverty.html
- Stack, Carol. 1974. All Our Kin. Harper & Row.
- Goode, Judith and Edwin Eames (1996). "An Anthropological Critique of the Culture of Poverty". In G. Gmelch and W. Zenner. Urban Life. Waveland Press.
- Harrington, Michael (1962). The Other America: Poverty in the United States. Simon & Schuster.
- Lewis, Oscar (1996 (1966)). "The Culture of Poverty". In G. Gmelch and W. Zenner, eds. Urban Life. Waveland Press.
- Lewis, Oscar (1969). "Culture of Poverty". In Moynihan, Daniel P. On Understanding Poverty: Perspectives from the Social Sciences. New York: Basic Books. pp. 187–220.
- Lewis, Oscar (January 1998). "The culture of poverty". Society 35 (2): 7. doi:10.1007/BF02838122.
- Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What money can’t buy : family income and children’s life chances. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-58733-2. Retrieved 2009-11-09.
- Duvoux, Nicolas, "The culture of poverty reconsidered", La vie des idées : http://www.laviedesidees.fr/The-Culture-of-Poverty.html
- Patricia Cohen (2010-10-17). "‘Culture of Poverty’ Makes a Comeback". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-10-20.
- Bourgois, Phillipe (2001). "Culture of Poverty". International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. Waveland Press.
- Small M.L., Harding D.J., Lamont M. (2010). "Reconsidering culture and poverty". Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 629 (1): 6–27. doi:10.1177/0002716210362077.

The four digit PIN is a common part of our everyday life. From door codes to ATMs to cell phones, some of us use a four digit PIN daily. Although it sounds a bit counter intuitive, using only three unique numbers in your PIN instead of four different numbers will your make your PIN more secure. In other words, a PIN like 3963 is more secure than one like 1872.
Most PINs tend to be four digits and have options from ten characters (0-9). The brute force strength of this is 10,000 different combinations (104=10,000). This is probably sufficient to ward off a manual brute force attack. The fact that most ATM card skimmers include PIN loggers seems to bear this out.
It’s pretty common knowledge, however, that straight brute force is often unnecessary. Residue and oils on your fingers will leave traces. Just a tilt to the light will often tell the attacker exactly what digits are used in your PIN and sometimes the PIN is used so often that light is not even necessary.
When an attacker knows that there are only four digits and four places their brute force attack drops from 10,000 to 24 (From 104 to 4! or 4x3x2x1). This drops even further with the likelihood that a specific pattern was probably used for easier recall. Take a look at the following two pictures and remember to keep your cell phones clean.
The PIN to unlock this cell phone is probably a pattern like 2546 or the opposite 6452.
It is likely that the PIN above is an easy to remember date like 1968 or 1986
(photo from Schneier on Security)
So what happens when you use only three numbers in a four digit PIN? The straight brute force strength remains the same at 10,000, but what about in the case of information leakage when there are smudges or worn keys?
Only three smudges this time. So what’s the PIN?
Since the attacker only knows three digits they are not sure which of the three is repeated or in which place it is repeated. While number patterns might help here (dates like 1990 & 2001 for instance) place patterns will always be an unhelpful triangle. In addition they can no longer calculate a straight factorial function of four (4!=24) to figure out how many different patterns are possible. The attacker has to calculate each string that could contain a single duplicate of the original three numbers.
If all possible permutations of four known numbers in a four digit PIN is 24, then the number of permutations where one number is repeated reduces that by half (4x3x1x1) or twelve. The attacker is not sure which of the three digits is repeated so they will have to try those 12 permutations three time, one for each known number. This means they now have 36 permutations to go through; 50% stronger than a PIN using four numbers.
The same does not work for a PIN using only two numbers. A quick calculation shows that even exponentially 24
is only 16 permutations. If you subtract 1111 and 2222 you are left with 14 permutations that have at least one of each character.
This makes three the sweet spot for slightly more secure four place PIN. It stands up as well as a four character PIN to straight brute force and is more secure under information leakage such as smudges and wear and tear.
It is a little bittersweet to discover that this ground has already been covered, but kudos to Presh Talwalkar. His article from Jan 2011
has much better math than mine.
This post seems to be getting a little traction, so let me be clear that whether we’re talking about 12, 24, or 36 permutations the difference between them is pretty trivial for anyone with focus. Moving to a 6 or 8 digit PIN would be an improvement across the board.

What’s it like to walk in space? In the first part of an examination of the challenges of living in space, our space correspondent steps outside the International Space Station.
“Here we go…”
“Whoah!” is all I can manage as I find myself transported from a cluttered office in Houston to Earth orbit. Below, 350km (220 miles) away, the blue and white crescent of the Earth. Above me is the glistening white hull of the International Space Station (ISS), its vast solar arrays glinting in the sunshine.
Nasa hasn’t invented teleport. This is the agency’s Virtual Reality (VR) Laboratory at the Johnson Space Centre where dreams of space travel really can come true.
The lab complements underwater training and prepares astronauts for EVAs [Extra Vehicular Activity] – space walks – and work with robotic arms. Most of the room looks like a regular office with desks, computers and monitors but the rear section resembles an eccentric gym. Ropes hang from the ceiling, metal boxes are suspended on bungee cords and the room is criss-crossed by lines and pulleys.
“That’s where most of the virtual reality takes place,” says James Tinch, chief engineer for the Robotics Astronaut Office and manager of the lab. “The crewmembers put on the helmets and they get the sensation that they’re at the space station. The metal boxes with the ropes and pulleys tied to them are a mass handling device, so the crews can get a feel for what it takes to handle a large mass in space and how much trouble they might have just to move it around.”
I sit on the chair at the centre of the test area and Tinch gently lowers a harness over my shoulders. This holds the electronics for the virtual reality helmet, which he tightens around my head, allowing me to see an image of the VR environment. Next come the gloves. They look like cycling gloves and are fitted with sensors for grip and movement. I pull them onto my fingers. A box mounted to the ceiling above me will track their position as I move my hands around.
Then Tinch clicks the start button and I’m in orbit reaching out to the handrail just outside the airlock. I truly feel that I’m in space and yet to look at me, I’m still sitting on a chair at the centre of a room.
“Right now you’re next to the ISS airlock, where the crew members come out,” says Tinch, calmly. But I’m feeling anything but calm as I struggle to comprehend my new surroundings.
Try before you buy
If I look down I can see the rest of my spacesuit; straight ahead and there are my hands, now encased in astronaut gloves, tightly clasping the handrail. After giving me a few minutes to get acquainted with the view, Tinch instructs me to try to pull myself across one of the space station modules by releasing my left hand from the rail and gripping again further along. The idea is to pull myself around, hand over hand. But I let go too quickly and end up pushing myself away. I try to ‘swim’ back towards the structure, waving my hands wildly back and forth, but realise there’s nothing to push against. One of the major challenges of space walking – and a fuller understanding of Newton’s laws of motion – starts to become apparent.
“In space your hands pretty well do all your work for you,” says Tinch. “So your legs can kick and do anything but they’re not helping you.”
“One of the things you’ll find in space is that your wrist is one of the primary sources of how you move your body around, so astronauts do a lot of exercises with their hands and wrists to make sure they’re strong enough,” Tinch explains. “It’s a long day in those suits as you’re working against the suit and working against yourself, trying to get the work done.”
Quite how difficult space walking could prove to be was first brought home to Nasa in 1966, when astronaut Gene Cernan left the confines of the Gemini 9 spacecraft for the world’s third EVA. Later described by Cernan as “the spacewalk from hell,” he fought to control his tether and tumbled in a “slow motion ballet.” By the end, his heart rate had tripled, his visor had fogged up and he struggled to get back into the capsule.
Although I wasn’t in any danger (except perhaps from falling off my chair), forty-six years later, I experienced similar problems. If I moved my arm one way, my virtual body spun the other. The normal rules of movement that we are accustomed to on Earth do not apply in space. Imagine the simple act of tightening a bolt – without something to push against, as you turn the bolt you end up spinning in the opposite direction, achieving nothing. To overcome this problem, the ISS is fitted with handrails, footholds and often the crew will also use a robotic arm to assist them.
And they cannot just pop outside when the mood takes them. Lessons learnt over the years mean that every EVA is meticulously planned and choreographed. In fact, “space dance” might be a better way of describing what’s involved. Tinch explains that the VR lab enables astronauts to solve problems before they try it for real.
“If I have these four bolts I have to undo, what’s the best way for my body position to be? So you’re trying to do the choreography of the EVA and trying to figure out what works best for that workspace.” For those already on the ISS, the lab is developing VR helmets that can hook up to the station’s own laptops so astronauts can refresh their training on the job.
After 20 minutes in orbit, I’m exhausted. My back aches, my face is dripping with sweat and my wrists are sore. As he lifts off the helmet, Tinch assures me that astronauts trying this for the first time have similar problems.
If this were real, I would be wearing a bulky spacesuit, looking through a visor and would not have the luxury of stopping when I got a bit tired. The experience has given me a new appreciation of the training, skill and effort it takes to operate in the uncompromising space environment. A reality check for those of us who advocate manned missions to the Moon and Mars that we should never take this stuff for granted. Space walking may look like fun but, once you get over the amazing view, it is hard. Really hard.
In future columns Richard will be reporting from inside the space station control room and the full-sized mock-up of the ISS at Houston to discover what it takes to keep the astronauts alive.

Powers of the Federal Government
the Constitution set the basis for the government we have today.
Powers are divided between the federal (or national) government
and the 50 states. The Founding Fathers knew they had to leave enough
powers with the states when they were writing the Constitution.
If they didn't, they knew the state legislatures would never ratify
the Constitution. All states were granted the right to control certain
things within their borders. They could do so as long as they did
not interfere with the rights of other states or the nation.
Show What You Know

Comparing Common Windows Terms with Mac Terms
Computers seem to run on jargon. Many of the buzzwords and common terms used to work with Macs are exactly the same as those used for Windows: files, users, log on, log out, open, close, shut down, help, and most networking and Internet terms. Terms used to describe the graphical interface are mostly the same, too: menu, check box, dialog box, radio button, dragging, clicking, and double-clicking.
But some terms are different between the Mac and Windows PC. The following table provides the equivalent terms or types of programs for each platform.
|Windows||Mac OS X|
|Control Panel||System Preferences|
|Exit (Alt+FX)||Quit (Command+Q)|
|My Documents||Documents folder|
|My Music||Music folder|
|My Pictures||Pictures folder|
|Recycle Bin||Trash Can|
|Hourglass cursor (busy signal)||Spinning beach ball (busy signal)|
|Windows Explorer||Finder window|
|Windows Update||Software Update|

Serum iron is a test that measures how much iron is in your blood.
Fe+2; Ferric ion; Fe++; Ferrous ion; Iron - serum
How the test is performed:
A blood sample is needed. For information on how this is done, see: Venipuncture
Iron levels are highest in the morning. It's best to do this test in the morning.
How to prepare for the test:
Make sure your doctor knows about all the medications your are taking.
Drugs that can increase iron include estrogens, birth control pills, and methyldopa.
Drugs that can lower iron include cholestyramine, colchicine, deferoxamine, methicillin, allopurinol, and testosterone.
How the test will feel:
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others will feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
Why the test is performed:
Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of low iron (iron deficiency).
- Iron: 60-170 mcg/dL
TIBC : 240-450 mcg/dL
- Transferrin saturation: 20-50%
Note: mcg/dl = micrograms per deciliter
Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What abnormal results mean:
Higher-than-normal levels may mean:
Lower-than-normal levels may mean:
Other conditions under which the test may be performed:
- Anemia of chronic disease
What the risks are:
There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include:
- Excessive bleeding
- Fainting or feeling light-headed
- Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
- Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Ginder G. Microcytic and hypochromic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 162.
Yee DL, Bollard CM, Geaghan SM. Appendix: Normal Blood Values: Selected Reference Values for Neonatal, Pediatric, And Adult Populations. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Shattil SS, et al, eds. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2008:chap 164.
|Review Date: 2/8/2012|
Reviewed By: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Palm Beach Cancer Institute, West Palm Beach, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington; David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. © 1997-
A.D.A.M., Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.

Practice of engaging in sexual activity, usually with individuals other than a spouse or friend, in exchange for immediate payment in money or other valuables. Prostitutes may be of either sex and may engage in either heterosexual or homosexual activity, but historically most prostitution has been by females with males as clients. Prostitution is a very old and universal phenomenon; also universal is condemnation of the prostitute but relative indifference toward the client. Prostitutes are often set apart in some way. In ancient Rome they were required to wear distinctive dress; under Hebrew law only foreign women could be prostitutes; in prewar Japan they were required to live in special sections of the city. In medieval Europe prostitution was licensed and regulated by law, but by the 16th century an epidemic of venereal disease and post-Reformation morality led to the closure of brothels. International cooperation to end the traffic in women for the purpose of prostitution began in 1899. In 1921 the League of Nations established the Committee on the Traffic in Women and Children, and in 1949 the UN General Assembly adopted a convention for the suppression of prostitution. In the U.S. prostitution was first curtailed by the Mann Act (1910), and by 1915 most states had banned brothels (Nevada being a notable exception). Prostitution is nevertheless tolerated in most U.S. and European cities. In The Netherlands many prostitutes have become members of a professional service union, and in Scandinavia government regulations emphasize hygienic aspects, requiring frequent medical examination and providing free mandatory hospitalization for anyone found to be infected with venereal disease. Prostitutes are very often poor and lack skills to support themselves; in many traditional societies there are few other available money-earning occupations for women without family support. In developing African and Asian countries, prostitution has been largely responsible for the spread of AIDS and the orphaning of hundreds of thousands of children.

|Search Results (6 videos found)|
|NASASciFiles - Meteors
NASA Sci Files segment explaining what meteors, meteoroids, and meteorites are and the differences in these.
Keywords: NASA Sci Files; Rock; Comet; Outer Space; Meteor; Meteoroid; Meteorite; Sonic Boom; Speed of Sound; Seismic Activity; Fire Ball; Shooting Star;
Popularity (downloads): 2170
|NASAWhy?Files - Equilibrium
NASA Why? Files segment explaining the concept of equlibrium and how the Treehouse Detectives could maintain equlibrium in a Martian environment.
Keywords: NASA Why? Files; Adaptation; Environment; Oxygen; Atmosphere; Astronauts; Trash Management; Module; Sunlight; Gravity; Equlilibrium; Balanced System; Mars; Habitat; Weather; Meteors; Plants; Algae; Algal Bloom; Fish;
Popularity (downloads): 1401
|NASASciFiles - Moon Phases
NASA Sci Files segment explaining the phases of the moon and how they are created.
Keywords: NASA Sci Files; Gravity; Craters; Meteors; Astroids; Water; Earth; Moon; Moon Phases; Illuminations; Revolve; New Moon; Full Moon; First Quarter; Third Quarter; Sun; Lunar Phases; Axis; Apollo; Tides; Beach; Gravitational Pull; Oceans; Century;
Popularity (downloads): 3386
|NASASciFiles - The Case of the Shaky Quake
NASA Sci Files video containing the following eleven segments. NASA Sci Files segment exploring the different types of waves that earthquakes create. NASA Sci Files segment exploring faults and...
Keywords: NASA Sci Files; Earthquake; Waves; Primary; Compressional Waves; Secondary; Sheer Waves; Earth; Vibrate; Epicenter; Surface Wave; Crust; Rock Layers; Faults; Normal Fault; Hanging Wall; Foot Wall; Reverse Fault; Strike-Slip Fault; Lithosphere; Plates; Earth; Fault Line; Plate Boundaries; Divergent Boundaries; Rift Valleys; Volcanoes; Convergent Boundary; Mountains; Transform Boundary; San Andreas Fault; Interplate Earthquakes; Fossils; Plate Tectonics; Dinosaur; Bones; Excavation; Climate; Riverbed; Arid; Equator; Continental Drift; Alfred Wagner; Pangaea; Rock Structures; Sandstone; Chimney Formation; Grand Canyon; Global Positioning System; Stations; Satellites; Crustal Movement; Earth; Blind Fault; Computer Simulation; Slip Rate; Prediction; Displacement; Layers; Core; Diameter; Iron; Nickle; Solid; Liquid; Dense; Mantle; Basalt; Granite; Density; Graduated Cylinder; Plates; Measurement; Richter Scale; Moment Magnitude Scale; Scientific Journals; Observations; Data; Epicenter; Comet; Outer Space; Meteor; Meteoroid; Meteorite; Sonic Boom; Speed of Sound; Seismic Activity; Fire Ball; Shooting Star; Earthquake Facts; Frenquency; Location; Intensity; California; Alaska; Weather; Seismograph; Inertia; Newton; Vertical Motion; Horizontal Motion; Seismology; Tremor; S Waves; P Waves; Sound Waves; Seismogram; Triangulation; Graph; Compass; World Map; Student Activity; Epicenter; Seismic Station;
Popularity (downloads): 2158
|NASASciFiles - The Case of the Galactic Vacation
NASA Sci Files video containing the following eleven segments. NASA Sci Files segment exploring the Arecibo Observatory, what it does, and where it is located. NASA Sci Files segment...
Keywords: NASA Sci Files; Arecibo Observatory; Telescope; Radio Telescope; Radio Waves; Signals; Universe; Pulsar; Quasar; Reflector; Receiver; Electrical Signal; Control Room; Scientists; Equator; Wavelength; Optical; Atmosphere; Solar System; Galaxy; Extraterrestrial Intelligence; Artificial Signal; Forces of Motion; Free Fall; Weightlessness; Inertia; Acceleration; Parabola; Accelerometer; Space Travel; Roller Coaster; Navigation and Vehicle Health Monitoring System; Modified Bathrooms; Gravity; Zero Gravity; Exercise Equipment; Kitchen; Starship 2040; Orbit; International Space Station; Living Environment; Earth; Commander; Mars; Tourist Attraction; Canyon; Crater; Solar System; Planet; Water; Liquid; Frozen; Seasons; Axis; Polar Ice Caps; Atmosphere; Gas; Carbon Dioxide; Oxygen; Nitrogen; Hydrogen; Temperature; Space Suit; Common Denomenator; Meteors; Astroids; Water; Earth; Moon; Moon Phases; Illuminations; Revolve; New Moon; Full Moon; First Quarter; Third Quarter; Sun; Lunar Phases; Axis; Apollo; Tides; Beach; Gravitational Pull; Oceans; Century; Space; Distances; Parallax; Experiment; Student Activity; Optics; Protractor; Vertex; Angle; Data; Propulsion System; Space Radiation; Bone Mass; Chemical Rockets; Spaceship; Gases; Plasma; Magnetic Field; Exhaust; Energy; Heat; Electricity; Nuclear Power; Fusion; Thermonuclear Reaction; Technology; Arecibo Telescope; Solar System; Extra-solar Planets; Stars; Planets; Lightyears; Reflecting Telescope; Light; Dim; Betelgeuse; Giant Star; Life; Colors; Red; Blue; Temperature; Yellow; Dwarf Star; Sun; Habitable Zone; Ultraviolet Radiation; Puerto Rico; Galaxy; Orion Nebula; Hydrogen Gas; Whirlpool Galaxy; Extreme Environment; Boiling Temperature; Air Pressure; Celcius; Oxygen; Gravitational Force; Jupiter; Kilometers; Inner Planets; Mercury; Venus; Lava Flows; Helium; Saturn; Uranus; Neptune; Pluto; Astronomer; Proxima Centauri;
Popularity (downloads): 1602
|NASAWhy?Files - The Case of the Inhabitable Habitat
NASA Why? Files video containing the following fifteen segments. NASA Why? Files segment explaining how astronauts adapt to a new environment like space. NASA Why? Files segment explaining how astronauts...
Keywords: NASA Why? Files; NASA Why? Files; Adaptation; Astronauts; Space; Altitude Sickness; Oxygen; Environment; Elevation; Sea Level; Training; Weightlessness; Free Fall; Parabola; Weightless Wonder; Airplane; Simulate; Zero Gravity; Vomit Comet; Trash Management; Module; Sunlight; Gravity; Equlilibrium; Balanced System; Mars; Habitat; Weather; Meteors; Plants; Algae; Algal Bloom; Fish; Atmosphere; Minerals; Water; Photosynthesis; Carbon Dioxide; Food Web; Consumers; Producers; Decomposers; Carnivores; Herbivores; Ominvore; Community; Survival; Bacteria; Fungi; Desert; Ocean; Food; Shelter; Reef; Lagoon; Forest; Pond; Animals; Rain Forest; Predators; Behaviors; Gravity; Outer Space; Microgravity; Earth; NASA; Gravitational Force; Boiling Point; Vacuum Pump; Martian Atmosphere; Boil; Density; Ice; Liquid Water; Water Vapor; Student Activity; Migration; Migratory Patterns; Turtles; Data; Coordinates; Food Source; Space Walk; International Space Station; Hubble Space Telescope; Neutral Bouyancy; Laboratory; Orbit; Space Suit; Radiation; Seeds; Plant Growth Chamber; Plant Reproduction; Germinate; Gases; Transpiration; Pores; Leaves; Evaporation; Condensation; Space Vehicles; Food; Nutrition; Space Seeds; Arabidopsis; Mustard Weed; Life Cycle; Control Group; Records; Reproduction; Normal Growth; Bioregenerative System; Extreme Temperature; Space Suit; Radiation; Protection; Outer Space; Air Pressure; Long Johns; Maximum Absorbency Garment; Iterative Process; Gloves; Space Station; Space Trash; Reduce; Reuse; Recycle; Trash Cans; Efficient Packaging; Progress; Hardware; Self-Sufficient; Soil; Nutrients; Terrarium; The Red Planet; Robotic Airplane; Winds; Iron; Lowlands; Highlands; Volcanoe; Canyon; Thin Atmosphere; Cold; Dry; Nitrogen; Argon;
Popularity (downloads): 2175

Researchers at Rensselaer have developed a new energy storage device that easily could be mistaken for a simple sheet of black paper.
The nanoengineered battery is lightweight, ultra thin, completely flexible, and geared toward meeting the trickiest design and energy requirements of tomorrow’s gadgets, implantable medical equipment, and transportation vehicles.
Along with its ability to function in temperatures up to 300 degrees Fahrenheit and down to 100 below zero, the device is completely integrated and can be printed like paper. The device is also unique in that it can function as both a high-energy battery and a high-power supercapacitor, which are generally separate components in most electrical systems. Another key feature is the capability to use human blood or sweat to help power the battery.
Details of the project are outlined in the paper “Flexible Energy Storage Devices Based on Nanocomposite Paper” published Aug. 13 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The semblance to paper is no accident: more than 90 percent of the device is made up of cellulose, the same plant cells used in newsprint, loose leaf, lunch bags, and nearly every other type of paper.
Rensselaer researchers infused this paper with aligned carbon nanotubes, which give the device its black color. The nanotubes act as electrodes and allow the storage devices to conduct electricity. The device, engineered to function as both a lithium-ion battery and a supercapacitor, can provide the long, steady power output comparable to a conventional battery, as well as a supercapacitor’s quick burst of high energy.
The device can be rolled, twisted, folded, or cut into any number of shapes with no loss of mechanical integrity or efficiency. The paper batteries can also be stacked, like a ream of printer paper, to boost the total power output.
“It’s essentially a regular piece of paper, but it’s made in a very intelligent way,” said paper co-author Robert Linhardt, the Ann and John H. Broadbent Senior Constellation Professor of Biocatalysis and Metabolic Engineering. “We’re not putting pieces together it’s a single, integrated device,” he said. “The components are molecularly attached to each other: the carbon nanotube print is embedded in the paper, and the electrolyte is soaked into the paper. The end result is a device that looks, feels, and weighs the same as paper.”
The creation of this unique nanocomposite paper drew from a diverse pool of disciplines, requiring expertise in materials science, energy storage, and chemistry. Along with Linhardt, authors of the paper include Pulickel M. Ajayan, professor of materials science and engineering, and Omkaram Nalamasu, professor of chemistry with a joint appointment in materials science and engineering. Senior research specialist Victor Pushparaj, along with postdoctoral research associates Shaijumon M. Manikoth, Ashavani Kumar, and Saravanababu Murugesan, were co-authors and lead researchers of the project. Other
The researchers used ionic liquid, essentially a liquid salt, as the battery’s electrolyte. It’s important to note that ionic liquid contains no water, which means there’s nothing in the batteries to freeze or evaporate. “This lack of water allows the paper energy storage devices to
Along with use in small handheld electronics, the paper batteries’ light weight could make them ideal for use in automobiles, aircraft, and even boats. “Plus, because of the high paper content and lack of toxic chemicals, it’s environmentally safe,” Shaijumon said.
Paper is also extremely biocompatible and these new hybrid battery/supercapacitors have potential as power supplies for devices implanted in the body. The team printed paper batteries without adding any electrolytes, and demonstrated that naturally occurring electrolytes in human sweat, blood, and urine can be used to activate the battery device.
“It’s a way to power a small device such as a pacemaker without introducing any harsh chemicals such as the kind that are typically found in batteries into the body,” Pushparaj said.
The materials required to create the paper batteries are inexpensive, Murugesan said, but the team has not yet developed a way to inexpensively mass produce the devices. The end goal is to print the paper using a roll-to-roll system similar to how newspapers are printed.
The team of researchers has already filed a patent protecting the invention. They are now working on ways to boost the efficiency of the batteries and supercapacitors, and investigating different manufacturing techniques.
The paper energy storage device project was supported by the New York State Office of Science, Technology, and Academic Research (NYSTAR), as well as the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center at Rensselaer.
Send comments to:
Inside Rensselaer, Strategic Communications and External Relations
1000 Troy Building, 110 Eighth Street, Troy, N.Y. 12180 or to email@example.com.
|Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute | About RPI | Virtual Campus Tour | Academics | Research | Student Life | Admissions | News & Events|

Pan across NGC 2841
Star formation is one of the most important processes in shaping the Universe; it plays a pivotal role in the evolution of galaxies and it is also in the earliest stages of star formation that planetary systems first appear.
Yet there is still much that astronomers don’t understand, such as how do the properties of stellar nurseries vary according to the composition and density of gas present, and what triggers star formation in the first place? The driving force behind star formation is particularly unclear for a type of galaxy called a flocculent spiral, such as NGC 2841 shown here, which features short spiral arms rather than prominent and well-defined galactic limbs.
NASA, ESA and the Hubble Heritage (STScI/AURA)-ESA/Hubble Collaboration Acknowledgment: M. Crockett and S. Kaviraj (Oxford University, UK), R. O'Connell (University of Virginia), B. Whitmore (STScI) and the WFC3 Scientific Oversight Committee.
About the Video
|Release date:||17 February 2011, 15:00|
About the Object
|Type:||• Galaxies Images/Videos|

February 7th, 2011
05:56 PM ET
Using marijuana, or cannabis, may cause psychosis to develop sooner in patients already predisposed to developing it, and in other patients the drug may even cause psychosis, according to a new study published in the Archives of General Psychiatry.
"This finding is an important breakthrough in our understanding of the relationship between cannabis use and psychosis," according to the study. "It raises the question of whether those substance users would still have gone on to develop psychosis a few years later."
Patients with psychosis tend to lose touch with reality and are prone to hallucinations and delusions about what is happening around them. Psychosis is frequently reported among patients with diagnosed mental illness such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
According to the study led by Australian researchers, in which data from 83 studies involving more than 20,000 patients were analyzed, marijuana users experienced psychosis about three years younger than non-users. Users of other substances (besides pot) experienced symptoms of psychosis two years sooner. Alcohol use had no influence on development of psychosis, according to the study.
"Reducing the use of cannabis could be one of the few ways of altering the outcome of the illness because earlier onset of schizophrenia is associated with a worse prognosis," according to the study. "An extra two or three years of psychosis-free functioning could allow many patients to achieve the important developmental milestones of late adolescence and early adulthood that could lower the long-term disability arising from psychotic disorders."
But experts say the complexity of interaction between genes and environment, and the possibility that cannabis is, in fact, a way to self-medicate when psychotic symptoms arise are not accounted for in this study.
"It is distinctly possible, in fact likely, that folks who experience initial symptoms turn to cannabis in an effort to control them, then end up having a psychotic break of some sort earlier simply because they had their first symptoms earlier," said Mitch Earleywine, an associate professor of psychology at the State University of New York at Albany, who is also a marijuana policy expert. "This predicament makes it look as if cannabis preceded the psychotic symptoms when, in fact...folks with worse symptoms who are more likely to have an early break might simply be more likely to turn to cannabis."
Theories about an association between marijuana use and schizophrenia include several –sometimes interrelated - scenarios: The possibility that cannabis causes schizophrenia; that cannabis may cause people vulnerable to schizophrenia to develop symptoms; that cannabis may make schizophrenia symptoms worse; or that people with schizophrenia are more likely to use cannabis, according to the study.
Study authors suggest that this study, "lends weight to the view that cannabis use precipitates schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders," perhaps because of some confluence of genetic and environmental factors, or because using cannabis early in life may disrupt brain development.
"[This study] found that cannabis is associated with early onset of psychosis and that is most likely true but it doesn't answer the question of which way it goes," said Dr. Charles L. Raison, associate professor in the department of psychiatry at Emory University, and CNNHealth's mental health expert doctor. "Does smoking cannabis early in life make you vulnerable to getting early psychosis or is the first manifestation of psychosis to do drugs and alcohol, or is it both?"
Raison added that other studies suggesting a causal relationship between marijuana use and psychosis disagree with this one.
Whatever the relationship between cannabis and psychosis, experts can agree that early use of cannabis is problematic.
"No one wants to see young people get heavily involved with any psychoactive substances," said Earleywine.
From around the web
About this blog
Get a behind-the-scenes look at the latest stories from CNN Chief Medical Correspondent, Dr. Sanjay Gupta, Senior Medical Correspondent Elizabeth Cohen and the CNN Medical Unit producers. They'll share news and views on health and medical trends - info that will help you take better care of yourself and the people you love.

The largest-ever three-dimensional map of the distant universe has been created using the light of the brightest objects in the cosmos.
Since this distant light took eons to reach Earth, the map is essentially a window back in time, providing an unprecedented view of what the universe looked like 11 billion years ago.
Normally, researchers make maps of the universe by looking at galaxies.
"Here, we are looking at intergalactic hydrogen gas, which blocks light," said researcher Anze Slosar, a physicist at the U.S. Department of Energy's Brookhaven National Laboratory. "It's like looking at the moon through clouds — you can see the shapes of the clouds by the moonlight that they block."
Mapping the universe
Scientists from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey relied on the light of the brightest objects in the cosmos, quasars — brilliantly luminous beacons powered by giant black holes. As light from a quasar voyages to Earth, it illuminates clouds of intergalactic hydrogen gas that absorb light at specific wavelengths depending on the distances between each quasar and these clouds. This leads to an irregular pattern of quasar light known as the "Lyman-alpha forest."
To make a full three-dimensional map of the universe, the researchers relied on 14,000 quasars. The map reveals a time 11 billion years ago, when the first galaxies were just beginning to come together under the force of gravity to form the first large clusters.
"The most exciting thing for me personally is proving wrong everyone who was telling us that it is never going to work," Slosar told Space.com. The use of the Lyman-alpha forest in creating a 3-D map was unproven, "a large investment of time, 20 percent of a big international project, and it sort of had to work. But we were the first to show that it actually works. So, while we haven't yet discovered anything amazing about the universe itself using this technique, we demonstrated that it does work and that we will very likely discover new things."
These observations came from the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS), the largest of the four projects making up the latest phase of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. When BOSS completes its observations of about 140,000 more quasars by 2014, astronomers can make a map 10 times larger than the one being released today.
"With that much data, we're bound to find things that we never expected," said researcher Patrick Petitjean, a quasar expert at the Institute of Astrophysics of Paris.
Uncovering the mysteries
For instance, the ultimate goal of such maps is to study how the expansion of the universe has changed during its history, which could shed light on the mysterious dark energy that seems to drive the accelerating expansion of the universe.
Space news from NBCNews.com
Teen's space mission fueled by social media
Science editor Alan Boyle's blog: "Astronaut Abby" is at the controls of a social-media machine that is launching the 15-year-old from Minnesota to Kazakhstan this month for the liftoff of the International Space Station's next crew.
- Buzz Aldrin's vision for journey to Mars
- Giant black hole may be cooking up meals
- Watch a 'ring of fire' solar eclipse online
- Teen's space mission fueled by social media
"Dark energy is one of the most surprising discoveries in physics in the last 20 years," Slosar noted. "Nobody has a foggiest idea of what it could be. So we study it by studying the expansion history and growth of structure in the universe. To study these we make maps of the universe at different epochs."
By the time BOSS ends, "we will be able to measure how fast the universe was expanding 11 billion years ago with an accuracy of a couple of percent," said researcher Patrick McDonald of Lawrence Berkeley and Brookhaven National Laboratories, who pioneered techniques for measuring the universe with the Lyman-alpha forest and helped design the BOSS quasar survey. "Considering that no one has ever measured the cosmic expansion rate so far back in time, that's a pretty astonishing prospect."
The scientists could, for example, "discover that dark energy actually kicked in 11 billion years ago rather than 7 billion as predicted by (the) simplest model and that would be just mind-blowing," Slosar said. "The potential for discovering anomalies is great."
The scientists detailed their findings May 1 at a meeting of the American Physical Society in Anaheim, Calif.
© 2013 Space.com. All rights reserved. More from Space.com.

v. gleaned, glean•ing, gleans
To gather grain or other produce left by reapers.
1. To gather grain or produce left behind by reapers.
2. To collect bit by bit
3. To strip (as a field) of the leavings of reapers
Have you ever been gleaning? Ever thought about what that term really means? The definition is listed above. It is the act of picking fruits or vegetables (or grains) that were left behind during the initial harvest.
In its simplest form, it is the act of saving food from being plowed under and going to waste. Often, farmers simply can’t afford to incur the labor, materials and transportation costs to retrieve the “leftovers” – and as a result each season millions of pounds of fresh food is left in the fields.
On Saturday, Feb. 19, more than 40 high school students from Chets Creek Church in Jacksonville got an opportunity to experience the process firsthand when they traveled to Hastings, Fla., to glean broccoli. The majority of them had never been on a farm, or even knew what it meant to ‘glean’ broccoli from a field.
It turned out to be a wonderful experience, and they asked if they could go again!
The opportunity was made possible by Second Harvest’s partnership with Society of St. Andrew (SOSA) and SOSA’s relationships with local farmers, as well as the beautiful weather we enjoyed that day.
In less than three hours, this group of high school kids picked 2,745 pounds of broccoli (four pallets worth)! Second Harvest was also able to pick up five bins of cabbage and two bins of citrus from neighbor farms – ultimately providing a full truck of fruits and vegetables to families and individuals experiencing hunger in our north Florida communities.
We are very grateful for those farmers that allow us this opportunity and to the kids that worked so hard and, in the process, created memories that will last a lifetime.
SOSA has gleaning opportunities on most Wednesdays and Saturdays during the growing season, which lasts from November to June. If your group is interested in gleaning, please contact Second Harvest volunteer coordinator Jessie Sanders at 904.517.5560, email@example.com.
(All photos provided by Jeff Taylor Photography)

On Thursday, Earth Day was celebrated throughout the country, and the Whittier Daily News included a supplemental section that featured "green" possibilities and initiatives.
Earth Day focuses on the need to care for the Earth, a kind of human practice that can be understood as emerging out of a spiritual attitude.
Our present tradition of Earth Day festivities, however, was generated by political actions. Conceived by former Wisconsin Sen. Gaylord Nelson, the first Earth Day celebration took place on April 22, 1970 when four million advocates throughout the nation participated in consciousness-raising events.
This year marked the 40th anniversary of the founding of the celebration, a number that resonates with biblical stories and symbols.
In biblical literature the number 40 signifies a time of trial or testing that is followed by a period of new possibilities. Noah and his kin boarded the ark for 40 days and 40 nights of flood, followed by fresh prospects for the survivors to start society again.
Moses and his motley crew of refugees wandered 40 years in the vacant vastness of Sinai before crossing the Jordan River into Canaan. They perceived the land full of promise - flowing with milk and honey - a place where their fidelity to God could flourish.
And Jesus went into the wilderness for 40 days of soul-searching solitude. This period of pondering preceded his baptism by John, which initiated his mission of healing and
Unlike these biblical stories in which the period of 40 days or years signifies the end of a trial period, the celebrations of Earth Day hereafter will continue to raise awareness about new possibilities for caring for creation.
So the alignment of the 40th anniversary of Earth Day with significant biblical periods is simply coincidental. The real spiritual character of Earth Day lies in its charge for humans to care for the earth.
In one of the biblical accounts of creation, humans are given the responsibility to exercise dominion over creation (Genesis 1:28). In biblical usage, dominion does not mean wanton domination. Instead, it calls for responsible care, to be God's emissary in working with plants and animals.
This idea is reaffirmed in Psalm 24, which my sixth-grade teacher had my classmates and me memorize and recite. Perhaps she was planting seeds for celebrating Earth Day a decade before its initial American celebration!
The psalm begins with these words: "The earth is the Lord's and all that is in it, the world, and those who live in it" (RSV).
Because the earth belongs to God, people must tend it and its inhabitants with respect and love.
With such reverence for the wonder and beauty of the earth, Christians throughout the last century have often sung a joyful hymn whose text was written by Folliot Pierpoint.
"For the Beauty of the earth, for the glory of the skies, for the love which from our birth, over and around us lies: Lord of all, to thee we raise, this our hymn of grateful praise."
Although Earth Day was not one of the agricultural festivals during biblical times, the roots for its celebration reach back into the earliest stories and statements of biblical faith, and the love of the earth has been expressed in psalms and hymns throughout the years.
Indeed, the celebration of Earth Day goes hand in hand with spiritual practices.
Joseph L. Price is the Genevieve S. Connick Professor of Religious Studies at Whittier College.

The growing use of handheld devices and social media among students is creating a technology tipping point for schools that could completely break down the barriers between teaching platforms within five to 10 years, Bill Gates said today.
Tablet computers, smartphones, e-readers, digital textbooks and the accessibility of digital video including YouTube are playing major roles in changing the way students are learning at both the K-12 and higher-education levels, Gates said during the keynote at the education arm of the South by Southwest conference in Austin, Texas.
Digital video exercises incorporated into textbooks online are blurring the line between teaching and assessment to the extent that there really isn’t a boundary anymore between the two, the Microsoft co-founder and chairman said.
“Finally there are people looking at whether textbooks should be fully digital,” he said, speaking to an audience of teachers, administrators and representatives of educational technology companies.
Gates has championed the cause of global health through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation since stepping down from day-to-day operations at Microsoft, but improving the state of US education has been a major focus of his humanitarian work as well.
One issue is the fact that standardized test scores at public schools have largely remained the same over the past decade or so even though resources being pumped into public school districts have doubled, Gates said.
Better use of technology could be the key to improving public schools, he said.
Some 44 percent of students in grades 6-8 say they want to read on a digital device, according to data presented by Gates during his SXSW talk. Meanwhile, 80 percent of high school students have access to smartphones, and Twitter use among high school students tripled last year, according to Gates.
There is still the issue of cost when it comes to supplying students with, say, tablet computers or e-readers, “but we’re just on the cusp where combo tablet-PCs devices are rich enough [in functionality] and cheap enough that this will clearly be the way it’s done,” Gates said.
Currently, the markets for technology content, services and back-end infrastructure for US schools amount to roughly US$420 million, but Gates said those markets could reach $9 billion in the future.
The vision has challenges, Gates acknowledged. Education, for example, comprised a mere one percent of all venture capital transactions between 1995 and 2011, while technology in general and health care took in 38 percent and 19 percent of the pie, respectively, according to Gates.
Other barriers include proving to administrators that technology works and ensuring that teachers are well-trained.
“We’re going to have to grow this,” Gates said. Ultimately, he hopes that better use of technology will help provide more personalised learning options for students and lead to integration of software programs used in schools.

Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space at UNH
Scientists Say Developing Countries Will Be Hit Hard By Water Scarcity in the 21st Century
By Sharon Keeler
UNH News Bureau
July 11, 2001
DURHAM, N.H. --The entire water cycle of the globe has been changed by human activities and even more dramatic changes lie ahead, said a group of experts at an international conference in Amsterdam on global change this week.
"Today, approximately 2 billion people are suffering from water stress, and models predict that this will increase to more than 3 billion (or about 40 percent of the population) in 2025," said Charles Vorosmarty, a research professor in the University of New Hampshire's Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space.
There will be winners and losers in terms of access to safe water. The world's poor nations will be the biggest losers. Countries already suffering severe water shortages, such as Mexico, Pakistan, northern China, Poland and countries in the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa will be hardest hit.
"Water scarcity means a growing number of public health, pollution and economic development problems," said Vorosmarty.
"To avoid major conflict through competition for water resources, we urgently need international water use plans," added Professor Hartmut Grassl from the Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology in Germany. "I believe this should be mediated by an established intergovernmental body."
The water cycle is affected by climate change, population growth, increasing water demand, changes in vegetation cover and finally the El Nino Southern Oscillation, bringing drought to some areas and flooding to others. Surprisingly, at the global scale, population growth and increasing demand for water -- not climate change -- are the primary contributing factors in future water scarcity to the year 2025.
"But at the regional scale, which is where all the critical decisions are made, it is the combination of population growth, increasing demand for water, and climate change that is the main culprit," said Vorosmarty.
According to El Nino expert, Professor Antonio Busalacchi from the University of Maryland, the two major El Nino events of the century occurred in the last 15 years and there are signs that the frequency may increase due to human activities.
"In 1982-83, what was referred to as the "El Nino event of the century" occurred with global economic consequences totaling more than $13 billion," said Busalacchi. "The recently concluded 1997-1998 El Nino was the second El Nino event of the century with economic losses estimated to be upward of $89 billion."

PRIAM -- Their grandparents knew the value of corn cobs as a fuel, and used them to help warm the house or heat up the oven for baking bread.
Yet brothers Lonnie Fosso and Ryan Fosso couldn't help but admit their amazement Wednesday as they watched two combines harvest their corn while also collecting the corn cobs. The corn cobs are being harvested as fuel for the Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company plant in Benson.
"I wish they could see this,'' said Lonnie Fosso.
Dozens of people did. The harvest at the Fosso farm south of Priam served as the first of three demonstration sites for a first-of-its-kind project in the region. Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company has been powering some of the operations at its 47 million-gallon-a-year ethanol plant by feeding biomass to a gasifier. The Frontline Technology system turns the biomass -- currently wood chips -- into a synthetic gas that can replace natural gas.
After more than four months of trial use, the gasifier has proven its ability to displace about 25 percent of the natural gas used by the plant.
The goal is to someday see biomass replace 75 percent to perhaps as much as 90 percent of the natural gas used at the plant, according to Gene Fynboh, a member of the board of directors and coordinator for the biomass harvest project.
Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company would like corn cobs raised by its members to become the biomass fuel of choice. Corn cobs are relatively easy to collect, store and handle when compared to other types of biomass. They have good energy content. And, they hold very little of the nutrients that are returned to the soil by corn stover, Fynboh said.
The cooperative would rather pay its farmer members for corn cobs and circulate the dollars at home than buy expensive fossil fuel from sources a long ways from home, Fynboh said. The evidence so far indicates that locally produced biomass is a lower-cost fuel than natural gas, he added.
Modern technology makes it much more efficient to convert biomass to energy than when the Fossos' grandparents tossed corn cobs into the wood stove. But in some respects, we're still stuck in the days of the bang board wagon in terms of the technology and knowledge needed to harvest and store corn cobs on a large scale.
"This is something we haven't done for 50 years,'' Fynboh said. "We have to learn it all over again.''
Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company and the University of Minnesota West Central Research and Outreach Center obtained $250,000 in grant funds to find a better way. At the Fosso farm, combines demonstrated two different ways to collect the corn cobs that would otherwise have been chopped and spit out with the rest of the corn stover on to the field.
One combine towed a pull-behind, Vermeer CCX770 Cob Harvester to collect the cobs. The other had a Ceres Ag Residue Recovery System mounted piggyback on it for the same purpose. With either system, the cobs were periodically dumped into trucks or onto piles.
Either system will add fuel costs to the harvest, and necessitate some additional help. An extra truck to haul cobs and a pay loader to build the piles were at work.
Fynboh said goal number one is to harvest the corn as efficiently as if the cobs were not being collected. The Fossos said that is a must for them: Farmers cannot afford to jeopardize their corn harvest in any way.
The Fossos and Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company are also interested in knowing how the costs of harvesting the corn cobs compare to their market value as a fuel.
Harvesting corn cobs as fuel could increase the overall economic return on corn fields, Fynboh said. "We have a resource that is right under our nose here,'' he said.
Speaking of the ground, it too is under study. Fynboh said the research will examine how much of the biomass can be taken without adversely affecting the soil or future yields.
Fynboh said Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company has lined up 5,000 acres of corn from its members to harvest for the research. The cooperative's 980 owner-members raise corn on 112,000 acres. That is ample to supply all of the biomass energy the company is seeking, Fynboh said.

Pauline Hopkins and the American Dream
Pauline Elizabeth Hopkins was perhaps the most prolific black female writer of her time. Between 1900 and 1904, writing mainly for Colored American Magazine, she published four novels, at least seven short stories, and numerous articles that often addressed the injustices and challenges facing African Americans in post–Civil War America. In Pauline Hopkins and the American Dream, Alisha Knight provides the first full-length critical analysis of Hopkins’s work.
Scholars have frequently situated Hopkins within the domestic, sentimental tradition of nineteenth-century women's writing, with some critics observing that aspects of her writing, particularly its emphasis on the self-made man, seem out of place within the domestic tradition. Knight argues that Hopkins used this often-dismissed theme to critique American society's ingrained racism and sexism. In her “Famous Men” and “Famous Women” series for Colored American Magazine, she constructed her own version of the success narrative by offering models of African American self-made men and women. Meanwhile, in her fiction, she depicted heroes who fail to achieve success or must leave the United States to do so.
Hopkins risked and eventually lost her position at Colored American Magazine by challenging black male leaders, liberal white philanthropists, and white racists—and by conceiving a revolutionary treatment of the American Dream that placed her far ahead of her time. Hopkins is finally getting her due, and this clear-eyed analysis of her work will be a revelation to literary scholars, historians of African American history, and students of women’s studies.
Alisha Knight is an associate professor of English and American Studies at Washington College. Her published articles include “Furnace Blasts for the Tuskegee Wizard: Revisiting Pauline E. Hopkins, Booker T. Washington, and the Colored American Magazine,” which appeared in American Periodicals.

ThomasNet Articles about custom manufacturing and fabrication including careers, employment trends, laser cutting, powder coating, history of manufacturing, machinist resources and more.
California ConnectEd Linked Learning connects strong academics with real–world experience in a wide range of fields, such as engineering, arts and media, and biomedical and health sciences—helping students gain an advantage in high school, college, and career.
Teaching Kids Real Math with Computers – Conrad Wolfram TED Ideas Worth Spreading Relates math to real work and everyday living
An Overview of the Methodological Approach of Action Research, Rory O’Brien, Faculty of Information Studies, University of Toronto
Resource Area For Teaching (RAFT) Sacramento is a new non-profit organization that fosters hands-on teaching as the best way for teachers to teach and students to learn in pre-school through 12th grade education and community programs.
Resource Area For Teaching (RAFT) With more than 8500 members throughout Silicon Valley at our San Jose and Redwood City, CA resource centers, RAFT produces innovative “hands-on” teaching idea sheets and packaged activity kits that are created around important concepts in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) as well as reading and art.
CTE Central Find out how the CTE Pathways Initiative funds are being used in communities to make a difference for students, faculty, employers/industry and others.
National Girls Collaborative Project NGCP brings together organizations throughout the United States that are committed to informing and encouraging girls to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
California Technology Education Resource (CTER) Center provides a resource for teachers and administrators in technology education in the state of California
Project-based learning: a case for not giving up Suzie Boss on Edutopia.
Seven Essentials for Project-Based Learning John Larmer and John R. Mergendoller on ASCD

CSE 341 -- Programming Languages
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
Steve Tanimoto (instructor) and Jeremy Baer (teaching assistant).
Assignment P1Version 1.00 of May 16 Subject to change.
Perl WarmupDue date and time: Wednesday, June 2, 1999, in class. (Note change of due date).
Turn in this assignment as a hardcopy printout. For #1 show the program, and examples of input and output for 2 separate example files, the first of which uses the 5-line text file in the assignment. For #2, give printouts of (1) the HTML forms page as it looks in the browser, with the form areas filled out ready to be submitted, (2) the Perl source code, and (3) the web page that is generated by the script. In case you choose option 2a, give a printout of the email message, too.
Instructions: Do both exercise 1 and exercise 2.
1. Write a perl program that processes a file and builds an inverted index that tells for each word in the file all of the line numbers where the word can be found in the file.
For example, if the input file contains the 5 lines of text...
This is a sample file
and the word zebra occurs
on lines 2 and 5. The
numbers here are treated
just like words such as zebra.
Then the inverted index would look like the following when printed out.
and: 2, 3
the: 2, 3
zebra: 2, 5
Note: All words have been converted to lower case, and punctuation has been ignored.
Peform a kind of "stemming" on the words as they are put into the index. For example, after stemming, each of the following words become "jump".
jump, jumped, jumping.
Your solution to this is permitted to make mistakes. It doesn't
have to handle irregular verbs. You may be able to avoid converting
"swing" to "sw" by avoiding stemming whenever the result would be shorter
than 3 characters long.
2. Create a Perl script and test it with a web server and browser to do one of the following (your choice).
a. receive the values of an HTML form for some questions about programming languages, and then (a) email the results posted by the user to your own mail account, and (b) print a nice message that somehow "evaluates" the user's answers telling them something like "right", "wrong", "I agree", "you have good taste", etc., according to what they answered in the form.
b. receive a URL from the user via an HTML form, and then retrieve the document from that location and run the algorithm of exercise 1 (inverted index) on it, and finally format the results as HTML that is returned to the user.
c. implement a "vote counter" that lets a web surfer vote on some set
of candidates. It should (a) update the count for that candidate
selected, and display the result. It should also refuse to accept
a second vote for the same election from the same IP address. (Use
a browser cookie that names the group of candidates, i.e., the particular
election that the user
has voted in). It should be possible for the same web page to have multiple elections (e.g., one for president, one for
Teamwork: Do your work individually on this assignment.
Resources: The recommended platform for this assignment is Fiji. Each of you should have an account on this machine.

Copyright © 2007 Dorling Kindersley
Light has different wavelengths, which we see as colors. The range of wavelengths we see is called the visible spectrum. We separate the colors of the spectrum by DISPERSION.
Light waves are just one type of electromagnetic wave. They belong to an electromagnetic spectrum that includes radio waves, X-rays, and gamma rays. The visible spectrum is the only part the human eye can see. To our eyes, the colors in the visible spectrum range from violet at one end to red at the other.
The light-sensitive cells in the human eye react to just three types of light: red, green, and blue wavelengths. These are the three primary light colors. If all three types of wavelength enter the eye with equal strength, we see white light. When just red and green light are present, we see the mixture as yellow.
Different wavelengths of light blend to produce millions of shades of color. The human eye is able to pick out over 10 million of them—some of which can be shown by a COLOR TREE. The amount of color we see depends on how much light there is. In dim light, we see no colors at all, only shades of gray.
When white light shines through a specially shaped piece of glass called a prism, it is separated into its different wavelengths by dispersion. The wavelengths show up as a range of colors called a spectrum. English scientist Isaac Newton first used a prism to disperse sunlight in the late 1600s.
Rainbows appear when there are water droplets in the atmosphere and bright sunshine at the same time. The droplets act like tiny prisms, refracting and reflecting the sunlight, and dispersing it into the colors of the spectrum. To see a rainbow, you have to be standing at a particular angle to the water droplets and the Sun.
A color tree is one way of grading or classifying colors. Using a color tree, it is possible to describe and then match a particular shade of color (of paint or fabric, for example).

Biological invasions: a growing threat to biodiversity
07 May 2012 | News story
Biological invasions: a growing threat to biodiversity, human health and food security. Policy recommendations for the Rio+20 process drafted by IUCN SSC Invasive Species Specialist Group and IUCN's Invasive Species Initiative.
Planet Under Pressure 2012 was the largest gathering of global change scientists leading up to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) with a total of 3,018 delegates at the conference venue and over 3,500 that attended virtually via live webstreaming. The first State of the Planet Declaration was issued at the conference.
Following the conference and declaration several ISSG members were concerned with the limited attention being paid to the issue of biological invasions and invasive alien species in the Rio+20 process. Members proposed the development and submission of a policy paper highlighting the growing threat of biological invasions on biodiversity, human health and food security for the Rio+20 process.
After extensive consultation with the membership, the ISSG with the IUCN's Invasive Species Intitiative (ISI) developed and submitted a policy brief related to biologival invasions and invasive alien species to the IUCN. This brief will be included in the IUCN documentation for Rio+20 and text be reflected in the umbrella position paper (which will form the basis of IUCN’s statement to the Rio+20 conference).
The Rio+20 Conference will take place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from is June 20 to 22, 2012, in order to mark the 20th anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, also called the “Rio Earth Summit”. The conference will focus on two themes: 1) a Green Economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication; and 2) the Institutional Framework for Sustainable Development.

People who suffer from allergies may have a lower risk of brain cancer, researchers say.
In a study at Ohio State University, blood samples from brain tumour patients were compared with those from people of a similar age and sex who were cancer-free.
The researchers found people affected by allergies to pollen, grass, pets and dust mites had a lower rate of glioblastoma, one of the most common types of brain cancer.
The results, published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, showed women with allergy-related antibodies were 54 per cent less likely to get a brain tumour, with men 20 per cent less likely.
Its thought that because the immune system is on red alert much of the time with an allergy, this suppresses the growth of cancerous cells in the brain.
Last year, a Danish study found people with common contact allergies, such as to nickel, had a lower risk of developing certain cancers such as breast and skin cancer.
- DAILY MAIL

The waste characteristics factor category in the ground water pathway is made up of two components: the toxicity/mobility of the most hazardous substance associated with the site and the hazardous waste quantity at the site. The most hazardous substance at a site is identified as the hazardous substance receiving the highest toxicity/mobility value factor. The hazardous waste quantity factor is evaluated as discussed in Section 5.
- The Most Hazardous Substance at a Site
- Toxicity/Mobility Factor
- Hazardous Waste Quantity
- Waste Characteristics Factor Category Value
The most hazardous substance at a site is identified by calculating the toxicity/mobility factor all eligible hazardous substances associated with the site. Eligible hazardous substances consist of those hazardous substances available to migrate from the sources at the site to ground water and include:
- All hazardous substances found in ground water observed releases at the site.
- All hazardous substances found in a source with a non-zero ground water containment factor value.
- All hazardous substances assigned to the "unallocated source."
As noted in Section 5, the determination of the toxicity value for a hazardous substance is complex, involving assessments of a substances relative propensity to cause cancer and/or non-cancer adverse health effects (such as liver damage or death). Toxicity values for nearly all hazardous substances of interest can be found in SCDM. If a value is needed for a hazardous substance not found in SCDM, then EPA should be consulted to determine the appropriate course of action. Toxicity factor values should not be independently calculated.
Ground water mobility is a measure of the propensity of a substance to migrate through an aquifer and reach targets. The mobility factor value assigned to a hazardous substance is based on generic and site-specific considerations. The mobility factor for any substance found in any ground water observed release at the site is assigned a value of 1. Otherwise, the substance mobility factor value is assigned based on the water solubility and distribution coefficient of the substance.
As with the toxicity factor, the rules for determining the mobility factor values for a hazardous mobility factor values for nearly all hazardous substances of interest can be found in SCDM. If a value is needed for a hazardous substance not found in SCDM, then EPA should be consulted to determine the appropriate course of action. Mobility factor values should not be independently calculated.
The SCDM mobility factor values may not be directly applicable at a site because the HRS contains special, site-specific provisions to be applied in certain situations:
- Substances found in ground water observed releases are assigned a mobility factor value of 1.
- Hazardous substance deposited or currently present in the source as a liquid are essentially assigned the maximum water solubility value.
- Hazardous substances are essentially assigned the minimum distribution coefficient value when evaluating karst aquifers.
- A default value of 0.002 is used if none of the hazardous substances eligible to be evaluated can be assigned a mobility factor value.
SCDM contains water solubility and distribution coefficient values for many hazardous substances for use in these situations.
It is important to note the sequential effect that demonstrating an observed release has on the ground water pathway score. If an observed release is demonstrated then:
- the maximum likelihood of release value of 550 is assigned (a value 10 percent higher than the maximum potential to release value)
- all hazardous substances meeting the observed release criteria are assigned the maximum mobility factor value.
Further impacts of observed release demonstrations on target evaluations will be discussed later.
With toxicity and mobility values calculated, the toxicity/mobility factor is obtained by referring to Table 3-9 of the HRS Rule. The most hazardous substance for the ground water pathway is the one with the highest toxicity/mobility value. This is the value used to score the aquifer (the value is entered in line 4 of Table 3-1 of the HRS Rule).
Note that many substances that are highly toxic have low values for ground water mobility. For example, PCBs, which are highly toxic (toxicity value of 10,000), sorb easily and have a mobility value of 0.0001, even when in liquid state. This explains why observed releases of PCBs to ground water have been documented at only a few sites.
What would happen to the toxicity/mobility value if PCBs were detected in a ground water sample at observed release criteria? ANSWER
The hazardous waste quantity (HWQ) — the second component of the waste characteristics factor value — is evaluated based only on those sources that have a ground water containment value greater than zero.
The waste characteristics factor category value is determined in a straight-forward manner by first multiplying the toxicity/mobility factor value by the hazardous waste quantity value, subject to a maximum value of 108. The waste characteristics factor category value is then determined using this product as specified in HRS Rule Table 2-7. The maximum value achievable in the ground water pathway is 100.
In the absence of both an observed release and karst terrain, the waste characteristics factor category value remains the same for all aquifers underlying the site.
The above diagram summarizes the steps taken to arrive at the waste characteristics value.
Consider the site shown above. As illustrated, the site records indicate that 13 drums containing waste chlordane and arsenical pesticides were deposited in an unlined pit. The SCDM toxicity values for chlordane and arsenic:
- arsenic: 10,000
- chlordane: 10,000
The SCDM ground water mobility values for chlordane and arsenic:
- arsenic: 0.01
- chlordane: 0.01
[Slide 1 of 3] [Home]

Friday, December 15, 2006
Welcome Message Converted
Sunday, December 03, 2006
The Cascajal Block and the Lost Continent of Mu
Cascajal Block and Symbols
In September 2006, Science Magazine published a paper entitled "Oldest Writing In the New World". The item of note in the article and most widely reported was that the block showed what appeared to be a sample of the oldest writing ever found in the Americas. As this discovery took place in a location where William Niven had unearthed artifacts and relics in the early 20th century and some of these items were subsequently used as evidence by James Churchward of ancient civilizations - then this new discovery might have some bearing on my research.
The questions I want answered are:
1. How close were the discoveries by Niven to the Cascajal Block?
2. Does this ancient script have similar characters to the symbols discussed in the books by James Churchward ?
3. Does this new discovery prove, disprove, or have no bearing on the theories of James Churchward ?
In answering questions about William Niven and his digs in Mexico - I turned to the biography of William Niven entitled: "Buried Cities, Forgotten Gods."[Wicks and Harrison; Texas Tech University Press]
Niven's Tablet #1584
It is true that the 1926 'Lost Continent of Mu, Motherland of Man' had an entire chapter entitled "Niven's Buried Cities," but James' first contact with Niven was after the publication of the first book (September 19, 1927.) Their relationship, as determined from correspondence, is covered in "Buried Cities, Forgotten Gods." In 1928, Niven sent rubbings of some 2500 tablets from the Valley of Mexico to James. These were translated by James and found their way into the 1931 "Lost Continent of Mu" and the 1931, "Children of Mu." I have seen references to these rubbings having been published, however I am not aware of the location of the original or reproductions thereof. Whether or not James' interpretation was valid is left to different research, the preceding is background information to help calculate the distance between discoveries.
One location cited in the Mexico Valley was Atzcapotzalco (19.4889N 99.1836W.) The Cascajal Block was found in Cascajal, Veracruz-Llave (17.9500N 95.1167W). Using an online latitude/longitude calculator (http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~cvm/latlongdist.html) and would place them 286.9 statute miles apart.
In answering question #2, I perused the 1926 Lost Continent of Mu, Motherland of Man, a 1969 reprint of the 1931 Lost Continent of Mu, a 1988 reprint of the 1959 printing of Children of Mu (originally published in 1931,) and the 1988 reprint of the 1960 printing of the Sacred Symbols of Mu (originally published in 1933.)
I could find no direct matches between the symbols on the Cascajal Block and any symbol in the aforementioned books. I looked at the symbols contained in the creation myth, I looked at the tables of primitive symbols and hieratic characters and I looked at the depictions of rock carvings.
Cascajal Block Symbol #53
Lost Continent of Mu (1931) page 53
The closest a symbol came to resembling a symbol in James Churchward's books is #3[& 16, 45, 53, 59.] The symbol at the top is referenced in numerous places as "Lands of the West" (Lost Continent of Mu, Motherland of Man page 53). The oblong shape beneath is not part of Churchward's theories. Michael Everson, on his website analysis of the Cascajal Block (http://www.evertype.com/gram/olmec.html) identifies the symbol as a pineapple, which is as good an explanation given the other symbols on the tablet.
Given that 28 (or 30 as interpretated by Michael Everson) unique symbols found on the Cascajal Block only one remotely resembles a symbol from an ancient civilization, then I would have to answer that there is no correlation between the symbols on the Cascajal Block and symbols discussed by James Churchward.
Does this discovery prove, disprove or have no bearing on the theories of James Churchward ?
Having no matches between the Cascajal Block symbols and those found in James Churchward's works does not prove or disprove anything, nor does the distances between where the objects were found. It might be said that the age of the artifacts could be different and that could account for the differences. Unfortunately, the Cascajal Block has no bearing on proving or disproving the theories of James Churchward, but still is an object to be studied in the hopes that one day, its secrets will be revealed to the world.
- Stone Pages Archaeo News Printed Coverage
- Stone Pages Archaeo News Audio Coverage
- Archaeology Channel Printed Coverage
- Archaeology Channel Audio Coverage
- NPR Coverage
- LiveScience Coverage
- Research Paper (pdf format)

HAMBURG, Germany, June 19, 2012 — The European X-ray Free-Electron Laser (European XFEL) international research facility has overcome one of its most difficult building phases: completion of a 3.6-mile-long network of tunnels. By 2015, laserlike x-ray flashes that enable new insights into the nanoworld will be generated in the tunnels by scientists worldwide.
“Electrons will fly with almost the speed of light from DESY [Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron] in Hamburg to Osdorf,” said professor Robert Feidenhans’l, chairman of the European XFEL Council.
Tunnel XTL on Dec. 6, 2011. (Image: ©European XFEL)
Tunnel construction began in July 2010 with the tunnel boring machine TULA (TUnnel for LAser), which concluded excavation in August 2011. A second boring machine was used from January 2011 right up until the last section of the five photon tunnels leading into the experiment hall was completed. (See: Europe signs on to big x-ray facility
The accelerator tunnel, the longest of the accelerator facility, runs in a straight line for 1.3 mi through Hamburg’s underground. It branches out into five photon tunnels, which lead into the future experiment hall. Undulator tunnels, which contain special magnet structures that slalom accelerated and bundled electrons — inducing them to emit intense flashes of x-ray radiation — are set between the accelerator and photon tunnels.
To generate the extremely short and intense x-ray flashes, bunches of high-energy electrons are directed through special arrangements of magnets (undulators). (Image: ©European XFEL, Design: Marc Hermann, tricklabor)
The tunnels will be equipped with safety devices and infrastructure before the main components of the facility are installed. These include the superconducting electron linear accelerator, whose development, installation and operation will be conducted by DESY, and the photon tunnels, undulator lines and experiment hall, whose equipment and instrument installation will be led by the European XFEL.
It is expected that scientists will be able to produce x-ray radiation for the first time here in 2015, generating up to 27,000 flashes per second — nearly 10 sextillion times brighter than the sun.
More than 400 participants, including guests from politics and science as well as staff from collaborating companies attended the June 14 ceremony upon completion of the tunnel. (Image: ©European XFEL)
“We expect great success for the life sciences, material sciences and nanotechnology when research at the European XFEL begins,” said Dr. Beatrix Vierkorn-Rudolph, head of the Subsection for Large Facilities, Energy and Basic Research, as well as the ESFRI Special Task of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. “The just-completed tunnel connects not only Hamburg and Schleswig-Holstein, but also scientists throughout Europe and beyond.”
For more information, visit: www.xfel.eu

| Central Route and Peripheral Route to Persuasion
Persuasion is a topic in social psychology. People may be persuaded in different ways. Petty and Cacioppo (1981) suggested that there are two different ways or routes to persuasion: the central route and the peripheral route.
The Central Route to Persuasion
The central route to persuasion involves being persuaded by the arguments or the content of the message. For example, after hearing a political debate you may decide to vote for a candidate because you found the candidates views and arguments very convincing.
The Peripheral Route to Persuasion
The peripheral route to persuasion involves being persuaded in a manner that is not based on the arguments or the message content. For example, after reading a political debate you may decide to vote for a candidate because you like the sound of the person's voice, or the person went to the same university as you did.
The peripheral route can involve using superficial cues such as the attractiveness of the speaker.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1981). Attitudes and
persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches.
Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown Company Publishers.

Used in: cache-config
The caching-schemes element defines a series of cache scheme elements. Each cache scheme defines a type of cache, for instance a database backed partitioned cache, or a local cache with an LRU eviction policy. Scheme types are bound to actual caches using cache-scheme-mappings.
Each of the cache scheme element types is used to describe a different type of cache, for instance distributed, versus replicated. Multiple instances of the same type may be defined so long as each has a unique scheme-name.
For example the following defines two different distributed schemes:
Some caching scheme types contain nested scheme definitions. For instance in the above example the distributed schemes include a nested scheme defintion describing their backing map.
Caching schemes can be defined by specifying all the elements required for a given scheme type, or by inheriting from another named scheme of the same type, and selectively overriding specific values. Scheme inheritance is accomplished by including a <scheme-ref> element in the inheriting scheme containing the scheme-name of the scheme to inherit from.
The following two configurations will produce equivalent "DistributedInMemoryCache" scheme defintions:
Please note that while the first is somewhat more compact, the second offers the ability to easily resuse the "LocalSizeLimited" scheme within multiple schemes. The following example demonstrates multiple schemes reusing the same "LocalSizeLimited" base defintion, but the second imposes a diffrent expiry-delay.
The following table describes the different types of schemes you can define within the caching-schemes element.
|<local-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme which provides on-heap cache storage.|
|<external-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme which provides off-heap cache storage, for instance on disk.|
|<paged-external-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme which provides off-heap cache storage, that is size-limited via time based paging.|
|<distributed-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme where storage of cache entries is partitioned across the cluster nodes.|
|<replicated-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme where each cache entry is stored on all cluster nodes.|
|<optimistic-scheme>||Optional||Defines a replicated cache scheme which uses optimistic rather then pessimistic locking.|
|<near-scheme>||Optional||Defines a two tier cache scheme which consists of a fast local front-tier cache of a much larger back-tier cache.|
|<versioned-near-scheme>||Optional||Defines a near-scheme which uses object versioning to ensure coherence between the front and back tiers.|
|<overflow-scheme>||Optional||Defines a two tier cache scheme where entries evicted from a size-limited front-tier overflow and are stored in a much larger back-tier cache.|
|<invocation-scheme>||Optional||Defines an invocation service which can be used for performing custom operations in parallel across cluster nodes.|
|<read-write-backing-map-scheme>||Optional||Defines a backing map scheme which provides a cache of a persistent store.|
|<versioned-backing-map-scheme>||Optional||Defines a backing map scheme which utilizes object versioning to determine what updates need to be written to the persistent store.|
|<remote-cache-scheme>||Optional||Defines a cache scheme that enables caches to be accessed from outside a Coherence cluster via Coherence*Extend.|
|<class-scheme>||Optional|| Defines a cache scheme using a custom cache implementation.
Any custom implementation must implement the java.util.Map interface, and include a zero-parameter public constructor.
Additionally if the contents of the Map can be modified by anything other than the CacheService itself (e.g. if the Map automatically expires its entries periodically or size-limits its contents), then the returned object must implement the com.tangosol.util.ObservableMap interface.
|<disk-scheme>||Optional||Note: As of Coherence 3.0, the disk-scheme configuration element has been deprecated and replaced by the external-scheme and paged-external-scheme configuration elements.|

Assent of Children in Research
The IRBMED has developed an assent template for researchers to use in developing an assent document appropriate for children ages 10 to 14. It is available at http://www.med.umich.edu/irbmed/ict.htm. Below are frequently asked questions about assent. More information is available on the IRBMED website at
Why must IRBs and researchers consider assent?
Federal regulations require, “The IRB shall determine that adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children, when in the judgment of the IRB the children are capable of providing assent.” The IRB must make the determination for each protocol that includes children. The IRB must require child assent unless it can be appropriately waived. 45 §46.408 & 21 § 50.55
What is assent?
“Assent” means a child’s affirmative agreement to participate in research. Mere failure to object should not, absent affirmative agreement, be construed as assent. This means the child must actively show his or her willingness to participate in the research, rather than just complying with directions to participate and not resisting in any way. A child’s authority to say “No” to participating in research. 45 CFR 46.402(b), 21 CFR 50.3(n)
What is an assent process?
It is a reasonable effort to enable the child to understand, to the degree they are capable, what their participation in research would involve. It is not identical to the consent process. Parents retain responsibility to protect the child from risks. The assent should focus on elements important to the child (e.g. pain, time). Foremost, when assent is required by the IRB, parents and researchers must adhere to the child’s decision.
What if the parent and child disagree?
“If a child is capable of assent and the IRB requires that assent be sought, it must be obtained before the child can participate in the research activity. Thus, if the child dissents from participating in research, even if his or her parents or guardian have granted permission, the child’s decision prevails,” HHS Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP).
How does the IRB determine when children are capable to assent?
Regulations direct IRBs to consider:
- Age and maturity of the children
- Psychological state of the children
- Nature of the proposed research activity
Regulations give IRBs flexibility in deciding which children an investigator must assent. A judgment may be made for all children to be involved in research under a particular protocol, or for each child. The IRB’s outcome should be suited/delineated for the study at hand.
Click here for guidelines that the IRB and researchers may use to determine whether to require assent.
When can the IRB waive assent?
There are 3 waiver options:
1. Capabilities of some or all children is so limited they cannot be consulted.
2. Study offers important benefit unavailable outside of the research.
- When the study offers a treatment that is thought to be a better option than those currently available, or it offers the only alternative. (NCI)
- Criterion of ‘potential direct benefit’ is not sufficient to grant this waiver.
3. Assent can also be waived under the same criteria as a consent waiver:
- the study is minimal risk
- subjects’ rights and welfare aren’t adversely affected
- assent is not practicable (for reasons other than children’s capabilities)
- when appropriate, the subjects will be provided pertinent information
How do researchers communicate assent plans to the IRB?In section 10.2.2., eResearch prompts researchers to describe the process to seek and obtain informed assent for children and parental consent/permission (e.g., setting, timing, personnel involved, arrangements for answering subject questions before and after the consent is signed).

Structs (C# Programming Guide)
Structs are defined using the struct keyword, for example:
Structs share almost all the same syntax as classes, although structs are more limited than classes:
Within a struct declaration, fields cannot be initialized unless they are declared as const or static.
A struct may not declare a default constructor —a constructor with no parameters — or a destructor.
Copies of structs are created and destroyed automatically by the compiler, so a default constructor and destructor are unnecessary. In effect, the compiler implements the default constructor by assigning all the fields of their default values (see Default Values Table). Structs cannot inherit from classes or other structs.
Structs are value types — when an object is created from a struct and assigned to a variable, the variable contains the entire value of the struct. When a variable containing a struct is copied, all of the data is copied, and any modification to the new copy does not change the data for the old copy. Because structs do not use references, they do not have identity — there is no way to distinguish between two instances of a value type with the same data. All value types in C# inherently derive from, which inherits from .
Value types can be converted to reference types by the compiler in a process known as boxing. For more information, see Boxing and Unboxing.
Structs have the following properties:
Structs are value types while classes are reference types.
Unlike classes, structs can be instantiated without using a new operator.
Structs can declare constructors, but they must take parameters.
A struct cannot inherit from another struct or class, and it cannot be the base of a class. All structs inherit directly from System.ValueType, which inherits from System.Object.
A struct can implement interfaces.
For more information:

MINNEAPOLIS - Sinkholes can swallow up earth in an instant and cause damage or even worse. A sinkhole in Florida claimed the life of a 36-year-old man on Thursday.
"They can be unpredictable," said Greg Brick, author of the book "Subterranean Twin Cities." "It's why we have an entire profession, geotechnical engineering."
Sinkholes happen in Minnesota, too. Some occur naturally like the massive indention in the Longfellow neighborhood of Minneapolis; a sinkhole 30 feet deep which occurred 3,000 years ago. Others can be caused by broken water mains. But most in Minnesota are found in the southeast corner where there have been hundreds.
"They tend to be found in what are known as karst areas where you have the limestone bedrock that can be easily dissolved by water," says Brick.
In the Twin Cities, you have what geologists call the "classic layer cake" of limestone then St. Peter sandstone.
To learn more about the bedrock in Minnesota, visit mngs.umn.edu.
(Copyright 2013 KARE. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.)

Personal Hygiene in America
Ever wonder what life was like before running water and today's endless assortment of toiletries? The plumbing and products we take for granted were nonexistent in colonial days, and this absence was glaringly apparent to visitors. Early travelers to this country noted the overall unclean condition of Americans--as one English tourist remarked, "filthy, bordering on the beastly." After several centuries, much progress has been made and personal hygiene for Americans has reached an art form.
Colonists viewed bathing as more curative in nature than hygienic and therefore bathed infrequently in rivers and streams and occasionally in public baths and outdoor bathhouses. With the advent of the 19th century, Americans slowly began to bathe more. New furniture forms and accessories, such as tin tubs, washstands, and wash basins, were designed for use in one's home. These were located anywhere throughout the home, but were primarily found in kitchens and bedrooms.
Soap was mainly used for laundry and was often made at home, as evidenced by numerous homemade recipes. By the mid 19th century, Americans started using soap to clean their skin, and manufacturers quickly met the dual demand by producing a variety of toilet and laundry soaps. It logically followed that as Americans washed their bodies more often, they also became concerned with washing their clothes.
Every part of the body was eventually scrutinized, not just the skin. Early on, poor dental hygiene caused a number of ear, nose, and throat complaints. To remedy these maladies, Americans concocted recipes for homemade tooth powder and sometimes used twigs and table salt to brush their teeth before toothpaste and toothbrushes were sold. As new dental products were introduced, so were new hair care products and styles. At the end of the 19th century, American men came to view their bushy beards and mutton chops as just another place to harbor germs. A new business look of less facial hair for men became the fashion.
The importance of etiquette books in spreading advice on cleanliness to Americans cannot be overlooked. Washing was once considered a privilege of the upper class. However, as these books became more accessible, the growing middle class used them as a blueprint in their quest for gentility and upper-class status. The gospel of hygiene then trickled down to the lower classes and immigrants in the late 1800s, when reformers taught them the rudiments of cleanliness in order to improve their health and assimilate them into the American way of life.
Beginning in the middle of the 19th century, large cities across America undertook public works projects to build municipal water and sewer lines. These improvements in plumbing and sanitation necessitated that fixtures be attached to a maze of pipes. A separate room was now required to house these fixtures, making portable containers and accessories obsolete. As bathrooms were gradually added to homes, new innovations and inventions also offered a wide range of options, including pumping one's own shower.
Styles in bathroom décor also changed over time. At first, fixtures were fashioned in wood with elaborate marquetry to imitate furniture. Toward the end of the century, with the emphasis on hygiene reaching new heights and scientists preaching germ theory, the bathroom closely resembled a laboratory with white, washable porcelain surfaces. Color was later added to bathrooms as they became more commonplace to personalize and soften the earlier scientific feel. The ritual of personal hygiene was now entrenched in the routine of American life.

Herbal Alternatives to Drugs in Pain Management, Part II
By John Chen, PhD, PharmD, OMD, LAc
Editor's note: Part I of Dr. Chen's column appeared in the May issue of Acupuncture Today.
Traditional Chinese Medicine
According to traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), the fundamental etiology of pain is qi stagnation, blood stagnation, or both.
It is often said that where there is pain, there is stagnation; where there is stagnation, there is pain. Therefore, effective pain relief most often requires the use of herbs that activate qi and blood, removing stagnation and thus resolving the cause of pain. As is true in all treatment involving Chinese medicinal herbs, they are most commonly prescribed in carefully-combined formulas (rather than singly) that directly address the causes and/or symptoms of the imbalance and treat without creating unwanted side-effects or complications.
In addition to treating qi and blood stagnation, successful treatment of pain also requires careful differential diagnosis of pain. The three main diagnostic keys are the location of the discomfort, the type of pain and the cause of pain. Location refers to the exact part of the body that is affected: upper body, lower body, external musculoskeletal muscle, internal smooth muscle and so on. The type of pain refers to the characteristics of the patient's pain, such as a sharp, stabbing pain or dull aching, pain at a fixed location as opposed to migratory pain, pain helped by cold or by heat, and other distinguishing characteristics. Lastly, identifying the cause of pain helps the practitioner differentiate soft tissue injuries from structural damage. For example, leg spasms and cramps often involve only soft tissue, while an acute sprained ankle is often accompanied by structural damage. Accurate evaluation of these three criteria is crucial for greatly enhanced diagnostic accuracy and successful relief for the patient.
Herbal Treatment for Headache
Headache pain may arise from internal or external causes such as invasion of wind, cold, heat, dampness, dryness, summer heat, accumulation of phlegm, and other pathogens in addition to qi and blood stagnation. Headache pain may represent excess or deficient conditions and may affect the occiput, vertex, sinuses and orbital region. It may also present with a complex of locations/symptoms, such as in migraine.
Corydalis (yan hu suo) is one of the strongest herbs available to relieve pain and reduce inflammation. Research studies have shown it to work directly on the central nervous system with analgesic effects comparable to those of morphine and codeine.1,2 Another herb, pueraria root (ge gen), has demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in relieving headache pain.3,4,5 Other herbs have proved effective in relieving various types of headaches, including (but not limited to) migraine, vertex, sinus and orbital headache.6,7,8
Many classical Chinese herbal formulas are also commonly used to treat headache. Cnidium & tea formula (chuan xiong cha tiao san) treats headaches due to wind cold. Evodia combination (wu zhu yu tang) relieves vertex headache due to cold and is also used to treat migraine. Coptis, phellodendron & mint formula (huang lian shang qing wan) addresses headache caused by heat. Notopterygium & tuhuo combination (qiang huo sheng shi tang) treats headache due to wind and dampness. Gastrodia & gambir combination (tian ma gou teng yin) relieves headache secondary to liver yang rising. Eucommia & rehmannia formula (you gui wan) tonifies kidney deficiency to relieve headache. Tangkuei & ginseng eight combination (ba zhen tang) tonifies qi and blood deficiency to relieve headache. Pinellia & gastrodia combination (ban xia bai zhu tian ma tang) relieves headache due to phlegm stagnation.
Herbal Treatment for Neck and Shoulder Pain
Neck and shoulder injuries can be divided into two major categories: acute and chronic. Acute injuries are generally characterized by redness, swelling, inflammation and sharp pain. Chronic injuries are generally characterized by stiffness, numbness, discomfort and dull pain.
Acute neck and shoulder problems are often caused by accidents, whiplash, improper sleeping or reading postures, and similar traumas. In addition to pain, redness, swelling and/or inflammation are sometimes present. Treatment consists of reducing pain, swelling and muscle spasms. Herbal formulas are designed to dispel painful symptoms while supporting the healing process. Strong analgesic herbs like corydalis (yan hu suo) are combined with anti-spasmodic herbs and blood-invigorating herbs to alleviate pain, promote blood circulation and open the meridian channels.
Chronic neck and shoulder problems are characterized by pain, numbness, stiffness, discomfort, limited mobility, slow recovery or continuing deterioration. Effective treatment must focus on activating qi and blood circulation, opening the channels and collaterals, and nourishing the muscles and tendons.
Corydalis is a main herb in the treatment of both acute and chronic neck and shoulder problems. In addition to having strong analgesic properties, it also has a distinctive facility for treating both acute and chronic cases of inflammation.9 Corydalis also protects against NSAID-induced gastric and duodenal ulcers by reducing gastric acid secretion.10
Classical formulas that treat neck and shoulder pain include the following specific applications. Lindera formula (wu yao shun qi san) is formulated for shoulder pain, while pueraria combination (ge gen tang) is more specific for stiff neck due to cold. Atractylodes & arisaema combination (er zhu tang) relieves deficient-type neck and shoulder disorders but may not have strong analgesic effects.
Herbal Treatment for Back Pain
Similar to neck and shoulder pain, back pain can be divided into two major categories: acute and chronic, with many of the key symptoms described in the categories above.
Many classic formulas tonify the kidney to relieve back pain and weakness. Tuhuo & loranthus combination (du huo ji sheng tang) eliminates wind and dampness and has a rapid onset to relieve acute back pain. Herbal formulas that tonify the kidney tend to be slower in action and are more suitable for chronic back pain. Cyathula & rehmannia formula (zuo gui wan) is more specific to address kidney yin deficiency; eucommia & rehmannia formula (you gui wan) focuses more specifically on kidney yang deficiency; and rehmannia eight formula (ba wei di huang wan) tonifies both kidney yin and yang.
Herbal Treatment for Musculoskeletal Pain and Painful Obstruction (Bi) Syndrome
Musculoskeletal pain is often classified as painful obstruction (bi) syndrome. Though there are many causes of this syndrome, cold and heat are the most common etiologies. Cold-type musculoskeletal pain is characterized by stiffness, pain and limited range of motion of the joints. In Western terms, cold conditions are associated with chronic arthritis and arthralgias such as osteoarthritis and fibromyalgia.
Heat-type musculoskeletal pain is characterized by redness, swelling, pain and/or inflammation of the muscles and joints. Patients typically present with muscle cramping and spasms. From a Western perspective, these patients have acute musculoskeletal disorders, typically involving inflammation of the muscles, bursae, tendons and ligaments.
Gentiana macrophylla root (qin jiao), a popular ingredient in some remedies, has been shown to have anti-inflammatory activities comparable to those of aspirin (salicylic acid).4 Aconite tsao wu (cao wu) and aconite wu tou (chuan wu) Other herbs have demonstrated exceptional anti-rheumatic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic and anti-pyretic functions.13,14
White peony (bai shao) and licorice (gan cao) have demonstrated remarkable properties in relieving spasms, cramps and pain of skeletal and smooth muscles. Clinical applications include dysmenorrhea,3 musculoskeletal disorders,15 trigeminal pain,16 muscle spasms and twitching in the facial region,17 pain in the lower back and legs,18 abdominal pain and cramps due to intestinal parasites,19 and epigastric and abdominal pain.20
If there are complications to the musculoskeletal disorders described above, classical formulas offer treatment options for the patients. Cinnamon & anemarrhena combination (gui zhi shao yao zhi mu tang) treats musculoskeletal and joint pain due to wind heat. Cyathula & plantago formula (ji sheng shen qi wan) treats musculoskeletal and joint pain arising from cold. Coix combination (yi yi ren tang) treats musculoskeletal and joint pain caused by dampness. Tuhuo & astragalus combination (san bi tang) treats musculoskeletal and joint pain due to deficiency of qi and blood and weakness of the liver and kidney. If the etiology is unclear, notopterygium & turmeric combination (juan bi tang) may be used for relief of general musculoskeletal and joint pain.
Herbal Treatment for Traumatic Injury
Traumatic injury is characterized by severe qi and blood stagnation. Types of injuries include bruises, contusions, sprains, broken bones, surgical incisions and related internal trauma, and other physical traumas.
For complications of traumatic injury, cinnamon & hoelen formula (gui zhi fu ling wan) is used to treat internal bleeding after traumatic or sports injuries; persica & rhubarb combination (tao ren cheng qi tang) is used to treat subcutaneous bleeding with severe swelling and pain.
Pain is universally understood as a signal of disease and is the most common symptom that brings a patient to a physician.21 Western clinical medicine and traditional Oriental medicine share common goals of alleviating pain and eliminating the causes of pain; however, the philosophy and clinical approach to pain management in the two disciplines is very different. Generally speaking, Western drugs have immediate and reliable analgesic effects. Unfortunately, Western pharmaceuticals often cause serious short- and long-term side-effects. In addition, the chronic use of drugs, especially opioid analgesics, is strongly associated with addiction and negative social consequences and connotations. As a result, more and more patients are turning to herbal medicine as their primary, complementary or alternative treatment for pain.
Herbal medicines definitely have outstanding analgesic, anti-inflammatory and anti-spasmodic functions and benefits. However, even though herbs and pharmaceutical drugs have many overlapping functions, they are not directly interchangeable or analogs of each other. The therapeutic effectiveness of herbal formulas is dependent on accurate diagnosis and careful prescription. When used properly, herbs are powerful alternatives to drugs for pain management.
Pharmacology and Applications of Chinese Herbs 1983; 447.
Zhu XZ. Development of natural products as drugs acting on central nervous system. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 86 (2):173-5, 191.
Bensky D, et al. Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press 1993.
Yeung HC. Handbook of Chinese Herbs. Institute of Chinese Medicine, 1983.
Gao XX, et al. Effectiveness of pueraria root (ge gen) in treating migraine headache: a case report of 53 patients. Journal of TCM Internal Medicine (Zhong Hua Nei Ke Za Zi) 1977;6:326.
Effectiveness of angelica (bai zhi) in treating occipital headache: a report of 73 cases. Air Force hospital in Hengyang, China. Modern Medical Journal (Xin Zhong Yi) 1976;3:128.
Effectiveness of angelica (bai zhi) in treating chronic headache: a report of 62 cases. National Defense Hospital. Journal of Modern Medicine (Xin Yi Xue Yao Za Zi) 1976;8:35.
Wang LS. Treatment of headache using xiong zhi shi gao tang: 50 cases. Shanxi Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1985;10:447.
Kubo M, et al. Anti-inflammatory activities of methanolic extract and alkaloidal components from corydalis tuber. Biol Pharm Bull February 1994;17(2):262-5.
Study of Chinese Herbal Medicine 1976; p. 340.
Military Hospital Unit #64. Effectiveness of aconite wu tou (chuan wu) in treating low back pain, a report with 225 patients. New Journal of Medicine and Pharmacology 1975;4:45.
Zhang HT, et al. Treatment of frozen shoulders with aconite wu tou (chuan wu) and camphor (zhang nao). Shanghai Journal of Medicine and Pharmacology 1987;1:29.
Liao JF. Evaluation with receptor binding assay on the water extracts of ten CNS-active Chinese herbal drugs. Proceedings of the National Science Council, Republic of China. Part B, Life Sciences. July 1995;19(3):151-8.
Sun DH. Treatment of heat type of painful obstruction (Bi) syndrome with stephania (fang ji) in 120 patients. Shangdong Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1987;6:21.
Tan H, et al. Chemical components of decoction of radix paeoniae and radix glycyrrhizae. China Journal of Chinese Materia Medica Sep 1995;20(9):550-1, 576.
Huang DD. Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1983;11:9.
Luo DP. Hunan Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1989;2:7.
Chen H. Yunnan Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1990;4:15.
Zhang RB. Jiangxu Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1966;5:38-39.
You JH. Guanxi Journal of Chinese Herbology 1987;5:5-6.
Harrison TR, et al. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 14th edition, 1998.
Click here for more information about John Chen, PhD, PharmD, OMD, LAc.

Learning at Laurel is often noisy, messy and fun! The cognitive growth of a Primary girl is exponential. The Primary School is an extraordinary place where girls excel - they set goals, ask questions, seek answers and establish the foundation they need to become life-long learners. An exceptionally dedicated and inspiring faculty has created an interdisciplinary curriculum, rich in content and transferable skills. Essential questions are explored, critical thinking is fostered and enduring understandings are formed. In our all-girls setting, girls develop early the capacity to take intellectual risks and to challenge themselves, building confidence and mastery along their way. Experiences with technology, math, science, engineering, creative writing, and quality literature require girls to collaborate and learn to identify their own strengths as they work together. Laurel girls develop cultural savvy, technological and linguistic skills, and a passion for discovering solutions to complicated problems that will allow them to compete and succeed in a global world.
Girls learn by doing. Active learning allows girls to experience the world. At Laurel we know it is sometimes best to move away from desks and learn about the natural world directly. A fully interdisciplinary approach, incorporating environmental science, mathematics, social studies, language arts, the arts, group problem solving and leadership development characterizes Laurel at Butler Days (LAB Days) once a month for an entire grade. Great education is transformative and offers multiple points of view - at the Butler Campus, girls literally gain another perspective on the world. In an environment that emphasizes respect for the natural world, including sustainability and respect for all, Laurel girls learn to believe in themselves and in each other.
Each Primary class spends time every month at Laurel's 140-acre Butler Campus.

NATA'S Safety Guidelines Endorsed by American Academy of Pediatrics
DALLAS (April 24, 2002) - Spring and lightning season go hand-in-hand, and due to an alarming rise in lightning casualties in recreational and sports settings, the National Athletic Trainers' Association (NATA) is re-issuing its safety guidelines. Recently endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics, NATA's Lightning Safety Guidelines provide protective measures for those who may be participating in outside recreation during a lightning storm. NATA's Lighting Safety Guidelines:
- Establish a chain of command that identifies who is to make the call to remove individuals from the field.
- Name a designated weather watcher. (A person who actively looks for the signs of threatening weather and notifies the chain of command if severe weather becomes dangerous.)
- Have a means of monitoring local weather forecasts and warnings.
- Designate a safe shelter for each venue.
- Use the Flash-to-Bang count to determine when to go to safety. By the time the flash-to-bang count approaches thirty seconds all individuals should be already inside a safe structure.
- Once activities have been suspended, wait at least thirty minutes following the last sound of thunder or lightning flash prior to resuming an activity or returning outdoors.
- Avoid being the highest point in an open field, in contact with, or proximity to the highest point, as well as being on the open water. Do not take shelter under or near trees, flagpoles, or light poles.
- Assume the lightning safe position (crouched on the ground, weight on the balls of the feet, feet together, head lowered, and ears covered) for individuals who feel their hair stand on end, skin tingle, or hear "crackling" noises. Do not lie flat on the ground.
Observe the following basic first aid procedures in managing victims of a lightning strike:
- Survey the scene for safety.
- Activate local EMS.
- Lightning victims do not 'carry a charge' and are safe to touch.
- If necessary, move the victim with care to a safer location.
- Evaluate airway, breathing, and circulation, and begin CPR if necessary.
- Evaluate and treat for hypothermia, shock, fractures and/or burns.
- All individuals have the right to leave an athletic site in order to seek a safe structure if the person feels in danger of impending lightning activity, without fear of repercussions or penalty from anyone.
Recently, the American Academy of Pediatrics endorsed the NATA's Lightning Safety Guidelines. The Lightning Safety for Athletics and Recreation is available at: http://www.nata.org/publications/otherpub/lightning.pdf (Adobe Acrobat PDF format). The NATA, based in Dallas, Texas, is the voice for nearly 23,000 certified athletic trainers. The NATA's mission is to enhance the quality of health care for athletes and those engaged in physical activity, and to advance the profession of athletic training through education and research in the prevention, evaluation, management and rehabilitation of injuries.

Judicature Genes and Justice
The Growing Impact of the New Genetics on the Courts
November-December 1999 Vol 83(3)
COMPLEX SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE and the JURY
by Robert D. Myers, Ronald S. Reinstein, and Gordon M. Griller
DNA—deoxyribonucleic acid, the chemical molecule inside cells which carries biological information. DNA is a double stranded molecule held together by weak hydrogen bonds between complementary base pairs of nucleotides (Adenine and Thymine; Guanine and Cytosine). This molecule carries genetic information from parent to offspring.
Genome—one copy of all the DNA found in each cell of an organism. The human genome is composed of three billion base pairs of DNA packaged as 23 chromosomes. There are two copies of each [chromosome] in a cell, one copy from each of your parents. The genome contains the organism's genes, the instructions for building that life form.
These definitions of DNA and genome, two scientific concepts at the heart of this issue of Judicature, seem rather straightforward and simple. One may think that even without scientific background and learning, these concepts can be readily understood, perhaps with a few additional definitions, or a little more explanation from someone knowledgeable. But as the twentieth century draws to a close, the U.S. Human Genome Project moves closer to its goal: determining and mapping the complete sequence of DNA in the human genome by the year 2003. The implications of the Project's work for courts and the entire legal system are enormous:
The HGP's ultimate goal is to discover all of the more than 80,000 human genes and render them accessible for further biological study.... Information obtained as part of the HGP will dramatically change almost all biological and medical research and dwarf the catalog of current genetic knowledge. Both the methods and data developed through the project are likely to benefit investigations of many other genomes, including a large number of commercially important plants and animals. In a related project to sequence the genomes of environmentally and industrially interesting microbes, in 1994 DOE initiated the Microbial Genome Program. For this reason, in addition to the DOE and NIH programs, genome research is being carried out at agencies such as the U.S. Department of AgricultureÉand the private sector. In a departure from most scientific programs, research also is being funded on the ethical, legal, and social implications (ELSI) of HGP data.1
Potential government and private sector applications of this knowledge—gene therapies, gene transfers, genetic screening, and new biotechnologies—ultimately will give rise to a myriad of disputes that will make their way into the courts for resolution. The legal issues involved in these controversies, and the evidence that underlies them, will be far more complex than the two brief definitions of DNA and genome at the outset of this article. As judges and lawyers ready themselves for this growing level of scientific evidence, one principal justice system decision maker is largely unprepared...the trial juror.
Already, the most familiar form of genomic evidence, DNA "fingerprinting" (or "profiling," or "typing") in criminal cases, is widely admissible in state and federal courts, by court decision or legislation. The possible uses of genomic evidence, however, are not limited to criminal matters. Some states have already enacted legislation regulating health insurers' use of genetic testing data. Disputes involving insurance coverage, medical malpractice, product liability, toxic torts, employment discrimination, paternity, privacy, and intellectual property will become increasingly complex as the knowledge of not only human, but plant and animal genetics, and the practical applications of that knowledge, become more widespread. As one commentator has said, it is "not whether genetic evidence will ever be admitted into court, but when and under what kinds of circumstances."2
Against this backdrop, the ability of juries to adequately understand genomic evidence, distinguish between and resolve contradicting opinions of expert witnesses, and properly apply the law to the evidence is being called into question. Some court watchers believe juries are not competent to resolve scientific evidence issues, and matters of complex scientific evidence should be removed from them. Others argue that the societal values represented by both criminal and civil juries are too important to forego, and that the common sense approach jurors bring to disputes equip them in a unique, capable manner to comprehend novel and complex scientific evidence. In reality, the truth likely lies somewhere in between. Yet, there is little doubt that increasingly complex scientific issues have the potential to further tax the jury system, and that courts must seek new ways to help jurors deal with scientific evidence. To do so, courts will have to promote an active learning environment within the courtroom—in effect, turn courtrooms into classrooms. This new approach to jury trials is under way in some states today, pioneered by Arizona in its far-reaching 1995 jury rule changes including permitting jurors to ask questions, take notes, and in civil cases allowing jurors to discuss the evidence during the trial.3 Arizona's objective: improve the experience and decision making of jurors by redefining their role from passive observers to active participants, using applied, proven adult learning methods, and permitting information to unfold during the trial in more meaningful and understandable ways—in other words, to increase the potential of the "search for the truth."
As research on Arizona's jury reform experience progresses, there is growing evidence that the courtroom, turned juror-friendly classroom, is more conducive to juror comprehension and promotes ease in understanding complex concepts and data. If such is the case, must others wait for statewide system changes? The simple answer: no. Courts and lawyers already possess the means and discretion to enable juries to better carry out their vital roles. Judges and lawyers can independently recognize their roles as educators by embracing ground breaking jury reforms and introducing them in their own courts. These reforms will become increasingly important as genomic evidence appears ever more routinely in America's courtrooms.
Juries and complex cases
Over the past 30 to 40 years, the perceived performance of juries has been criticized, both in high-profile criminal cases and in complex civil litigation in antitrust, securities, intellectual property, and product liability cases. Critics have questioned whether a jury of untrained and inexperienced people can be a competent fact finder and decision maker in lengthy trials that require comprehension of substantial quantities of complex scientific, technical, or statistical evidence, and resolving the testimony of duplicative expert witnesses whose opinions conflict.
Moreover, it is alleged, juries in complex trials will have greater difficulty understanding and remembering the court's instructions, and properly applying the law to the facts. Faced with such a burden, say critics, jurors who are untrained in science and technology are ill-equipped for sound fact finding. As a result, critics allege, jurors will base their decisions less on the evidence and a careful consideration of the reliability of expert testimony, than on external cues, such as the perceived relative expertise and status of the expert witnesses, and will be more susceptible to "junk science" and emotional appeals.4
Intuitively then, we would expect juries to have enormous difficulties with the complex legal issues and scientific evidence that will confront the courts as disputes involving the strange, new world of human genetics and statistical probabilities become more commonplace. We would expect, as well, new proposals for replacing juries with such expert bodies as science courts and expert or "blue ribbon" panels. At the same time, however, a growing body of research on juries and their performance in both "simple" and complex cases is giving us a different picture.5 This research, based on case studies and "lab" or experimental studies, shows that jurors, rather than giving up in the face of voluminous evidence and conflicting expert opinions, take their fact-finding and decision-making responsibilities seriously.
The research shows that while certain elements of complex trials do tax jurors' comprehension and understanding, there is no firm evidence that their judgments have therefore been wrong. Jurors are in fact capable of resolving highly complex cases. These studies have also shown that factors such as length of trial, and evidentiary complexity in itself, are not necessarily the critical factors in jury performance in complex matters. The problem presented by conflicting testimony of experts hired by the respective parties, for example, is present in simple as well as complex cases. Finally, the research shows that jurors, rather than being passive participants in the trial process, are active decision makers and want to understand. Jurors actively process evidence, make inferences, use their common sense, have individual and common experiences that inform their decision making, and form opinions as a trial proceeds.6
What the research shows then, along with the experiments and experiences of active and concerned judges in complex cases, is that the trial process itself may be as much an impediment to jury comprehension and understanding as the complexity of the legal concepts and evidence, or the competencies of jurors.7 Many factors, including failure to follow instructions, confusing instructions, non-sequential presentation of evidence, "dueling" expert witnesses, evidentiary admissibility rulings, and attorney strategic errors, affect the jury's ability to follow and comprehend complex evidence. Researchers, and increasingly many progressive courts, suggest that reforming and improving the "decision making environment"8 can improve not only jury comprehension and performance, but juror satisfaction with their trial experience.
Challenging the current model
The Arizona Supreme Court's Committee on More Effective Use of Juries recognized these issues when it made 55 recommendations to reform the jury system, many of which resulted in the officially adopted comprehensive jury reform rules in 1995. In the introduction to Jurors: The Power of 12, its report to the supreme court, the Committee cited "unacceptably low levels of juror comprehension of the evidence" as one of the motivating factors in urging the Supreme Court to adopt its proposed jury reform rules.9 Arizona's reforms, designed to make jurors active participants during the trial, include juror note taking, pre-deliberation discussions of evidence during civil trials, and the right of jurors to ask written questions. The Arizona reforms also permit judges greater latitude in exercising their inherent powers to provide to each juror preliminary and final written jury instructions, as well as to open up a dialogue between the jurors, the judge, and the lawyers when a jury believes it is deadlocked or needs assistance. The result has been increased satisfaction with the judicial process by judges, lawyers, jurors, and litigants. For years, jury reforms such as note taking and question asking were opposed on the assumption that jurors would miss crucial pieces of evidence or assume the role of advocate rather than neutral fact-finder. The empirical evidence collected thus far, however, overwhelmingly indicates that such opportunities do not adversely affect the pace or outcome of trials.
It is intellectually arrogant for those in the legal system to assume that lay jurors are incapable of processing complex information. We have all been thrust into a technologically advanced world, and lawyers and judges are hardly better prepared for the task of sifting through scientific evidence than the jury. But common sense suggests that jury reform measures will aid understanding, and jurors themselves support reforms such as those described above.10 We should recognize that it makes little sense to oppose practices that make jurors more comfortable with complex scientific information. To drive the point home, we have often made the observation that it is difficult to imagine an academic setting in which taking notes and asking questions would not be permitted.
Fortunately, the tides are beginning to shift in the debate over jury reform. Already a number of states are adopting new rules; Arizona, Colorado, and California are just a few.11 In New York, much of the reform debate has centered on the selection, administration, and management of the jury, but substantive changes are not far behind. Reforms such as increased jury fees and security, and a juror hotline to report problems have been quite successful. However, the trend in these states and others is to expand beyond administrative concerns and attempt to improve jury deliberations and performance. These grassroots efforts led the American Bar Association in 1998 to adopt a number of jury reform ideals drafted by a Section of Litigation task force as part of its Civil Trial Practice Standards. In adopting these standards, the ABA recognized the need to provide juries, lawyers, and judges with the tools to increase jury comprehension in this era of increasingly complex evidentiary issues.
However, a complete overhaul of state and local jurisdictional rules is not necessary. These reforms can often be implemented, consistent with existing rules, at the discretion of the trial judge. Of course, when local rules conflict, those rules control, but most judges possess the inherent power to implement reforms in complex cases. For example, Rule 611 of the Federal (and Arizona) Rules of Evidence permit the judge to control the mode and order of questioning witnesses and presenting evidence. With the number of complex cases dramatically on the rise, judges and lawyers need to collaborate to help the jury become better fact-finders.
A practical guide
Many lawyers and judges seem to have forgotten the proper role of juries. Alexis de Tocqueville, the renowned historian, once said:
[t]he jury...may be regarded as a gratuitous public school, ever open, in which every juror learns his rights,...and becomes practically acquainted with the laws, which are brought within the reach of his capacity by the efforts of the bar, the advice of the judge, and even the passions of the parties...I look upon the [the jury] as one of the most efficacious means for the education of the people which society can employ.12
It is this idea of educating the jury, of treating the courtroom as a classroom, that judges and lawyers alike need to recapture. We urge all members of the legal profession to implement, on their own initiative, the appropriate reforms when cases require an understanding of complex scientific evidence.
Before we discuss individual reforms in more detail, it is important to note the role of judges in rigorously applying the rules of evidence. The judge plays a very important role in improving jury comprehension by appropriately screening evidence and admitting only that which meets the appropriate standards. The judge must scrupulously protect the jury from unreliable scientific evidence.13
Jury selection. Lawyers are often criticized for using their peremptory challenges to "dumb down" the jury. In complex cases, however, it is in the best interest of all concerned to select educated jurors and not strike persons based on the extent of their education. While there is little empirical evidence to demonstrate that more educated jurors are struck more often than less educated jurors, there does seem to be an unwritten rule of practice that professionals should be struck when possible. The authors themselves plead guilty to using that approach as trial lawyers.
Perhaps lawyers fear that highly educated individuals will dominate in the jury room and be able to persuade the jury to their side during deliberations. However, preliminary data suggest, and we believe, that jurors take their job seriously and will not be easily persuaded to a position with which they do not agree.14 Those lawyers who believe in "dumbing down" juries should adjust their views accordingly, and recognize the important role of jurors as fact finders and decision makers. Of course, both lawyers and judges must still attempt to detect jurors with prejudices or preconceived ideas, but they should also seek to empanel the best jurors available from the pool.
Juror note taking and notebooks. Of all the reforms discussed, allowing the jury to take notes during the trial must be the most common-sense and least controversial. Nevertheless many jurisdictions just don't get it. Research indicates that note taking does not distract jurors, nor does it create an undue influence on those jurors who choose not to take notes. Judges in Arizona instruct jurors that they are not obligated to take notes, and they tell the jury to pay attention to all aspects of the trial including witness demeanor and the documentary and testimonial evidence. The vast majority of courts recognize that it is within the sound discretion of the trial judge to permit jurors to take notes. Judges need to thoughtfully exercise their discretion and allow juror note taking in complex cases, and lawyers must urge judges to do so. Jurors need to be encouraged to take an active role in the trial. Allowing the jury to keep track of parties, witnesses, testimony, and evidence by taking notes will empower juries to improve their recall and understanding of all issues, simple and complex.
Jurors in complex cases should also be given a comprehensive notebook containing items such as simplified jury instructions, layouts of the courtroom with the names and locations of lawyers and parties, and glossaries of scientific terms or helpful scientific diagrams, photographs, charts, and background data of all types.
Better jury instructions. Judges historically instruct juries at the end of the trial. There are few rules or cases, however, that prohibit judges from instructing juries earlier. Judges in Arizona provide juries with pretrial instructions that, for example, define the elements of the alleged crime or define terms such as "negligence" and "fault." This permits the jury to understand the basic legal standards early in the case, refer to them during the trial, and then concentrate on the presentation of the evidence.
Jury instructions should be written in plain English. When drafting jury instructions, both judges and lawyers should avoid unnecessary legal jargon. In Arizona, the state bar's Civil Jury Instruction Committee even includes a linguistics professor from a local university. Jury instructions must also be tailored to the case at trial. Instead of using only pattern jury instructions, judges should work with counsel to draft case-specific instructions that include party names and actual facts in the case, without commenting on the evidence. Instructions should be given early in the case both orally and in writing for maximum comprehension and memory retention. The written instructions should be included in the jury notebook. Jurors need to understand the legal context of the evidence presented, and early instruction facilitates a better understanding of its legal relevance.
Finally, jurors should each be given a written copy of the final instructions and they should be allowed to have the instructions in the deliberation room. Arizona's rules require judges to provide each juror with a copy of all the jury instructions. After all, why should jurors have to pass a single copy when a few dollars can provide copies all around? And where is it written that jury instructions must only be oral?
Permitting the jury to ask written questions. When it comes to issues of scientific evidence, lawyers and judges collaborate to understand and narrow the issues before the court. They ask each other questions to clarify misunderstandings prior to trial, and will confer even during the trial. Yet, once the trial begins, jurors traditionally are not permitted to ask questions. It is time to end this nonsensical practice.
Jury questions should be written and given to court personnel before the witness leaves the courtroom. Counsel should be given the opportunity to object in a sidebar, or outside the hearing of the jury, and the jury should be instructed about the limitations on questions that can be asked. In Arizona, there have been no reports of problems with this type of procedure after thousands of trials over the last four years. A study reported in the March-April 1996 issue of Judicature found that jury questions helped jurors understand the facts and issues, that jurors did not ask inappropriate questions, and that jurors did not draw inappropriate inferences when their questions, due to counsel's objection, for example, were not asked.15
As the comments to the ABA Standards noted, state and federal courts have overwhelmingly recognized that it is within the sound discretion of the trial judge to allow juror questioning of witnesses. We encourage judges and lawyers to experiment with jury questions in complex cases. The empirical evidence, and our own experience, reveals that the fears and concerns about jury questions are unfounded. As two Arizona attorneys recently wrote, "Our experience [with juror questions] reinforces for us the effectiveness of juror questions in keeping the jury engaged and in improving the quality of our own trial presentations. The jurors' questions revealed areas of confusion or concern, enabling us to adjust our presentation accordingly."16
Juror discussion during civil trials. Perhaps one of the most controversial Arizona reforms at the time of its adoption, and still controversial today, is allowing jurors in civil cases to discuss the evidence prior to final deliberation. In Arizona, jurors are carefully instructed by the trial judge that they may discuss the case, so long as all members of the jury are present and they reserve judgment until final deliberations. The general consensus of the Arizona bench and bar is that this reform has been a success. In fact, the Committee on the More Effective Use of Jurors, in its second report to the Arizona Supreme Court (in June, 1998), recommended that the rules be expanded to allow pre-deliberation discussions during criminal trials. As of this writing, however, the supreme court has not adopted that recommendation.
Traditionally, the view has been that permitting jurors to discuss the evidence early in the trial will lead them to make up their minds before hearing both sides. Recent studies suggest that this is not true.17 In fact, some studies have gone so far as to say that requiring jurors to refrain from discussing evidence actually hinders their ability to process information.18 Pre-deliberation discussion can help improve juror comprehension, improve memory recall, and relieve the tension created by a forced atmosphere of silence with regard to the evidence presented at trial.19
Social scientists report that jurors naturally tend to actively process information as it is received. Therefore, it is not surprising to find that studies show that anywhere from 11 to 44 percent of jurors discuss the evidence among themselves during the trial despite judicial admonitions to avoid such discussion.20 Explicitly allowing pre-deliberation discussions, then, is really an acknowledgment of what often occurs naturally.
Perhaps surprising to some, Arizona's experience has shown that when one individual juror makes a preliminary judgment during pre-deliberation discussions, that judgment is often tested or challenged by the entire group.21 In United States v. Wexler (1987) Judge Ditter aptly explained that "jurors are concerned, responsible, conscientious citizens who take most seriously the job at hand." Like Judge Ditter, we believe the jurors are more interested in doing justice than in justifying their own loosely based preliminary conclusions, which are frequently subject to modification as a result of group discussions.
A recent study of jury discussions during Arizona trials found that jurors overwhelmingly support this reform and report that it has positive effects.22 Specifically, jurors said that discussions improved comprehension of evidence, that all jurors' views were considered, and evidence was remembered accurately. Additionally, only a very low percentage of participants in the study said that trial discussions encouraged jurors to make up their minds early on. The study also found that, among judges, lawyers, and jurors, support for this reform increases with experience. Permitting pre-deliberation discussion, more than any other reform, challenges the legal profession's traditional notions of jury behavior, but it is time to recognize the need for juries to have better tools in dealing with complex evidentiary issues.
Independent court appointed or stipulated experts. Unlike fingerprint or ballistic evidence, where it is easier to understand the samples juries are asked to compare, genetic evidence requires juries to sit through conflicting scientific interpretations from expert witnesses presented by the opposing parties. Early presentation of independent experts, either court appointed or stipulated, can help solve many of the problems presented by genetic evidence. Recent surveys suggest that judges favor appointing independent experts in complex cases. However, statistics show that the actual use of court appointed experts is relatively low.23 This situation is unfortunate because there are many advantages to be realized by the use of independent experts. For example, a case involving the admissibility of DNA evidence using a particular type of analysis was recently before the Arizona Superior Court. Both parties agreed to the appointment of a neutral court expert to testify about the procedures used in this analytial method. Substantial saving, in time and money, were realized by the appointment of the court expert. Judicial economy and fairness demand the use of innovative techniques in dealing with admittedly complex scientific issues.
In most jurisdictions trial judges have inherent authority to appoint experts as technical advisors to assist the court. In fact, judges may appoint expert witnesses for testimonial purposes under Rule 706 of the Federal Rules of Evidence and similar provisions in force in most states. However, the use of court appointed experts to serve as a jury tutor on the basics of, for example, DNA evidence, is an under-utilized tool.24 Pre-recorded video "lectures" may be another avenue to explore when considering how to educate jurors on issues of "common" scientific knowledge. The basic building blocks of DNA and the basic methods of DNA testing could be simplified and presented to the jury in such a fashion as to make it much less intimidating.25
Many lawyers may argue that "dueling experts" is the model courts should adhere to, based on the adversarial nature of our justice system. However, a recent study found that jurors do not rely on cross-examination of expert witnesses designed to point out flawed scientific methodology.26 The authors suggest that this is because jurors do not believe lawyers are sincere in their attempts to educate jurors, but rather see cross-examination as the lawyer's attempt to undermine the expert through any means possible.
Independent experts present an opportunity to not only improve juror comprehension and performance, but also decrease the substantial costs of expert witnesses, and increase judicial economy. The adversarial nature of the trial may be diminished, but that is actually a benefit, not a cost, according to independent experts considering jury reactions to lawyer cross-examination of opposing party witnesses. It is the judge's responsibility to be proactive in ensuring that the trial is a search for the truth, and that it is not about lawyers setting up roadblocks to that search.
Allow a dialogue between jurors, lawyers, and the judge during deliberations. In place of the traditional "pep talk" judges often give to deadlocked juries, Arizona explicitly provides for an opportunity for further instruction by the judge and argument by the parties. Why should the opportunity to educate jurors further stop once deliberations begin? Allowing additional evidence, argument by counsel, or providing further instruction is not problematic, legally or pragmatically. Of course, judges must be careful not to influence jurors and need to limit further inquiries only to those issues that confuse or divide the jury. Once again, there are many cases approving the judge's inherent authority to reopen a case for additional evidence or argument where the jury needs further admissible evidence to reach a verdict, or to determine if a deadlock is unavoidable.27
Opening the courtroom to more creative learning. Increasingly, the Human Genome Project's Ethical, Legal and Social Implications Program is sensitizing the judicial and legal community about the changing rule of the law in light of new genetic discoveries and testing methods. Primers reviewing DNA and genome science have been written, memorable cartoon drawings simplify sophisticated concepts,28 and video background resources explaining genetics in meaningful non-scientific ways are growing in number.
Further, difficult concepts can be reduced to plain English and conveyed to juries through innovative technologies, including live, videotaped, or interactive Internet-based testimony. These approaches can easily be presented while simultaneously ensuring that complex scientific evidence is afforded the utmost of seriousness.
Educating the jury early in the trial, by using court appointed experts, better written jury instructions, jury notebooks, and basic adult education techniques, will provide a foundation for later testimony of experts presented by the lawyers. Jurors who have been tutored early about complex scientific issues will be in a better position to judge both the content and character of dueling experts.
Two central participants in the courtroom are the ultimate beneficiaries of reform-oriented jury approaches when heavy doses of scientific evidence are the subject of an unfolding courtroom drama: jurors, and more importantly, litigants. Contemporary behavioral research, and Arizona's jury reform experience, substantiate that comprehension and understanding are significantly enhanced when information is actively processed. Most courts already possess the tools to implement the educational techniques discussed above. Whether through system-wide jury reform or the efforts of individual trial judges and trial lawyers, a more jury-centered trial will not only allow jurors to actively and intelligently participate in the fact-finding and decision-making process, but also give the litigants a better truth-finding forum.
Robert D. Myers is Presiding Judge of the Arizona Superior Court in Maricopa County.
Ronald S. Reinstein is Associate Presiding Judge of the Arizona Superior Court in Maricopa County.
Gordon M. Griller is court administrator, Arizona Superior Court in Maricopa County and a member of the Board of Directors of the American Judicature Society.
The authors wish to thank Timothy D. Keller, a law researcher for Judge Robert D. Myers, and Richard Teenstra, assistant director of the Maricopa County Superior Court Law Library, for their assistance.
1. Department of Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research, Life Sciences Division, Human Genome Research: An Introduction (visited Sept. 2, 1999) http://www.science.doe.gov/.
2. Denno, Legal Implications of Genetics and Crime Research, in Bock and Goode, eds., Genetics of Criminal and Antisocial Behaviour 235 (Chichester, N.Y.: Wiley, 1996).
3. See Arizona Supreme Court Orders, Nos. R-94-0031, R-92-004 (1995).
4. See Adler, The Jury: Trial and Error in the American Courtroom (New York: Times Books, 1994); Jury Comprehension in Complex Cases: Report of a Special Committee of the ABA Litgation Section (Chicago: American Bar Association, 1989).
5. For a review of criticisms of civil jury competencies and the jury research literature, see Lempert, Civil Juries and Complex Cases: Taking Stock after Twelve Years, in Litan, ed., Verdict: Assessing the Civil Jury System 181-247 (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1993); Vidmar, The Performance of the American Civil Jury: An Empirical Perspective, 40 Ariz. L. Rev. 849 (1998); Cecil, Hans and Wiggins, Citizen Comprehension of Difficult Issues: Lessons from Civil Jury Trials, 40 Am. U. L. Rev. 727 (1991).
6. Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, The Arizona Jury Reform Permitting Civil Jury Trial Discussions: The Views of Trial Participants, Judges, and Jurors, 32 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 349 (1999).
7. See Dann, "Learning Lessons" and "Speaking Rights": Creating Educated and Democratic Juries, 68 Ind. L.J. 1229 (1993).
8. Cecil, Hans and Wiggins, supra n. 5, at 765.
9. Jurors: The Power of 12, Report of the Arizona Supreme Court Committee On More Effective Use of Juries (November 1994).
10. Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, supra n. 6, at 371-372.
11. For a review of state jury reform efforts, see Munsterman, A brief history of state jury reform efforts, 79 Judicature 216 (1996); Murphy, et al, Managing Notorious Trials (Williamsburg, Va.: National Center for State Courts, 1998); Enhancing the Jury System: A Guidebook for Jury Reform (Chicago: American Judicature Society, 1999).
12. de Tocqueville, Democracy in America 295-296 (Vintage ed. 1945).
13. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm. Inc., 509 U. S. 579 (1993).
14. Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, supra n. 6.
15. Heuer and Penrod, Increasing juror participation in trials through note taking and question asking, 79 Judicature 256, 260-261 (1996).
16. Cabot and Coleman, Arizona's 1995 Jury Reform Can be Deemed a Success, Arizona Journal, July 12, 1999, at 6.
17. See Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, supra n. 6; Hannaford, Hans and Munsterman, "Permitting Jury Discussions During Trial: Impact of the Arizona Reform" 9 (1998) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the authors).
18. Chilton and Henley, Improving the Jury System, Jury Instructions: Helping Jurors Understand the Evidence and the Law, §II, PLRI Reports (Spring 1996) http://www.uchastings.edu/plri/spr96tex/juryinst.html.
19. Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, supra n. 6; Hannaford, Hans and Munsterman, supra n. 17; Chilton and Henley, supra n. 18.
20. Chilton and Henley, supra n. 18.
21. Myers and Griller, Educating Jurors Means Better Trials: Jury Reform in Arizona, 36 Judges J. 13-17, 51 (Fall 1997).
22. Hans, Hannaford and Munsterman, supra n. 6.
23. Sanders, Scientifically Complex Cases, Trial by Jury, and the Erosion of Adversarial Processes, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 355, 378-379 (1998).
24. The Evaluation of Forensic DNA Evidence 169-171 (Washington, D.C.: National Research Council, 1996).
25. For examples of excellent illustrations and explanations, see Hoagland and Dotson, The Way Life Works (New York: Time Books, 1995).
26. Kovera, McAuliff and Hebert, Reasoning About Scientific Evidence: Effects of Juror Gender and Evidence Quality on Juror Decisions in a Hostile Work Environment Case, 84 J. of Applied Psychology 362, 372-373 (1999).
27. Myers and Griller, supra n. 21, at 16-17.
28. See Hoagland and Dotson, supra n. 25.
|The online presentation of this publication is a special feature of the Human Genome Project Information Web site.|

It was previously thought that Australopithecus afarensis walked in a crouched posture, and on the side of the foot, pushing off the ground with the middle part of the foot, as today's great apes do. We found, however, that the Laetoli prints represented a type of bipedal walking that was fully upright and driven by the front of the foot, particularly the big toe, much like humans today, and quite different to bipedal walking of chimpanzees and other apes.Quite remarkably, we found that some healthy humans produce footprints that are more like those of other apes than the Laetoli prints. The foot function represented by the prints is therefore most likely to be similar to patterns seen in modern-humans. This is important because the development of the features of human foot function helped our ancestors to expand further out of Africa.
Our work demonstrates that many of these features evolved nearly four million years ago in a species that most consider to be partially tree-dwelling. These findings show support for a previous study at Liverpool that showed upright bipedal walking originally evolved in a tree-living ancestor of living great apes and humans.
Australopithecus afarensis, however, was not modern in body proportions of the limbs and torso.The characteristic long-legged, short body form of the modern human allows us to walk and run great distances, even when carrying heavy loads. Australopithecus afarensis had the reverse physical build, short legs and a long body, which makes it probable that it could only walk or run effectively over short distances.

|Research Home | Pavements Home|
|This report is an archived publication and may contain dated technical, contact, and link information|
Publication Number: FHWA-RD-98-085
From the public's perspective, the most important basic purpose of a roadway pavement is to provide a smooth safe ride. For a pavement to accomplish this purpose it must be durable, and it is the responsibility of pavement engineers to ensure that pavements are designed and constructed in such a way that they achieve this durability. Pavement researchers are continually looking for ways that will allow engineers to design and construct pavements that provide a smooth safe ride for the longest amount of time and for the least cost.
Pavements historically have been constructed from a combination of locally available natural materials, including natural soils, select soils such as natural gravel, and processed material such as quarried stone. Pavements are constructed in layers with the weaker or least durable materials at the bottom and the stronger or most durable materials at the top. The top layers are normally bound together with some sort of binder. Commonly used binders include hydraulic cements and bituminous cements. The most widely used of the bituminous cements is asphalt, a petroleum product refined from crude oil. What makes asphalt desirable for pavement construction is its tendency to stick to the granular material used in the upper pavement layers and thus to keep this material in place. In addition, when asphalt is heated, it becomes very fluid and can be mixed with gravel or rock, making it an easy material to process in the mass quantities required for pavement construction.
If a layer of asphalt bound gravel or rock is thick enough, it takes on structural characteristics of its own and contributes to the overall durability of the pavement. Pavement engineers and researchers discovered long ago that the durability of a pavement is dependent on how it is used. Heavy wheel loads, many wheel loads, or a combination of both will shorten the service life of a pavement. Thicker pavement layers were found to counteract the effects of heavier or more numerous wheel loads. Pavement researchers developed mathematical relationships to calculate the thickness required for specific accumulations of expected wheel loads. Recently developed relationships tend to relate to the specific mechanical properties of the materials used in pavement construction and to how much strain these materials can tolerate while remaining intact.
Asphalt has some unique properties that relate to the mechanical properties of an asphalt bound layer of gravel or rock. Asphalt is a liquid, albeit a very stiff liquid under normal ambient temperatures. When an asphalt material is deformed slightly, and for a very short period of time, it tends to return to its original shape. If the deformation is larger or if it occurs over a longer period of time, the asphalt does not fully return to its original shape. The amount of force needed to deform asphalt increases when the asphalt is cooled and decreases when it is warmed. In short, we have a material that deforms if loaded excessively or for too long, and how much or how long it takes to deform depends on its temperature. Another property of asphalt is that, although it is a liquid, it can crack if loaded too much, too quickly or too many times. Additionally, it may lose its bond to the gravel or rock under the same circumstances. All of these factors make asphalt a difficult material to model.
One of the mechanical properties of a blend of asphalt and gravel is its modulus, or stiffness. The particular modulus that pavement engineers are most interested in is the amount of recoverable deformation that occurs due to a load. This is sometimes termed the resilient modulus. Another property is the amount of un-recovered (plastic) deformation due to that same load. A special case of the resilient modulus is the dynamic modulus, a measure of the deformation due to an applied load, plus a measure of the time delay between load application and deformation. Asphalt also does not deform simultaneously to a load being applied, an effect known as hysteresis. Rather, it begins to deform when the load is applied and continues to deform over some period of time, although usually a fairly short amount of time. All of these stiffness properties of asphalt are very dependent on temperature. The stiffness of the asphalt layer in turn controls the amount of bending, or deflection, that will occur in a pavement when a load is applied.
There are two types of deflections that are relevant to pavement analysis:
A pavement engineer or researcher, will measure the deflection with an FWD, analyze the deflection data, usually by backcalculation, to determine a resilient modulus for the asphaltic bound layers, and then use this result to predict how much deflection a truck axle load will generate. The temperature of the asphalt must be taken into account in both cases so that deflections or modulus can be adjusted as needed.
With the trend toward mechanistic-empirical design methods, methods to adjust the pavement response for temperature are needed. One such method was developed from the Long Term Pavement Performance (LTPP) program. Within LTPP, the seasonal monitoring program (SMP) was initiated to measure pavement deflections and corresponding pavement temperatures on over 40 pavement test sections throughout the United States and Canada. The testing is conducted on half of the sections for one year, then on the other half the following year. The sections are also instrumented to measure in-pavement temperatures and moisture contents. The FWD tests were conducted at two-year intervals at the same positions within the test sections to minimize the spatial effects (variation in test results that are due to variation in the pavement in both longitudinal and transverse directions). The SMP provides the largest dataset of deflections and related pavement temperatures currently available to researchers.
To illustrate the effect that pavement temperatures have on deflections, Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the variation in deflection response to in-pavement temperatures measured at test site locations in Nebraska and Colorado. Figure 1 shows the change that occurs over the course of a few hours at the same point within the same day. Notice that the temperatures effect the deflections close to the load and not away from the load. This is because the top asphalt layer is sensitive to temperature and the underlying unbound materials such the aggregate base and subgrade soil are not. It may be argued that deflections furthest away from the load plate do not change because temperatures do not vary as much, or as quickly in those lower layers, but it is known from independent measurements that those materials are not temperature sensitive. Note that the graph shows a symmetric deflection basin for illustration purposes only. The measurements were only made at the right side of the ordinate. If deflection sensors had been placed on both sides of the load plate, the basin would have been shown to be asymmetric because pavements are not exactly uniform in all directions.
Figure 1. Variations in Deflection due to Temperature in Nebraska
Figure 2 shows the variation in deflections at a single spot on a test site in Colorado over the course of a year. The deflection is plotted against the temperature measured at the mid-depth of the asphalt pavement. Although this shows a strong relationship between temperature and deflection, other seasonal effects are reflected in this plot also. It can be seen that temperature alone explains 88 percent of the variation in the deflections. The remaining 12 percent of the variation is due to seasonal effects and random error. The seasonal effects at other locations or other pavements will be similar.
Figure 2. Variations in Deflection due to Temperature at One Location in Colorado
Figure 3 shows the combined effect of temperature and season at a location on a Nebraska test site. The deflections now show that only the outer sensor measurement remained unchanged, indicating that the seasonal effect was not evident in that sensor but did show up at the intermediate sensors. It is still evident that temperature was responsible for most of the observed changes in deflection.
Figure 3. Temperature and Seasonal Effects in Nebraska
Figure 4 shows the backcalculated moduli for the 160 mm asphalt layer at the same location shown in Figure 3. The trend-line shows that temperature changes explain nearly 98 percent of the variation in the backcalculated moduli. The backcalculated moduli are from 18 different measurements taken from this specific point over the course of a year. If the asphalt moduli are converted to logarithms and plotted against the temperature, the plot becomes linear as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 4. Variation in Backcalculated Moduli at a Location in Nebraska
Figure 5. Variation in the Log of the Backcalculated Moduli at a Location in Nebraska
The SMP, described in the previous section, provided a large amount of data that was used by Lukanen, Stubstad, and Briggs1 to develop empirical regression models for predicting in-depth pavement temperatures from surface temperatures, the time of day when the surface temperature measurement was made, and the average air temperature of the day before. With the same data, Lukanen et al developed empirical regression models that related measured deflections, deflection basin shape factors, or backcalculated moduli to the temperature of the asphalt at mid-depth. These models may be used to adjust measured deflections, deflection basin factors, or backcalculated moduli to those values expected at different temperatures.
The BELLS model is used to increase productivity and (arguably) accuracy during testing in the field. An FWD equipped with infrared (IR) sensors records surface temperatures at every test location, accounting for the effects of varying shade levels and color over the pavement surface. Temperature measurements taken in-depth at a fixed location on the test site cannot account for such variations. The surface temperatures can be input into the appropriate BELLS model to calculate the in-depth temperature for each test.
Once the in-depth temperatures are calculated, the deflections, basin shape factor, or backcalculated modulus at any other temperature can be predicted by using the models developed and presented within the Lukanen et al report.
The ability to measure deflections under any temperature and then adjust the results for all other temperatures greatly increases the usefulness of deflection testing. Without this ability, deflection test productivity would be extremely limited since it would always have to be performed at the specific pavement temperature of interest.
Evaluation of the structural capacity of an asphalt pavement typically involves the measurement of pavement deflections under a load with an FWD. At the same time that the deflections are measured, the temperature of the asphalt surface is commonly measured with an IR thermometer mounted on the FWD. If the FWD does not have such a thermometer, surface temperatures can be measured manually with a hand held instrument, or with a surface contact thermometer. Alternatively, a small hole may be drilled to allow measurement of the asphalt temperature at the desired depth directly. The procedure described here deals with using surface temperature measurements to estimate the temperature at some depth within the asphalt using the BELLS equations.
Once the temperature at depth is estimated, the deflection measurements, or the backcalculated asphalt moduli can be adjusted to the deflection or moduli expected at any other temperature. Detailed descriptions of using BELLS to estimate mid-depth temperatures and to adjust deflection responses for the effects of temperature follow.
Topics: research, infrastructure, pavements and materials
Keywords: research, infrastructure, pavements and materials
TRT Terms: Pavements, Asphalt--United States--Temperature, Pavements, Asphalt--Performance--United States, Long-Term Pavement Performance Program (U.S.), Adjustment factors, Asphalt pavements, Backcalculation

Give the students some white wax crayons and tell them to lay down a
thick layer on manilla paper. Then tell them to cut out high contrast photos
(without letters) from newspapers-- color comics work, too. Turn the image
over on to the wax layer and burnish well--you can use the round handle end
of scissors, wooden spoons, clay tools, whatever. The image from the
newsprint will transfer into the white crayon. You can have them create
captions, extend other ideas for images. The kids really get into the
physical aspects of preparing these transfers and you are free to
concentrate on your mural painters.
Ann-on-y-mouse in Columbus
how to manage the mural painters out in the hall, while supervising the rest
of the class.
Any ideas for less teacher intensive projects with a high enough engagement
level that students would be able to work on out in the hall?

(Swans - March 28, 2011) The terrible earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan have caused not only massive devastation and the loss of thousands of lives over a wide area, but they also caused major problems at several nuclear power plants, particularly at Fukushima. It is these nuclear problems that have tended to dominate discussions in the news media.
The radioactive plumes from the Fukushima plant have so far caused slightly raised levels of radioactivity across a wide area. Nevertheless, dangerous levels have been essentially confined to workers at the site.
The threatened meltdown of spent fuel rods in underwater storage at the plant is entirely due to the complete loss of electrical power in the area. This loss of electrical power eliminated the pumping of cooling water to the storage ponds and elsewhere in the plant. This allowed the heat generated by the fuel rods to raise the temperature sufficiently to boil the radioactive ponds dry.
The continued heating threatened not simply the release of radioactivity to the atmosphere, but also the loss of integrity of the ponds' structures. This could release the melted nuclear material to an uncontrolled, and possibly uncontrollable, area around the ponds, and would potentially threaten any further rehabilitation of the plant. Certainly, some elements in the rods such as iodine, strontium, and caesium would be emitted to the atmosphere, but considering the known effects of the 1986 complete meltdown at Chernobyl, the expected resulting deaths would be far less than those already caused by the earthquake and tsunami themselves. And, anyway, hope still remains of avoiding the meltdown.
It is necessary to emphasize that damage at the plant was entirely due to the unforeseen strength of the tsunami, which poured over the insufficient sea defences, putting out of action all electrical mains and backup power, with consequent failure of all the cooling water pumps, the development of fires in the plant, and the overheating of the spent rods in the storage ponds. It is supremely evident that the design of the plant coped very well with an earthquake of a severity greater than had been designed for, but was overwhelmed by the height of the tsunami.
If similar provision for resistance to a severe earthquake was considered and implemented in the design and construction of the nuclear plants in California, then the dismal scenario forecast by Alexander Cockburn (1) is far from the reality of this industry.
Widespread reports of radioactivity in water and the atmosphere of what is described as thrice normal levels sounds far more threatening than it is in practice. It has never been properly explained to the public that acceptable levels of radioactivity are set at a level at the most 1/100th the lowest accepted no effect level for human health. This is a level of the kind that has widespread use in the control and assessment of the dangers to human health of substantially all pollutants known to be dangerous at high levels, including food additives and the like, as well as radioactivity.
Nevertheless, public concern exists, and it becomes necessary to discuss whether governments should abandon nuclear energy as a source of electrical power.
Available energy sources
Current energy sources used in the United Kingdom are approximately 39% coal; 36% gas; 22% nuclear; 2% hydro & pumped storage, 1 to 2%; and wind 1 to 2%. (2) Similar figures for the United States are 1% petroleum, 17% natural gas, 51% coal, 9% renewable, and 21% nuclear.
Usages in other developed countries are broadly similar, with France being notable for its concentration on hydro and nuclear.
Costings for the United Kingdom are not readily available to me, but costings predicted in the United States for 2016 show anticipated cost per megawatt hour as approximately: coal (various technologies) $65 to $93, gas (various technologies) $17 to $46, nuclear $90, hydro $52, wind (onshore) $84, wind (offshore) $210, solar $195 to $260. (3)
What is remarkable about these figures are the relatively low cost of coal, and the relatively high cost of the newer renewables, wind and solar. Coal is, and seems likely to remain for at least decades, the major fuel for electricity supply in most countries.
Wind power sources are highly subject to weather variability; and solar power is only operative during daylight hours, and is similarly subject to variability of cloud cover. Accordingly, both these sources require equivalent back up from power plants powered with conventional or nuclear fuels. Neither can be considered as practical alternatives to conventional plants.
Realism about Energy
Energy is, undoubtedly, fundamental to all modern society.
With a steady and reliable source of electrical energy all things are possible.
For anyone living in the Western world, where a reliable and continuous source of electrical power is taken for granted, it is very hard to understand the difficulties of development, or even of everyday living, that faces millions in much of the rest of the world.
Just try to remember the difficulties you found during the last power failure you experienced; which, if you live in one of the leading economies, probably lasted for only a few minutes, or hours, not for weeks or months, and you will realise how crucial is a reliable power supply.
Until a means of large-scale storage of electricity at far above the megawatt-hour level is found, renewables can only make a relatively minor, and always unreliable, contribution to world energy supplies.
The really important thing to understand is that renewables cannot produce the reliable electrical power we need, and we shall remain for a considerable period reliant on coal, gas, oil, and nuclear power for our main and reliable energy needs.
Nuclear waste is considered waste because it is not sufficiently high in radioactivity to be useful for concentration as fuel and yet is dangerous to humans in quantity.
There are at present only two basic ways of getting rid of it, either to hide it deep underground in cement (or lead) encasements, or spread it around!
Widely distributed as small particles in the atmosphere or in the oceans, the total quantity of radiation would be insignificant compared to the size of the earth and its background radioactivity, to which it would cause no significant increase. The radioactivity of the waste is per mass relatively low, but it is also of long half-life, so will remain at substantially the same level for perhaps centuries or longer, and that is why it is so dangerous bulked into a small place.
The troubles with the second method are two-fold. The technical problems are: what chemical compounds of the radioactive elements to choose for the dispersal, and then how to spread it so that it is really fully dispersed around the world. The third problem is one of public relations. Whatever is proposed cannot seem to calm the inordinate fear of radioactivity that grips the populace. Unfortunately, few seem capable of understanding the quip of the old sage Paracelsus that "the poison is in the dose." Certainly there has not, so far, been any public relations attempt to explain it.
It is perfectly feasible that a third method, involving inhibition of the radioactivity, may become available in the future as a result of further understanding of nuclear physics as a result of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider resulting in further understanding of the controlling features of quantum mechanics in nuclear physics.
As one who was early, well before the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, against the use of atomic energy for military instead of peaceful (power) uses, I fear that the one thing our campaigns have left is this apparently all-pervading fear (akin to panic) of radioactivity. In practice radioactivity is a part of reality for which we know extremely well how to check on dangers, and how to use for benefit.
Fear of radioactivity is understandable, because it cannot be seen or felt. Local radioactivity is readily detectable and measured with electronic instruments based on the Geiger counter. Nevertheless, it is completely out of the individual's personal control.
Yet the current background of radioactivity everywhere is barely affected by all the radioactive fallout introduced to the atmosphere since 1945, and is mainly due to the radioactivity of the earth itself, together with the constant bombardment of the earth by so-called cosmic rays originating from the far corners of the universe.
I am no expert in inorganic chemistry, being more used to dealing with biological materials, an area in which low radioactivity materials have been so beneficial in experimentation, and in medicine. So, though I would, in principal, prefer the second method (dilution) to the first method (localised hiding), I have no real idea of how to carry it out in practice.
To enlarge on my reference above to Paracelsus, this is the pet name of the wonderfully-named Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheimm, who was a famous physician, alchemist, and astrologer of the early 16th century. He was probably the first to recognise that there are many substances very well known to the lay public that can be medicine at small doses, while causing illness at larger doses. One example group consists of the vitamins, unknown in his day, but now known to be so necessary in small amounts in the daily diet, despite being able to cause medical problems at higher doses. It is a finding of exceedingly wide applicability.
Radioactivity can be both a cause and a cure for cancer. It all depends on the dose. Of course, it is up to government agencies and the nuclear power industry itself, to contain radioactivity within acceptable limits for human health.
It does seem that at least part of the public relations problem of nuclear power resides in the common perception that governments, and by extension their public servants, cannot be trusted to tell the truth.
Nevertheless nuclear power has served well, with remarkably few accidents involving fatalities or injuries to either the public or its workforce. Indeed, in so far as its immediate and associated workforce is concerned, its record is probably better than that of all the other power sources considered.
As experience and development continues, nuclear energy holds out the best prospect of a truly environmentally benign and reliable provider of electrical power. It must be supported until, in the possibly distant future, its fission reaction method can be superseded by the hopeful paragon of the fusion reaction.
It is time to rid ourselves of the influence of the jeremiads who constantly exaggerate dangers and ignore the benefits of every new development in science and technology.
If you find Paddy Apling's work valuable, please consider
Feel free to insert a link to this work on your Web site or to disseminate its URL on your favorite lists, quoting the first paragraph or providing a summary. However, DO NOT steal, scavenge, or repost this work on the Web or any electronic media. Inlining, mirroring, and framing are expressly prohibited. Pulp re-publishing is welcome -- please contact the publisher. This material is copyrighted, © Edward Apling 2011. All rights reserved.
Have your say
Do you wish to share your opinion? We invite your comments. E-mail the Editor. Please include your full name, address and phone number (the city, state/country where you reside is paramount information). When/if we publish your opinion we will only include your name, city, state, and country.
About the Author
Paddy Apling is a retired British scientist. His bio reads with many acronyms: "BSc MChemA CChem FRSC FIFST MRSPH Lecturer in Food Science, University of Reading, 1962-1986 Professional Member, AACC International Professional Member, Institute of Food Technology (USA) Member, Society of Chemical Industry." Put it in simpler terms, he is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and the Institute of Food Science & Technology, qualified for appointment as Public Analyst, retired from University of Reading (1962-86). Apling maintains his own Blog at http://apling.freeservers.com/. To learn more about him, please read Louis Proyect's recollection of his meeting with Paddy in Manhattan, January 2009. (back)
3. Levelized energy cost chart 1, 2011 DOE report.gif Source: Energy Information Adninstration, December 2010, DOE/EIA -- 0383(2) (back)

By Gerald Forbes
While the South Burbank pool is being cited as an example of the economic advantages of unitization,1 it is an interesting fact that the first two decades of oil development in the Osage Reservation contained similar features of community interest and concerted control. Between the years 1896 and 1916 the petroleum of the Osage Reservation was developed under a single contract, known as the Foster Lease, the only enduring and successful "blanket" lease in Mid-Continent's history. The Foster Lease undoubtedly was a monopoly,2 but just as certainly it was an instrument of conservation.
The former Osage Reservation, the present Oklahoma county by that name, contains about one and a half million acres that were bought from the Cherokees, preparatory to moving the Osages from Kansas in 1872. This territory is bounded by the ninety-sixth meridian on the east, the Arkansas River and the former Creek Nation on the south and west, and Kansas on the north.3
It was nearly twenty years after the Osages had bought the land that the possibility of producing petroleum began to be investigated. The American Civil War had interrupted the beginning of the oil industry in Kansas, but in the final decade of the century the production of petroleum became an established industry in that state. In 1895 the oil production of Kansas was 44,430 barrels.4 Among those persons interested, in the oil industry was Henry Foster, who had moved to Independence, Kansas, from Rhode Island. Foster suspected the presence of petroleum beneath the land of the Osages. In 1895 he applied to the Secretary of the De-
1John J. Arthur, "Unitization vs. Competition," The Oil Weekly, V. 83, No. 2, September 21, 1936, pp. 22-26; The Oil Weekly, V. 82, No. 13, September 7, 1936, p. 51.
2Kate P. Burwell, "Richest People in the World," Sturm's Oklahoma Magazine, II, No. 4, pp. 89-93; United States Geological Survey, Mineral Resources of the United States, 1905, p. 885.
4United States Geological Survey, Mineral Resources of the United States, 1889-90, 355; University Geological Survey of Kansas, IX, Special Report on Oil and Gas, 1908, pp. 21-23.
partment of the Interior for a lease of the Osage Reservation. Henry Foster died before the contract was consummated, but his brother, Edwin B. Foster, assumed his interests and obligations. The lease finally was signed, March 16, 1896, by Edwin B. Foster and the Osage National Council, with James Bigheart, principal chief of the Osages, Saucy Chief, president of the Council, and several other Indians writing their names or making their "X's."5
The terms of the contract, which soon became known as a "blanket lease," conferred on Foster the exclusive right of producing oil in the entire Osage Reservation. The term was for ten years. Foster, in turn, agreed to pay a royalty of ten per cent of all crude petroleum removed from the ground and fifty dollars a year for each gas well, as long as it was used. The royalty was to be based on the market value at the place of production, and was to be paid to the National Treasurer of the Osage Nation. Foster further agreed to settle the royalty accounts between the fifth and tenth days of January, April, July, and October.6 Even at this early period there was dissention, and in less than a month a protest was filed with the Secretary of the Interior. The leading protestant was Saucy Chief, who had placed his "X" on the original Foster Lease. The protest was not attested and not clearly genuine. It declared that a full council had not been present when the leasing had been discussed and that the contract did not represent the wishes of a majority of the Osage Tribe. An investigation followed, and the Osage Agent reported that two white men had taken about fifty Indians across the Arkansas River to Cleveland, Oklahoma Territory, where the Osages had been induced with whiskey to sign a protest to the Foster Lease.7
Edwin B. Foster and the heirs of Henry Foster, having organized the Phoenix Oil Company, arranged with McBride and
5Osage Indian Archives, Pawhuska, Oklahoma, D. M. Browning to Henry Foster, January 24, 1896; Hines, E. P., Osage County, in Snider, L. C., Oil and Gas in the Mid-Continent Field, p. 208; Kappler, Charles J., Indian Affairs, Laws and Treaties, III, 1913, p. 137.
6Exact copy of the original lease—Mining Lease, Osage Agency, Oklahoma Territory, 1896, for Prospecting and Mining for Oil and Gas upon the Osage Reservation, Oklahoma Territory.
7Osage Indian Archives, D. M. Browning to U. S. Indian Inspector Duncan, April 6, 1896; D. M. Browning to Acting Agent Freeman, June 13, 1896.
Bloom, drillers of Independence, Kansas, to put down a well three or four miles south of Chautauqua Springs, Kansas, likely near the present town of Boulanger, Oklahoma.8 This well was shallow but it produced about fifty barrels of oil daily, not enough at that time to be commercially valuable, so it was capped. The rumor that the well was an excellent one became current. It was rumored that this first Osage well had been closed to permit the owners to acquire leases cheaply in the Oklahoma Territory. The first Osage well was drilled in 1897. It was in 1899 that the Osage Oil Company, another Foster concern, drilled on the eastern side of the Osage Reservation near Bartlesville, a town in the Cherokee Nation. The first well of the Osage Oil Company showed prospects of petroleum and the second well was a good producer. Several dry or nearly dry holes were drilled, but the seventh well of the group was the best producer in the entire Kansas-Indian Territory oil field.9
By 1900 Foster had done little to develop the petroleum industry in the Osage Reservation, but in that year arrangements were completed for subleasing the land in large blocks. The entire reservation was divided into tracts half a mile wide and three miles east to west. These rectangles were numbered consecutively and those in the eastern part of the Reservation were offered to sublessees on a bonus and royalty basis. The sublessees were required to pay the Foster interests a one-eighth (later one-sixth) royalty and a bonus of one to five dollars an acre.10 The next year the Foster interests were consolidated in the Indian Territory Illuminating Oil Company (usually called the I. T. I. O.) which was incorporated at Trenton, New Jersey, with a capitalization of three million dollars. This new company was authorized to own and control all the rights and properties of the Osage and Phoenix Oil Companies.11 It was the I. T. I. O. that handled the subleasing
8Hines, loc. cit. p. 208; Hutchison, L.L., Preliminary Report on Rock Asphalt, Asphalite, Petroleum and Natural Gas in Oklahoma, Oklahoma Geological Survey, Bulletin No. 2, 1911, p. 167; Tidal Topics, III, Tidal Oil Company, 1919, p. 15.
11The Tulsa Democrat, Tulsa, Indian Territory, December 27, 1901, The Osage Journal, January 2, 1902.
of the Osage Reservation, and buyers of drilling rights were sought in New York. The first well drilled by a sublessee was financed by the Almeda Oil Company on Lot 40. The Indian Territory Illuminating Oil Company announced that it planned to drill wells itself at the rate of one every twenty days, that the Standard Oil Company would buy the crude oil production at its refinery at Neodesha, Kansas, for eighty-eight cents a barrel, and that leases had been sold to New York and St. Louis companies covering rights on about six thousand acres of land. The I. T. I. O. further called attention to the quality of the crude oil which caused it to yield a high percentage of kerosene. (The name of the company itself calls attention to the fact that gasoline then was not of first importance.) The average depth of the wells was thirteen hundred feet, which made them relatively inexpensive to drill.12
Drilling in the Osage Reservation was comparatively rapid after the system of subleasing had been perfected. During 1902 the rail shipments of crude oil to the Neodesha refinery amounted to 37,000 barrels, which was the production of thirteen wells, six of which had been drilled in 1902. By January, 1903, thirty wells had been completed by the I. T. I. O. and its sublessees. Seventeen of the thirty wells produced oil, two gas, and eleven were dry holes. A year later 361 wells had been completed, and 243 were producing oil, twenty-one gas, and ninety-seven were dry. By the beginning of 1906 there had been 783 wells drilled—544 producing oil, forty-one gas, and 198 were dry. The oil production was: 1903—56,905 barrels; 1904—652,479 barrels; 1905—3,421,478 barrels; 1906—5,219,106 barrels. The average daily production of the Osage wells in 1905 was about 15,000 barrels. In 1905 there were 687,000 acres of the Osage Reservation under the control of the sublessees.13 That year the I. T. I. O. announced that it had disbursed $2,686,627 in connection with the "blanket lease."
By the terms of the contract with Foster, the Osages were to receive one-tenth royalty (later changed to one-eighth) while the I. T. I. O. Company required one-eighth (later changed to one-
13United States Geological Survey, Mineral Resources of the United States, 1905, p. 855; 1906, p. 858; 1914, pp. 1009-1010; Tidal Topics, III, p. 15.
sixth) royalty of its sublessees, making a profit of one-fortieth (later one-twenty-fourth) in addition to rentals and bonuses. There were less than twenty-five hundred members of the Osage tribe on the official rolls. The rolls contained Indians on the list January 1, 1906, and all children born to them by July, 1907, and those children of white fathers who had not been enrolled previously. There was no distinction between males and females, age, or degree of Indian blood. The equal share which each member of the tribe received from the communal mineral receipts was known as a headright. Headrights, it was provided by law, could be inherited, subdivided or consolidated, and as time passed different members of the tribe did not receive equal shares, as was the case at the time of the Osage allotment. This allotment differed from that of the other Oklahoma tribes, for it provided that only the surface of the land be held in severalty while the minerals of the subsurface remained communal property. As the sublessees of the I. T. I. O. developed the oil industry, the royalties of the Osage tribe mounted and were divided into headright payments.14
The days of the quarterly payments at Pawhuska, seat of the Osage agency, were colorful. On the first and second days of the payments, the full bloods received their monies; then the mixed-bloods were paid on the following two or three days. By 1906 the quarterly payment period kept force of eight men busy for four or five days. The merchants and professional men of Pawhuska who had extended credit to the Indians were on hand to collect their bills before the Osages had spent their money elsewhere. The amount of the payment depended on the number of barrels of oil taken from the ground, the number of gas wells being used, and the market price of petroleum. Accurate figures on the receipts from oil and gas are difficult to acquire, for the Osages also received payments for grazing permits, pipe line damages, and other revenues. Between July 1, 1904, and May 13, 1905, a total of $108,567 was paid to the Osages as oil and gas royalties.15
14United States Statutes At Large, XXXIV, p. 540; Kappler, op. cit., p. 256; United States Geological Survey, Mineral Resources of the United States, 1906, p. 855; Daniel, L. H. "The Osage Nation," The Texaco Star, V. Nos. 7-8, pp. 10-14.
Congress began considering the renewal of the Foster Lease in 1905, although it did not expire until March, 1906. Several of the tribal leaders went to Washington to watch the action of Congress, and there were some who wished to prevent renewal of the contract.16 There were oil operators who called attention to the profits they believed the I. T. I. O. company was making and objected that one firm should have such a monopoly. After an investigation, Congress compromised by renewing the Foster Lease and all the subleases made by the I. T. I. O. on a total area of six hundred and eighty thousand acres on the eastern side of the Reservation. All the original conditions of the Foster Lease were to apply for another decade, with the exception that gas well royalty was increased from fifty to one hundred dollars for each well. The status of the western half of the Reservation was left undetermined until 1912. The renewal with reduced acreage left the Indian Territory Illuminating Oil Company with only 2,060 acres that had not been subleased, and caused that firm to lease from its own sublessees.17
Before 1904 the Osage oil was transported by railroad, but in that year the Department of the Interior approved two applications for pipelines to move the crude petroleum. The amount of damages to be paid the Osages puzzled the Federal officials, for there was no precedent for laying pipelines across Indian lands. The Prairie Oil and Gas Company wanted to lay a line to the refinery at Neodesha, while Guffey and Galey sought to pipe gas to Tulsa.18 Damages were fixed at ten cents a rod. In 1905 the Prairie constructed the "Cleveland discharge" line, which connected the Osage wells near Cleveland, Oklahoma Territory, with the trunk line to Kansas. Another outlet for the Osage petroleum appeared with the construction of a refinery by the Uncle Sam Oil Company at Cherryvale, Kansas. The disagreements of the Uncle Sam and the
17"History of twenty-three Years of Oil and Gas Development in the Osage," "National Petroleum News," V. No. 11, pp. 66-68; Kappler, op. cit., p. 137; Osage Indian Archives, Memorandum, p. 1; Osage Indian Archives, C. F. Larrabee to Frank Frantz, June 7, 1905; Hines, E.P., loc. cit., p. 208; Department of the Interior, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Annual Report, I, p. 307.
18The Osage Journal, March 18, 1905; The Cherokee Advocate, Tahlequah, Indian Territory, April 4, 1903.
Standard companies were dragged through the courts for years.19 In 1910 the Gulf Pipe Line Company became a buyer of Osage oil, since inadequate transportation facilities had resulted in 1909 in a decrease of production.20 Drilling and production received no more setbacks until 1915, when little drilling was done because of the uncertainty resulting from the struggle over the second renewal of the Foster Lease.
The disposition of the mineral rights in the western half of the Osage county (Oklahoma became a state in 1907) became a pressing question in 1911. A committee of Osages urged the National Council to lease the western land on terms that would be more profitable to the Indians. Royalties of one-third and one-sixth were suggested. Since the Osages were interested in farming and ranching, as well as oil, it was argued that no company should be permitted to drill for oil without the "written consent" of the allottee on whose land the well was desired. After revising some of the suggestions of the committee, the Osage National Council went on record as favoring sealed bids for leases. Sealed bids would prevent leasing except at specific times, and then the lease would go to the highest bidder.21
While this discussion was current among the Indians, some oil operators met at Tulsa and decided on a plan for leasing the western side of Osage County. They proposed the organization of a large company of independent operators, each of whom would be on an equal cooperative footing. Such a company, the oil men believed, would be financially able to contract for the entire unleased acreage of Osage lands. They believed this company could deal pleasantly with the Department of the Interior. The financing of this huge company was expected to be comparatively simple, and it was argued that such a concern would be able to dictate favorable terms to crude oil buyers and thereby gain a profitable
19Osage Indian Archives, C.F. Larrabee to Frank Frantz, January 12, and January 14, 1905; The Muskogee Times Democrat, Muskogee, Indian Territory, January 8, 1907.
21The Osage Journal, January 5, May 25, August 17, September 14, and October 19, 1911; Senate Document 487, 62 Congress, 2 Sess.
price for the petroleum. Among the leaders of this plan were P. J. White, Harry Sinclair, E. R. Kemp, and David Gunsberg.22
Samuel Adams, Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior asked those who were interested in leasing Osage land to communicate with him.23 The Osage National Council went to Washington to confer with Adams. The proponents of the giant organization of independent producers sent representatives. Many oil men favored neither the plan of the independents nor that of the Osage Council, so a mass meeting was called at Tulsa to protest the organization of the giant cooperative firm. Some believed that the Osage oil long had been a menace to the price of petroleum, and they did not look kindly on any plan to further the production. They suggested that a plan be adopted to discover whether any oil existed in the western side of the Osage County. Several operators believed that all the oil of the Osages had been discovered. Another group, led by E. W. Marland and F. A. Gillespie, opposed any plan involving one big lease. They favored leasing the western side of the county in blocks as small as 160 acres.24
In May, 1912, the Osage National Council directed the principal chief to sign four leases that would cover virtually the entire western part of the county. In these leases were several ideas which the Osages desired, including the "written consent clause," the maintenance by the leasing companies of offices at Pawhuska, and the retention in the county of all the gas. (It was believed that the retention of the gas in the county would induce industries to come.) The leases were issued to four men, one of whom was H. H. Tucker of the Uncle Sam Oil Company, who was reported to be an adopted member of the Osage tribe. The Secretary of the Department of the Interior refused to accept these leases because no provision was made for the supervision of the Federal government. He also frowned on the "written consent clause."25
Despite the fact that Assistant Secretary Adams had said that he would not recognize their election, Bacon Rind, as Principal
25The Osage Journal, March 14 and May 23, 1912; The Tulsa World, March 16, May 25 and June 19, 1912.
Chief, and Red Eagle, as Assistant Chief, celebrated their election in July of that year (1912).26 Under the guidance of Bacon Rind and Red Eagle, the Osage National Council joined the Uncle Sam Oil Company in publicly presenting a petition to President Taft asking that the entire unleased portion of the Osage lands be leased to Tucker's company. The Department of the Interior concluded the opposition among the Indians by promptly removing from office both Bacon Rind and Red Eagle, as well as the entire National Council. Tucker responded with a final threat to President Taft that the twelve thousand stockholders of the Uncle Sam Oil Company would remember the refusal of the president to override the decision of the Department of the Interior. He vowed that the stockholders would use their influence to prevent Taft's reelection in November.27
The final decision of the Department of the Interior, issued July 13, 1912, involved elements of several of the plans suggested for the disposal of the west side mineral rights. The land was to be leased in tracts varying from three hundred to 5,120 acres, but no person was to have more than 25,000 acres. The United States Agent at Pawhuska was required periodically to advertise specific tracts for leasing on sealed bids. A person wishing to lease a tract was required to request in writing that the land be offered for bidding. Each bid was to be accompanied by a certified check for ten per cent of the bonus and the first year's rental. All leases were to endure for ten years from the date of approval by the Department of the Interior, providing no lease extended beyond April 8, 1931. The royalty on gas was fixed at one-sixth of the market value at the well, while on petroleum it was set at one-sixth of the gross production at the actual market value. Heretofore the royalty on oil had been one-eighth. Oil men who had been paying one-eighth royalty on oil produced on the land of the Five Tribes objected to giving one-sixth to the Osages, but that was the share which the I. T. I. O. had been receiving from its sublessees. A compromise was reached on the "written consent clause" whereby cultivated lands and homesteads were protected from oil prospec-
tors. Producers strongly condemned the new regulations and the Osage National Council.28
The conflict over leasing the west side of the county hardly had ended before it was time for the renewal of the Foster Lease on the east side of the Osage Reservation. The I. T. I. O. minimized the profit it received from the Foster Lease, but in June, 1914, a renewal of the lease was asked. The request of the I. T. I. O. was supported by the company's sublessees. The next month the Osage National Council requested that no blanket lease be approved for the land then held by the I. T. I. O. The leasing company issued a financial statement to show the benefits that it had brought the Osages. The statement said that the I. T. I. O. had received over two million dollars in seventeen years, but that more than a million dollars had been paid to the Indians. The company cited the fact that it had furnished more than one hundred thousand dollars worth of gas free to operating companies. The statement of the I. T. I. O. indicated that the company had spent more in developing the Osage petroleum than it had received from the sublessees.29
When 1915 opened it was clear that some decision must be made regarding the Foster Lease. Secretary Lane of the Department of the Interior called a public hearing at Washington to discuss the lease. Members of the Osage National Council, officials of the Indian administration, and oil operators attended.30 Charles N. Haskell, first governor of Oklahoma, appeared for P. J. White and Harry Sinclair, and declared that the decision would affect the entire Mid-Continent. He asserted that the I. T. I. O. would develop the oil industry in an orderly manner, but that if the district were thrown open to competitive drilling there would be a
28Oklahoma Geological Survey, Bulletin No. 19, Part 1, Petroleum and Natural Gas in Oklahoma, 1915, p. 32; Department of the Interior, Regulations to Govern the Leasing of Lands in the Osage Reservation, Oklahoma, for Oil Gas, and Mining Purposes, 1912, pp. 1-4.
29Estimate of Profit and Loss under the Leases and Subleases of the Indian Territory Illuminating Oil Company in the Osage Reservation, compiled by Charles F. Leech, (nd) Osage Indian Archives.
30The Oil and Gas Journal, February 11, 1915, p. 2; Osage Indian Archives, Cato Sells to J. George Wright, February 10, 1915, The Osage Journal, February 11, 1915.
flood of oil that would swamp the marketing facilities. Charles Owen, in a letter that was made a part of the record, took the stand that if the I. T. I. O. were to be protected for the pioneer development, its lease should be renewed where it actually had put down wells, not subleased the land to other companies. Some sublessees objected to the policy of the I. T. I. O. in separating the oil and gas rights, for they argued that they had found the gas, but now that a market was available the I. T. I. O. held it. (By the Foster Lease, the I. T. I. O. owned all gas discovered.) The Osage National Council demanded that leases be made directly with the operating companies without the I. T. I. O. as an intermediary.31 The hearing was concluded in June and the Department of the Interior refused to renew the Foster Lease, deciding to eliminate the I. T. I. O. except as a producing company.
The new regulations provided that the east side of the county be broken up into quarter-section units combined in such a way that none would exceed an aggregate of 4,800 acres, except in such units where producing wells were capable of averaging twenty-five barrels a day on July 1, 1915. These units were to be offered at public auction for lease by the Osages under the supervision of the Department of the Interior. Oil and gas rights still were to be kept separately. The royalty on oil was fixed at one-sixth, except on quarter-sections where the average daily production equalled or exceeded one hundred barrels daily. There the royalty was one-fifth. Former sublessees of the I. T. I. O. were allowed to keep those quarter-sections they then were developing provided there would not be a total exceeding 4,800 acres.32 In general these rules were much the same as those governing the oil leases in the lands of the Five Civilized Tribes.
March 16, 1916, the Foster Lease expired, ending the only successful blanket lease of the lands of an Indian tribe. The lease
31Osage Indian Archives, J. George Wright to Cato Sells, March 2, 1915, Stenographer's Minutes of Hearing Before Cato Sells, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, in the Matter of the so-called Foster Lease on Oil and Gas Property Owned by the Osage Indians of Oklahoma, Washington, March, 1915, pp. 675-680, 682-683, 686-687, 692-694-703, 710-711, 715, 730; The Osage Journal, May 15, 1915.
was a monopoly, but it had good features for all concerned. The Osage lands continued to produce an increasing volume of oil until 1923, whereas the immense deposits in the Creek Nation (Glenn Pool, Cushing Pool, Okmulgee County) were dissipated very rapidly. In the Osage area there was a tendency to avoid competitive drilling because of the large leases. The Osage gas was conserved, thereby retaining much of the natural pressure. Gross overproduction never was one of the evils found in the district. The Osages themselves certainly benefited under the Foster Lease, although their individual wealth generally was over-estimated.

Significance and Use
Sediment provides habitat for many aquatic organisms and is a major repository for many of the more persistent chemicals that are introduced into surface waters. In the aquatic environment, most anthropogenic chemicals and waste materials including toxic organic and inorganic chemicals eventually accumulate in sediment. Mounting evidences exists of environmental degradation in areas where USEPA Water Quality Criteria (WQC; Stephan et al.(67)) are not exceeded, yet organisms in or near sediments are adversely affected Chapman, 1989 (68). The WQC were developed to protect organisms in the water column and were not directed toward protecting organisms in sediment. Concentrations of contaminants in sediment may be several orders of magnitude higher than in the overlying water; however, whole sediment concentrations have not been strongly correlated to bioavailability Burton, 1991(69). Partitioning or sorption of a compound between water and sediment may depend on many factors including: aqueous solubility, pH, redox, affinity for sediment organic carbon and dissolved organic carbon, grain size of the sediment, sediment mineral constituents (oxides of iron, manganese, and aluminum), and the quantity of acid volatile sulfides in sediment Di Toro et al. 1991(70) Giesy et al. 1988 (71). Although certain chemicals are highly sorbed to sediment, these compounds may still be available to the biota. Chemicals in sediments may be directly toxic to aquatic life or can be a source of chemicals for bioaccumulation in the food chain.
The objective of a sediment test is to determine whether chemicals in sediment are harmful to or are bioaccumulated by benthic organisms. The tests can be used to measure interactive toxic effects of complex chemical mixtures in sediment. Furthermore, knowledge of specific pathways of interactions among sediments and test organisms is not necessary to conduct the tests Kemp et al. 1988, (72). Sediment tests can be used to: (1) determine the relationship between toxic effects and bioavailability, (2) investigate interactions among chemicals, (3) compare the sensitivities of different organisms, (4) determine spatial and temporal distribution of contamination, (5) evaluate hazards of dredged material, (6) measure toxicity as part of product licensing or safety testing, (7) rank areas for clean up, and (8) estimate the effectiveness of remediation or management practices.
A variety of methods have been developed for assessing the toxicity of chemicals in sediments using amphipods, midges, polychaetes, oligochaetes, mayflies, or cladocerans (Test Method E 1706, Guide E 1525, Guide E 1850; Annex A1, Annex A2; USEPA, 2000 (73), EPA 1994b, (74), Environment Canada 1997a, (75), Enviroment Canada 1997b,(76)). Several endpoints are suggested in these methods to measure potential effects of contaminants in sediment including survival, growth, behavior, or reproduction; however, survival of test organisms in 10-day exposures is the endpoint most commonly reported. These short-term exposures that only measure effects on survival can be used to identify high levels of contamination in sediments, but may not be able to identify moderate levels of contamination in sediments (USEPA USEPA, 2000 (73); Sibley et al.1996, (77); Sibley et al.1997a, (78); Sibley et al.1997b, (79); Benoit et al.1997, (80); Ingersoll et al.1998, (81)). Sublethal endpoints in sediment tests might also prove to be better estimates of responses of benthic communities to contaminants in the field, Kembel et al. 1994 (82). Insufficient information is available to determine if the long-term test conducted with Leptocheirus plumulosus (Annex A2) is more sensitive than 10-d toxicity tests conducted with this or other species.
The decision to conduct short-term or long-term toxicity tests depends on the goal of the assessment. In some instances, sufficient information may be gained by measuring sublethal endpoints in 10-day tests. In other instances, the 10-day tests could be used to screen samples for toxicity before long-term tests are conducted. While the long-term tests are needed to determine direct effects on reproduction, measurement of growth in these toxicity tests may serve as an indirect estimate of reproductive effects of contaminants associated with sediments (Annex A1).
Use of sublethal endpoints for assessment of contaminant risk is not unique to toxicity testing with sediments. Numerous regulatory programs require the use of sublethal endpoints in the decision-making process (Pittinger and Adams, 1997, (83)) including: (1) Water Quality Criteria (and State Standards); (2) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) effluent monitoring (including chemical-specific limits and sublethal endpoints in toxicity tests); (3) Federal Insecticide, Rodenticide and Fungicide Act (FIFRA) and the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA, tiered assessment includes several sublethal endpoints with fish and aquatic invertebrates); (4) Superfund (Comprehensive Environmental Responses, Compensation and Liability Act; CERCLA); (5) Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, sublethal toxicity testing with fish and invertebrates); (6) European Economic Community (EC, sublethal toxicity testing with fish and invertebrates); and (7) the Paris Commission (behavioral endpoints).
Results of toxicity tests on sediments spiked at different concentrations of chemicals can be used to establish cause and effect relationships between chemicals and biological responses. Results of toxicity tests with test materials spiked into sediments at different concentrations may be reported in terms of an LC50 (median lethal concentration), an EC50 (median effect concentration), an IC50 (inhibition concentration), or as a NOEC (no observed effect concentration) or LOEC (lowest observed effect concentration). However, spiked sediment may not be representative of chemicals associated with sediment in the field. Mixing time Stemmer et al. 1990b, (84), aging ( Landrum et al. 1989,(85), Word et al. 1987, (86), Landrum et al., 1992,(87)), and the chemical form of the material can affect responses of test organisms in spiked sediment tests.
Evaluating effect concentrations for chemicals in sediment requires knowledge of factors controlling their bioavailability. Similar concentrations of a chemical in units of mass of chemical per mass of sediment dry weight often exhibit a range in toxicity in different sediments Di Toro et al. 1990, (88) Di Toro et al. 1991,(70). Effect concentrations of chemicals in sediment have been correlated to interstitial water concentrations, and effect concentrations in interstitial water are often similar to effect concentrations in water-only exposures. The bioavailability of nonionic organic compounds in sediment is often inversely correlated with the organic carbon concentration. Whatever the route of exposure, these correlations of effect concentrations to interstitial water concentrations indicate that predicted or measured concentrations in interstitial water can be used to quantify the exposure concentration to an organism. Therefore, information on partitioning of chemicals between solid and liquid phases of sediment is useful for establishing effect concentrations Di Toro et al. 1991, (70).
Field surveys can be designed to provide either a qualitative reconnaissance of the distribution of sediment contamination or a quantitative statistical comparison of contamination among sites.
Surveys of sediment toxicity are usually part of more comprehensive analyses of biological, chemical, geological, and hydrographic data. Statistical correlations may be improved and sampling costs may be reduced if subsamples are taken simultaneously for sediment tests, chemical analyses, and benthic community structure.
Table 2 lists several approaches the USEPA has considered for the assessment of sediment quality USEPA, 1992, (89). These approaches include: (1) equilibrium partitioning, (2) tissue residues, (3) interstitial water toxicity, (4) whole-sediment toxicity and sediment-spiking tests, (5) benthic community structure, (6) effect ranges (for example, effect range median, ERM), and (7) sediment quality triad (see USEPA, 1989a, 1990a, 1990b and 1992b, (90, 91, 92, 93 and Wenning and Ingersoll (2002 (94)) for a critique of these methods). The sediment assessment approaches listed in Table 2 can be classified as numeric (for example, equilibrium partitioning), descriptive (for example, whole-sediment toxicity tests), or a combination of numeric and descriptive approaches (for example, ERM, USEPA, 1992c, (95). Numeric methods can be used to derive chemical-specific sediment quality guidelines (SQGs). Descriptive methods such as toxicity tests with field-collected sediment cannot be used alone to develop numerical SQGs for individual chemicals. Although each approach can be used to make site-specific decisions, no one single approach can adequately address sediment quality. Overall, an integration of several methods using the weight of evidence is the most desirable approach for assessing the effects of contaminants associated with sediment, (Long et al. 1991(96) MacDonald et al. 1996 (97) Ingersoll et al. 1996 (98) Ingersoll et al. 1997 (99), Wenning and Ingersoll 2002 (94)). Hazard evaluations integrating data from laboratory exposures, chemical analyses, and benthic community assessments (the sediment quality triad) provide strong complementary evidence of the degree of pollution-induced degradation in aquatic communities (Burton, 1991 (69), Chapman 1992, 1997 (100, 101).)
Regulatory Applications—Test Method E 1706 provides information on the regulatory applications of sediment toxicity tests.
The USEPA Environmental Monitoring Management Council (EMMC) recommended the use of performance-based methods in developing standards, (Williams, 1993 (102). Performance-based methods were defined by EMMC as a monitoring approach which permits the use of appropriate methods that meet preestablished demonstrated performance standards (11.2).
The USEPA Office of Water, Office of Science and Technology, and Office of Research and Development held a workshop to provide an opportunity for experts in the field of sediment toxicology and staff from the USEPA Regional and Headquarters Program offices to discuss the development of standard freshwater, estuarine, and marine sediment testing procedures (USEPA, 1992a, 1994a (89, 103)). Workgroup participants arrived at a consensus on several culturing and testing methods. In developing guidance for culturing test organisms to be included in the USEPA methods manual for sediment tests, it was agreed that no one method should be required to culture organisms. However, the consensus at the workshop was that success of a test depends on the health of the cultures. Therefore, having healthy test organisms of known quality and age for testing was determined to be the key consideration relative to culturing methods. A performance-based criteria approach was selected in USEPA, 2000 (73) as the preferred method through which individual laboratories could use unique culturing methods rather than requiring use of one culturing method.
This standard recommends the use of performance-based criteria to allow each laboratory to optimize culture methods and minimize effects of test organism health on the reliability and comparability of test results. See Annex A1 and Annex A2 for a listing of performance criteria for culturing or testing.
1.1 This test method covers procedures for testing estuarine or marine organisms in the laboratory to evaluate the toxicity of contaminants associated with whole sediments. Sediments may be collected from the field or spiked with compounds in the laboratory. General guidance is presented in Sections 1-15 for conducting sediment toxicity tests with estuarine or marine amphipods. Specific guidance for conducting 10-d sediment toxicity tests with estuarine or marine amphipods is outlined in Annex A1 and specific guidance for conducting 28-d sediment toxicity tests with Leptocheirus plumulosus is outlined in Annex A2.
1.2 Procedures are described for testing estuarine or marine amphipod crustaceans in 10-d laboratory exposures to evaluate the toxicity of contaminants associated with whole sediments (Annex A1; USEPA 1994a (1)). Sediments may be collected from the field or spiked with compounds in the laboratory. A toxicity method is outlined for four species of estuarine or marine sediment-burrowing amphipods found within United States coastal waters. The species are Ampelisca abdita, a marine species that inhabits marine and mesohaline portions of the Atlantic coast, the Gulf of Mexico, and San Francisco Bay; Eohaustorius estuarius, a Pacific coast estuarine species; Leptocheirus plumulosus, an Atlantic coast estuarine species; and Rhepoxynius abronius, a Pacific coast marine species. Generally, the method described may be applied to all four species, although acclimation procedures and some test conditions (that is, temperature and salinity) will be species-specific (Sections 12 and Annex A1). The toxicity test is conducted in 1-L glass chambers containing 175 mL of sediment and 775 mL of overlying seawater. Exposure is static (that is, water is not renewed), and the animals are not fed over the 10-d exposure period. The endpoint in the toxicity test is survival with reburial of surviving amphipods as an additional measurement that can be used as an endpoint for some of the test species (for R. abronius and E. estuarius). Performance criteria established for this test include the average survival of amphipods in negative control treatment must be greater than or equal to 90 %. Procedures are described for use with sediments with pore-water salinity ranging from >0 o/ooto fully marine.
1.3 A procedure is also described for determining the chronic toxicity of contaminants associated with whole sediments with the amphipod Leptocheirus plumulosus in laboratory exposures (Annex A2; USEPA-USACE 2001(2)). The toxicity test is conducted for 28 d in 1-L glass chambers containing 175 mL of sediment and about 775 mL of overlying water. Test temperature is 25° ± 2°C, and the recommended overlying water salinity is 5 o/oo ± 2 o/oo(for test sediment with pore water at 1 o/oo to 10 o/oo) or 20 o/oo ± 2 o/oo (for test sediment with pore water >10 o/oo). Four hundred millilitres of overlying water is renewed three times per week, at which times test organisms are fed. The endpoints in the toxicity test are survival, growth, and reproduction of amphipods. Performance criteria established for this test include the average survival of amphipods in negative control treatment must be greater than or equal to 80 % and there must be measurable growth and reproduction in all replicates of the negative control treatment. This test is applicable for use with sediments from oligohaline to fully marine environments, with a silt content greater than 5 % and a clay content less than 85 %.
1.4 A salinity of 5 or 20 o/oo is recommended for routine application of 28-d test with L. plumulosus (Annex A2; USEPA-USACE 2001 (2)) and a salinity of 20 o/oois recommended for routine application of the 10-d test with E. estuarius or L. plumulosus (Annex A1). However, the salinity of the overlying water for tests with these two species can be adjusted to a specific salinity of interest (for example, salinity representative of site of interest or the objective of the study may be to evaluate the influence of salinity on the bioavailability of chemicals in sediment). More importantly, the salinity tested must be within the tolerance range of the test organisms (as outlined in Annex A1 and Annex A2). If tests are conducted with procedures different from those described in 1.3 or in Table A1.1 (for example, different salinity, lighting, temperature, feeding conditions), additional tests are required to determine comparability of results (1.10). If there is not a need to make comparisons among studies, then the test could be conducted just at a selected salinity for the sediment of interest.
1.5 Future revisions of this standard may include additional annexes describing whole-sediment toxicity tests with other groups of estuarine or marine invertebrates (for example, information presented in Guide E 1611 on sediment testing with polychaetes could be added as an annex to future revisions to this standard). Future editions to this standard may also include methods for conducting the toxicity tests in smaller chambers with less sediment (Ho et al. 2000 (3), Ferretti et al. 2002 (4)).
1.6 Procedures outlined in this standard are based primarily on procedures described in the USEPA (1994a (1)), USEPA-USACE (2001(2)), Test Method E 1706, and Guides E 1391, E 1525, E 1688, Environment Canada (1992 (5)), DeWitt et al. (1992a (6); 1997a (7)), Emery et al. (1997 (8)), and Emery and Moore (1996 (9)), Swartz et al. (1985 (10)), DeWitt et al. (1989 (11)), Scott and Redmond (1989 (12)), and Schlekat et al. (1992 (13)).
1.7 Additional sediment toxicity research and methods development are now in progress to (1) refine sediment spiking procedures, (2) refine sediment dilution procedures, (3) refine sediment Toxicity Identification Evaluation (TIE) procedures, (4) produce additional data on confirmation of responses in laboratory tests with natural populations of benthic organisms (that is, field validation studies), and (5) evaluate relative sensitivity of endpoints measured in 10- and 28-d toxicity tests using estuarine or marine amphipods. This information will be described in future editions of this standard.
1.8 Although standard procedures are described in Annex A2 of this standard for conducting chronic sediment tests with L. plumulosus, further investigation of certain issues could aid in the interpretation of test results. Some of these issues include further investigation to evaluate the relative toxicological sensitivity of the lethal and sublethal endpoints to a wide variety of chemicals spiked in sediment and to mixtures of chemicals in sediments from contamination gradients in the field (USEPA-USACE 2001 (2)). Additional research is needed to evaluate the ability of the lethal and sublethal endpoints to estimate the responses of populations and communities of benthic invertebrates to contaminated sediments. Research is also needed to link the toxicity test endpoints to a field-validated population model of L. plumulosus that would then generate estimates of population-level responses of the amphipod to test sediments and thereby provide additional ecologically relevant interpretive guidance for the laboratory toxicity test.
1.9 This standard outlines specific test methods for evaluating the toxicity of sediments with A. abdita, E. estuarius, L. plumulosus, and R. abronius. While standard procedures are described in this standard, further investigation of certain issues could aid in the interpretation of test results. Some of these issues include the effect of shipping on organism sensitivity, additional performance criteria for organism health, sensitivity of various populations of the same test species, and confirmation of responses in laboratory tests with natural benthos populations.
1.10 General procedures described in this standard might be useful for conducting tests with other estuarine or marine organisms (for example, Corophium spp., Grandidierella japonica, Lepidactylus dytiscus, Streblospio benedicti), although modifications may be necessary. Results of tests, even those with the same species, using procedures different from those described in the test method may not be comparable and using these different procedures may alter bioavailability. Comparison of results obtained using modified versions of these procedures might provide useful information concerning new concepts and procedures for conducting sediment tests with aquatic organisms. If tests are conducted with procedures different from those described in this test method, additional tests are required to determine comparability of results. General procedures described in this test method might be useful for conducting tests with other aquatic organisms; however, modifications may be necessary.
1.11 Selection of Toxicity Testing Organisms:
1.11.1 The choice of a test organism has a major influence on the relevance, success, and interpretation of a test. Furthermore, no one organism is best suited for all sediments. The following criteria were considered when selecting test organisms to be described in this standard (Table 1 and Guide E 1525). Ideally, a test organism should: (1) have a toxicological database demonstrating relative sensitivity to a range of contaminants of interest in sediment, (2) have a database for interlaboratory comparisons of procedures (for example, round-robin studies), (3) be in direct contact with sediment, (4) be readily available from culture or through field collection, (5) be easily maintained in the laboratory, (6) be easily identified, (7) be ecologically or economically important, (8) have a broad geographical distribution, be indigenous (either present or historical) to the site being evaluated, or have a niche similar to organisms of concern (for example, similar feeding guild or behavior to the indigenous organisms), (9) be tolerant of a broad range of sediment physico-chemical characteristics (for example, grain size), and (10) be compatible with selected exposure methods and endpoints (Guide E 1525). Methods utilizing selected organisms should also be (11) peer reviewed (for example, journal articles) and (12) confirmed with responses with natural populations of benthic organisms.
1.11.2 Of these criteria (Table 1), a database demonstrating relative sensitivity to contaminants, contact with sediment, ease of culture in the laboratory or availability for field-collection, ease of handling in the laboratory, tolerance to varying sediment physico-chemical characteristics, and confirmation with responses with natural benthic populations were the primary criteria used for selecting A. abdita, E. estuarius, L. plumulosus, and R. abronius for the current edition of this standard for 10-d sediment tests (Annex A1). The species chosen for this method are intimately associated with sediment, due to their tube- dwelling or free-burrowing, and sediment ingesting nature. Amphipods have been used extensively to test the toxicity of marine, estuarine, and freshwater sediments (Swartz et al., 1985 (10); DeWitt et al., 1989 (11); Scott and Redmond, 1989 (12); DeWitt et al., 1992a (6); Schlekat et al., 1992 (13)). The selection of test species for this standard followed the consensus of experts in the field of sediment toxicology who participated in a workshop entitled “Testing Issues for Freshwater and Marine Sediments”. The workshop was sponsored by USEPA Office of Water, Office of Science and Technology, and Office of Research and Development, and was held in Washington, D.C. from 16-18 September 1992 (USEPA, 1992 (14)). Of the candidate species discussed at the workshop, A. abdita, E. estuarius, L. plumulosus, and R. abronius best fulfilled the selection criteria, and presented the availability of a combination of one estuarine and one marine species each for both the Atlantic (the estuarine L. plumulosus and the marine A. abdita) and Pacific (the estuarine E. estuarius and the marine R. abronius) coasts. Ampelisca abdita is also native to portions of the Gulf of Mexico and San Francisco Bay. Many other organisms that might be appropriate for sediment testing do not now meet these selection criteria because little emphasis has been placed on developing standardized testing procedures for benthic organisms. For example, a fifth species, Grandidierella japonica was not selected because workshop participants felt that the use of this species was not sufficiently broad to warrant standardization of the method. Environment Canada (1992 (5)) has recommended the use of the following amphipod species for sediment toxicity testing: Amphiporeia virginiana, Corophium volutator, Eohaustorius washingtonianus, Foxiphalus xiximeus, and Leptocheirus pinguis. A database similar to those available for A. abdita, E. estuarius, L. plumulosus, and R. abronius must be developed in order for these and other organisms to be included in future editions of this standard.
1.11.3 The primary criterion used for selecting L. plumulosus for chronic testing of sediments was that this species is found in both oligohaline and mesohaline regions of estuaries on the East Coast of the United States and is tolerant to a wide range of sediment grain size distribution (USEPA-USACE 2001 (2), Annex Annex A2). This species is easily cultured in the laboratory and has a relatively short generation time (that is, about 24 d at 23°C, DeWitt et al. 1992a (6)) that makes this species adaptable to chronic testing (Section 12).
1.11.4 An important consideration in the selection of specific species for test method development is the existence of information concerning relative sensitivity of the organisms both to single chemicals and complex mixtures. Several studies have evaluated the sensitivities of A. abdita, E. estuarius, L. plumulosus, or R. abronius, either relative to one another, or to other commonly tested estuarine or marine species. For example, the sensitivity of marine amphipods was compared to other species that were used in generating saltwater Water Quality Criteria. Seven amphipod genera, including Ampelisca abdita and Rhepoxynius abronius, were among the test species used to generate saltwater Water Quality Criteria for 12 chemicals. Acute amphipod toxicity data from 4-d water-only tests for each of the 12 chemicals was compared to data for (1) all other species, (2) other benthic species, and (3) other infaunal species. Amphipods were generally of median sensitivity for each comparison. The average percentile rank of amphipods among all species tested was 57 %; among all benthic species, 56 %; and, among all infaunal species, 54 %. Thus, amphipods are not uniquely sensitive relative to all species, benthic species, or even infaunal species (USEPA 1994a (1)). Additional research may be warranted to develop tests using species that are consistently more sensitive than amphipods, thereby offering protection to less sensitive groups.
1.11.5 Williams et al. (1986 (15)) compared the sensitivity of the R. abronius 10-d whole sediment test, the oyster embryo (Crassostrea gigas) 48-h abnormality test, and the bacterium (Vibrio fisheri) 1-h luminescence inhibition test (that is, the Microtox test) to sediments collected from 46 contaminated sites in Commencement Bay, WA. Rhepoxynius abronius were exposed to whole sediment, while the oyster and bacterium tests were conducted with sediment elutriates and extracts, respectfully. Microtox was the most sensitive test, with 63 % of the sites eliciting significant inhibition of luminescence. Significant mortality of R. abronius was observed in 40 % of test sediments, and oyster abnormality occurred in 35 % of sediment elutriates. Complete concordance (that is, sediments that were either toxic or not-toxic in all three tests) was observed in 41 % of the sediments. Possible sources for the lack of concordance at other sites include interspecific differences in sensitivity among test organisms, heterogeneity in contaminant types associated with test sediments, and differences in routes of exposure inherent in each toxicity test. These results highlight the importance of using multiple assays when performing sediment assessments.
1.11.6 Several studies have compared the sensitivity of combinations of the four amphipods to sediment contaminants. For example, there are several comparisons between A. abdita and R. abronius, between E. estuarius and R. abronius, and between A. abdita and L. plumulosus. There are fewer examples of direct comparisons between E. estuarius and L. plumulosus, and no examples comparing L. plumulosus and R. abronius. There is some overlap in relative sensitivity from comparison to comparison within each species combination, which appears to indicate that all four species are within the same range of relative sensitivity to contaminated sediments.
220.127.116.11 Word et al. (1989 (16)) compared the sensitivity of A. abdita and R. abronius to contaminated sediments in a series of experiments. Both species were tested at 15°C. Experiments were designed to compare the response of the organism rather than to provide a comparison of the sensitivity of the methods (that is, Ampelisca abdita would normally be tested at 20°C). Sediments collected from Oakland Harbor, CA, were used for the comparisons. Twenty-six sediments were tested in one comparison, while 5 were tested in the other. Analysis of results using Kruskal Wallace rank sum test for both experiments demonstrated that R. abronius exhibited greater sensitivity to the sediments than A. abdita at 15°C. Long and Buchman (1989 (17)) also compared the sensitivity of A. abdita and R. abronius to sediments from Oakland Harbor, CA. They also determined that A. abdita showed less sensitivity than R. abronius, but they also showed that A. abdita was less sensitive to sediment grain size factors than R. abronius.
18.104.22.168 DeWitt et al. (1989 (11)) compared the sensitivity of E. estuarius and R. abronius to sediment spiked with fluoranthene and field-collected sediment from industrial waterways in Puget Sound, WA, in 10-d tests, and to aqueous cadmium (CdCl2) in a 4-d water-only test. The sensitivity of E. estuarius was from two (to spiked-spiked sediment) to seven (to one Puget Sound, WA, sediment) times less sensitive than R. abronius in sediment tests, and ten times less sensitive to CdCl2 in the water-only test. These results are supported by the findings of Pastorok and Becker (1990 (18)) who found the acute sensitivity of E. estuarius and R. abronius to be generally comparable to each other, and both were more sensitive than Neanthes arenaceodentata (survival and biomass endpoints), Panope generosa (survival), and Dendraster excentricus (survival).
22.214.171.124 Leptocheirus plumulosus was as sensitive as the freshwater amphipod Hyalella azteca to an artificially created gradient of sediment contamination when the latter was acclimated to oligohaline salinity (that is, 6 o/oo; McGee et al., 1993 (19)). DeWitt et al. (1992b (20)) compared the sensitivity of L. plumulosus with three other amphipod species, two mollusks, and one polychaete to highly contaminated sediment collected from Baltimore Harbor, MD, that was serially diluted with clean sediment. Leptocheirus plumulosus was more sensitive than the amphipods Hyalella azteca and Lepidactylus dytiscus and exhibited equal sensitivity with E. estuarius. Schlekat et al. (1995 (21)) describe the results of an interlaboratory comparison of 10-d tests with A. abdita, L. plumulosus and E. estuarius using dilutions of sediments collected from Black Rock Harbor, CT. There was strong agreement among species and laboratories in the ranking of sediment toxicity and the ability to discriminate between toxic and non-toxic sediments.
126.96.36.199 Hartwell et al. (2000 (22)) evaluated the response of Leptocheirus plumulosus (10-d survival or growth) to the response of the amphipod Lepidactylus dytiscus (10-d survival or growth), the polychaete Streblospio benedicti (10-d survival or growth), and lettuce germination (Lactuca sativa in 3-d exposure) and observed that L. plumulosus was relatively insensitive compared to the response of either L. dytiscus or S. benedicti in exposures to 4 sediments with elevated metal concentrations.
188.8.131.52 Ammonia is a naturally occurring compound in marine sediment that results from the degradation of organic debris. Interstitial ammonia concentrations in test sediment can range from <1 mg/L to in excess of 400 mg/L (Word et al., 1997 (23)). Some benthic infauna show toxicity to ammonia at concentrations of about 20 mg/L (Kohn et al., 1994 (24)). Based on water-only and spiked-sediment experiments with ammonia, threshold limits for test initiation and termination have been established for the L. plumulosus chronic test. Smaller (younger) individuals are more sensitive to ammonia than larger (older) individuals (DeWitt et al., 1997a (7), b (25). Results of a 28-d test indicated that neonates can tolerate very high levels of pore-water ammonia (>300 mg/L total ammonia) for short periods of time with no apparent long-term effects (Moore et al., 1997 (26)). It is not surprising L. plumulosus has a high tolerance for ammonia given that these amphipods are often found in organic rich sediments in which diagenesis can result in elevated pore-water ammonia concentrations. Insensitivity to ammonia by L. plumulosus should not be construed as an indicator of the sensitivity of the L. plumulosus sediment toxicity test to other chemicals of concern.
1.11.7 Limited comparative data is available for concurrent water-only exposures of all four species in single-chemical tests. Studies that do exist generally show that no one species is consistently the most sensitive.
184.108.40.206 The relative sensitivity of the four amphipod species to ammonia was determined in ten-d water only toxicity tests in order to aid interpretation of results of tests on sediments where this toxicant is present (USEPA 1994a (1)). These tests were static exposures that were generally conducted under conditions (for example, salinity, photoperiod) similar to those used for standard 10-d sediment tests. Departures from standard conditions included the absence of sediment and a test temperature of 20°C for L. plumulosus, rather than 25°C as dictated in this standard. Sensitivity to total ammonia increased with increasing pH for all four species. The rank sensitivity was R. abronius = A. abdita > E. estuarius > L. plumulosus. A similar study by Kohn et al. (1994 (24)) showed a similar but slightly different relative sensitivity to ammonia with A. abdita > R. abronius = L. plumulosus > E. estuarius.
220.127.116.11 Cadmium chloride has been a common reference toxicant for all four species in 4-d exposures. DeWitt et al. (1992a (6)) reports the rank sensitivity as R. abronius > A. abdita > L. plumulosus > E. estuarius at a common temperature and salinity of 15°C and 28 o/oo. A series of 4-d exposures to cadmium that were conducted at species-specific temperatures and salinities showed the following rank sensitivity: A. abdita = L. plumulosus = R. abronius > E. estuarius (USEPA 1994a (1)).
18.104.22.168 Relative species sensitivity frequently varies among contaminants; consequently, a battery of tests including organisms representing different trophic levels may be needed to assess sediment quality (Craig, 1984 (27); Williams et al. 1986 (15); Long et al., 1990 (28); Ingersoll et al., 1990 (29); Burton and Ingersoll, 1994 (31)). For example, Reish (1988 (32)) reported the relative toxicity of six metals (arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, mercury, and zinc) to crustaceans, polychaetes, pelecypods, and fishes and concluded that no one species or group of test organisms was the most sensitive to all of the metals.
1.11.8 The sensitivity of an organism is related to route of exposure and biochemical response to contaminants. Sediment-dwelling organisms can receive exposure from three primary sources: interstitial water, sediment particles, and overlying water. Food type, feeding rate, assimilation efficiency, and clearance rate will control the dose of contaminants from sediment. Benthic invertebrates often selectively consume different particle sizes (Harkey et al. 1994 (33)) or particles with higher organic carbon concentrations which may have higher contaminant concentrations. Grazers and other collector-gatherers that feed on aufwuchs and detritus may receive most of their body burden directly from materials attached to sediment or from actual sediment ingestion. In some amphipods (Landrum, 1989 (34)) and clams (Boese et al., 1990 (35)) uptake through the gut can exceed uptake across the gills for certain hydrophobic compounds. Organisms in direct contact with sediment may also accumulate contaminants by direct adsorption to the body wall or by absorption through the integument (Knezovich et al. 1987 (36)).
1.11.9 Despite the potential complexities in estimating the dose that an animal receives from sediment, the toxicity and bioaccumulation of many contaminants in sediment such as Kepone®, fluoranthene, organochlorines, and metals have been correlated with either the concentration of these chemicals in interstitial water or in the case of non-ionic organic chemicals, concentrations in sediment on an organic carbon normalized basis (Di Toro et al. 1990 (37); Di Toro et al. 1991(38)). The relative importance of whole sediment and interstitial water routes of exposure depends on the test organism and the specific contaminant (Knezovich et al. 1987 (36)). Because benthic communities contain a diversity of organisms, many combinations of exposure routes may be important. Therefore, behavior and feeding habits of a test organism can influence its ability to accumulate contaminants from sediment and should be considered when selecting test organisms for sediment testing.
1.11.10 The use of A. abdita, E. estuarius, R. abronius, and L. plumulosus in laboratory toxicity studies has been field validated with natural populations of benthic organisms (Swartz et al. 1994 (39) and Anderson et al. 2001 (40) for E. estuarius, Swartz et al. 1982 (43) and Anderson et al. 2001 (40) for R. abronius, McGee et al. 1999 (41)and McGee and Fisher 1999 (42) for L. plumulosus).
22.214.171.124 Data from USEPA Office of Research and Development's Environmental Monitoring and Assessment program were examined to evaluate the relationship between survival of Ampelisca abdita in sediment toxicity tests and the presence of amphipods, particularly ampeliscids, in field samples. Over 200 sediment samples from two years of sampling in the Virginian Province (Cape Cod, MA, to Cape Henry, VA) were available for comparing synchronous measurements of A. abdita survival in toxicity tests to benthic community enumeration. Although species of this genus were among the more frequently occurring taxa in these samples, ampeliscids were totally absent from stations that exhibited A. abdita test survival <60 % of that in control samples. Additionally, ampeliscids were found in very low densities at stations with amphipod test survival between 60 and 80 % (USEPA 1994a (1)). These data indicate that tests with
2. Referenced Documents (purchase separately) The documents listed below are referenced within the subject standard but are not provided as part of the standard.
D1129 Terminology Relating to Water
D4447 Guide for Disposal of Laboratory Chemicals and Samples
E29 Practice for Using Significant Digits in Test Data to Determine Conformance with Specifications
E105 Practice for Probability Sampling of Materials
E122 Practice for Calculating Sample Size to Estimate, With Specified Precision, the Average for a Characteristic of a Lot or Process
E141 Practice for Acceptance of Evidence Based on the Results of Probability Sampling
E177 Practice for Use of the Terms Precision and Bias in ASTM Test Methods
E178 Practice for Dealing With Outlying Observations
E456 Terminology Relating to Quality and Statistics
E691 Practice for Conducting an Interlaboratory Study to Determine the Precision of a Test Method
E729 Guide for Conducting Acute Toxicity Tests on Test Materials with Fishes, Macroinvertebrates, and Amphibians
E943 Terminology Relating to Biological Effects and Environmental Fate
E1241 Guide for Conducting Early Life-Stage Toxicity Tests with Fishes
E1325 Terminology Relating to Design of Experiments
E1391 Guide for Collection, Storage, Characterization, and Manipulation of Sediments for Toxicological Testing and for Selection of Samplers Used to Collect Benthic Invertebrates
E1402 Guide for Sampling Design
E1525 Guide for Designing Biological Tests with Sediments
E1611 Guide for Conducting Sediment Toxicity Tests with Polychaetous Annelids
E1688 Guide for Determination of the Bioaccumulation of Sediment-Associated Contaminants by Benthic Invertebrates
E1706 Test Method for Measuring the Toxicity of Sediment-Associated Contaminants with Freshwater Invertebrates
E1847 Practice for Statistical Analysis of Toxicity Tests Conducted Under ASTM Guidelines
E1850 Guide for Selection of Resident Species as Test Organisms for Aquatic and Sediment Toxicity Tests
Ampelisca abdita; amphipod; bioavailability; chronic; Eohaustorius estuarius; estuarine; invertebrates; Leptocheirus plumulosus; marine; Rhepoxynius abronius; sediment; toxicity; Acidity, alkalinity, pH--chemicals; Acute toxicity tests; Ampelisca abdita; Amphipods/Amphibia; Aqueous environments; Benthic macroinvertebrates (collecting); Biological data analysis--sediments; Bivalve molluscs; Chemical analysis--water applications; Contamination--environmental; Corophium; Crustacea; EC50 test; Eohaustorius estuarius; Estuarine environments; Field testing--environmental materials/applications; Geochemical characteristics; Grandidierella japonica; Leptocheirus Plumuulosus; Marine environments; Median lethal dose; Polychaetes; Reference toxicants; Rhepoxynium abronius; Saltwater; Seawater (natural/synthetic); Sediment toxicity testing; Static tests--environmental materials/applications; Ten-day testing; Toxicity/toxicology--water environments
ASTM International is a member of CrossRef.
Citing ASTM Standards
[Back to Top]

The Cold War Years
With the post-war boom in private, airline and military flying generating a record number of accidents, demand was high for CAP’s leading role in domestic air search and rescue.
War surplus aircraft helped jump-start post-war search operations. These hand-me-down wartime observation and liaison aircraft included military versions of the 65-hp Taylorcraft (L-2), Aeronca (L-3), and Piper Cub (L-4) plus the larger Stinson L-5.
The CAP fleet was bolstered by thousands of member-owned planes. Command organizations flew larger USAF and surplus aircraft including the Beech C-45 and Douglas C-47.
Beginning in 1952, the Air Force made its 85-90 hp Aeronca
L-16 post-war observation planes available to CAP. Initially flown in USAF inventory by CAP pilots, some 332 of these military Aeroncas were transferred to CAP ownership in 1956 and given FAA “N” numbers. Used for both search and cadet orientation flights, many a baby boomer today can reminisce about his or her first airplane flight in the L-16.
CAP in Nevada and elsewhere were prepared for air sampling, both to help monitor Nevada A-Bomb tests in the 1950s and for Civil Defense roles in case of nuclear attack.
In 1957 when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the world’s first artificial satellite, America panicked! Early efforts to track satellites involved a system of ground observers scanning the nighttime skies. Satellite passage was so fast – 20 seconds from horizon to overhead to horizon – that ground personnel could only radio their timing of these events as “See – Center – Saw.”
How to train for this? How to simulate the passage of a satellite overhead? Air Force jets flew too fast or too high, so CAP planes towed a low-wattage light bulb protected in a low-cost aerodynamic shape: a bathroom plunger! In the nighttime sky, the set-up was exactly as bright at 7,000 feet as an orbiting satellite in space.
|>PHOTO GALLERY >ART & MEDIA GALLERY >THE AIRPLANES >MUSEUM >MUSEUM STORE >BE A PATRON >SEE CAP HISTORY LOCALLY|
© 2005-2009, CAP Historical Foundation. All rights reserved. No reproduction of text, or photographs for commercial purposes, without written permission.

Theme 10: Ready for Kindergarten!
Theme Read Aloud
A Theme Read Aloud Book extends and enhances each of the ten themes, helping children build connections. Each Theme Read Aloud Book develops vocabulary and comprehension and may be introduced at any point during the three-week theme. All Theme Read Aloud Books are available in an audio format on the Theme CDs.
In Parts, children learn that everything is made up of smaller pieces, including them!

A near-sighted eye is usually longer than a normal-sighted eye. Incoming rays of light are bundled so that their focal point is not on, but in front of, the retina. Distant objects are perceived in a blurred manner, whilst objects up close are in focus. The longer the eye, the more pronounced the degree of near-sightedness.
The interactive animation to the side of this text allows you to see how the eye and image perception change with varying degrees of near-sightedness.
The power of refraction of the eyes can be reduced surgically by means of laser correction or intraocular lenses, which shifts the focal point backwards onto the retina. In the case of glasses or contact lenses, this occurs by means of a concave lens, the strength of which is expressed in minus dioptres.

Literacy skills begin early in life and are critical to a child's health, behaviour and success in school.
The Early Literacy Specialist will:
- Strengthen, support and promote early literacy and language development within our communities
- Work with programs, agencies and families to deliver workshops and presentations
- Distribute resources that will further develop language and literacy-rich environments for children aged 0-6 years, with a focus on children aged 0-3 years
- facilitating "Train the Trainer" sessions with early years practitioners and parents
- working together with libraries, museums and other recreation and cultural programs parenting programs, adult education and literacy programs
- evaluating and monitoring early learning programs
- providing early literacy materials to programs
- and, offering assistance to parents who have questions
The Early Literacy Specialist informs parents, child care providers and other interested parties of what is available to them.
The following resources are available to borrow at Ontario Early Years Centre near you:
- Literacy Suitcases: Suitcases feature many books, activities, costumes, props and much more to add to your daily programming needs
- Literacy Kits: A book and related props are included in each literacy kit. They are great for making story time more interactive
Who is Eligible?
Parents, caregivers, professionals and students may all access the Early Literacy Program.
Any community organization involved with children from birth to six years is welcome to access the services of the Early Literacy Specialist.
Is there a cost for this program?
Workshops and visits to early learning centres and home day cares are free. Borrowing suitcases and other literacy kits is also free. Fees are only charged for cost recovery of materials that are required for some of the workshops and subsidies are available upon request..
How can I access or find out more about this program?
For a full listing of the workshops that are currently offered, see "Your Guide"
You can call the Early Literacy Specialist at the Ontario Early Years Centre at
519-429-2875 ext 230 or 1-866-463-2759 ext 230.
For more related information on literacy and education, you may wish to follow the links below:
Infant & Child Development Program,
McKinnon Park Child Care Centre
Ready Set School
Licensed Home Child Care
Ontario Early Years Centre-Haldimand and Norfolk
Community Action Program for Children
"Your Guide" includes a full listing of early literacy workshops being offered.
Ontario Early Years Website
Haldimand & Norfolk Early Years
(online directory featuring community services to support early years)
Healthy Babies Healthy Children, Preschool Speech and Language Program
Ministry of Children and Youth
Grand Erie District School Board
Brant Haldimand Norfolk District Catholic School Board
Ecole Sainte. Marie
Haldimand County Library System
Norfolk County Library System
Early Years Study 1
Early Years Study 2

Water reuse can be defined as the use of reclaimed water for a direct beneficial purpose. The use of reclaimed water for irrigation and other purposes has been employed as a water conservation practice in Florida, California, Texas, Arizona, and other states for many years.
Reclaimed water, also known as recycled water, is water recovered from domestic, municipal, and industrial wastewater treatment plants that has been treated to standards that allow safe reuse. Properly reclaimed water is typically safe for most uses except human consumption.
Wastewater is not reclaimed water. Wastewater is untreated liquid industrial waste and/or domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, and industrial facilities. Gray water, or untreated wastewater from bathing or washing, is one form of wastewater. Wastewater may be land applied, but this is considered to be land treatment rather than water reuse.
The demand for fresh water in Virginia is growing as the state’s population increases. This demand can potentially exceed supply during times of even moderate drought. In recent years, the normal seasonal droughts that have occurred in Virginia have caused local and state government to enact water conservation ordinances. These ordinances limit the use of potable water (water suitable for human consumption) for such things as car washing and landscape irrigation. The potential for developing new sources of potable water is limited. Conservation measures, such as irrigating with reclaimed water, are one way to help ensure existing water supplies are utilized as efficiently as possible.
The environmental benefits of using reclaimed water include:
Reclaimed water typically comes from municipal wastewater treatment plants, although some industries (e.g., food processors) also generate water that may be suitable for nonpotable uses. (Figure 1).
During primary treatment at a wastewater treatment plant, inorganic and organic suspended solids are removed from plant influent by screening, and settling. The decanted effluent from the primary treatment process is then subjected to secondary treatment, which involves biological decomposition of organic material and settling to further separate water from solids. If a wastewater treatment plant is not equipped to perform advanced treatment, water is disinfected and discharged to natural water bodies following secondary treatment.
Advanced or tertiary treatment consists of further removal of suspended and dissolved solids, including nutrients, and disinfection. Advanced treatment can include:
Water that has undergone advanced treatment is disinfected prior to being released or reused. Reclaimed water often requires greater treatment than effluent that is discharged to local streams or rivers because users will typically have more direct contact with undiluted reclaimed water than undiluted effluent.
For an interactive diagram of a wastewater treatment system with more information on treatment processes, please see www.wef.org/apps/gowithflow/theflow.htm.
Although the primary focus of this publication is on the use of reclaimed water for agricultural, municipal, and residential irrigation, reclaimed water can be used for many other purposes. Non-irrigation uses for reclaimed water include:
Intentional indirect potable reuse means that reclaimed water is discharged to a water body where it is then purposefully used as a raw water supply for another water treatment plant. This occurs unintentionally in most rivers, since downstream water treatment plants use treated water discharged by upstream wastewater treatment plants.
Direct potable reuse refers to the use of reclaimed water for drinking directly after treatment, and, to date, has only been implemented in Africa (U.S. EPA, 2004).
Examples of non-irrigation permitted water reuse projects in Virginia are:
The turfgrass and ornamental horticulture industries have grown as Virginia becomes more urbanized. The acreage devoted to high-value specialty crops that benefit from irrigation, such as fruits and vegetables, is also increasing. As demand for potable water increases, maintaining turf, landscape plants, and crops will require the utilization of previously underutilized water sources.
The regulation of reclaimed water production and use encourages both the supply of and the demand for reclaimed water. The benefits to suppliers of reclaimed water include greater public awareness and demand for reclaimed water and clear guidelines for reclaimed water production. Benefits to end users include increased public acceptance of the use of reclaimed water and a subsequent decrease in the demand for fresh water.
There are no federal regulations governing reclaimed water use, but the U.S. EPA (2004) has established guidelines to encourage states to develop their own regulations. The primary purpose of federal guidelines and state regulations is to protect human health and water quality. To reduce disease risks to acceptable levels, reclaimed water must meet certain disinfection standards by either reducing the concentrations of constituents that may affect public health and/or limiting human contact with reclaimed water.
The U.S. EPA (2004) recommends that water intended for reuse should:
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is an indicator of the presence of reactive organic matter in water. Total suspended solids (TSS) or turbidity (measured in nephelometric turbidity units, or NTUs) are measures of the amount of organic and inorganic particulate matter in water. Some other parameters often measured as indicators of disinfection efficiency include:
The recommended values for each of these indicators depend on the intended use of the reclaimed water (Table 1).
Table 1. Summary of U.S. EPA guidelines for water reuse for irrigation
(Adapted from U.S. EPA, 2004).
Monitoring for specific pathogens and microconstituents may become a part of the standard testing protocol as the use of reclaimed water for indirect potable reuse applications increases. Pathogens of particular concern include enteric viruses and the protozoan parasites Giardia and Cryptosporidium, whose monitoring is required by the state of Florida for water reuse projects.
Microconstituents include organic chemicals, such as pharmaceutically active substances, personal care products, endocrine disrupting compounds, and previously unregulated inorganic elements whose toxicity may be re-assessed or newly evaluated. Fish, amphibians, and birds have been found to develop reproductive system abnormalities upon direct or indirect exposure to a variety of endocrine disrupting compounds. Such microconstituents may have the potential to cause reproduction system abnormalities and immune system malfunctioning in other wildlife and humans at higher concentrations. The impacts of the extremely low concentrations of these compounds found in wastewater effluent or reclaimed water are unknown. To date, there is no evidence that microconstituents cause human health effects at environmentally relevant concentrations.
Some possible options for the removal of microconstituents from wastewater are treatment with ozone, hydrogen peroxide, and UV light. These methods can destroy some microconstituents via advanced oxidation, but the endocrine disruption activity of the by-products created during oxidation may also be of concern.
No illnesses have been directly associated with the use of properly treated reclaimed water in the U.S. (U.S. EPA, 2004). The U.S. EPA recommends, however, that ongoing research and additional monitoring for Giardia, Cryptosporidium, and microconstituents be conducted to understand changes in reclaimed water quality.
State regulations need not agree with U.S. EPA guidelines and are often more stringent. In Virginia, water reuse means direct beneficial reuse, indirect potable reuse, or a controlled use in accordance with the Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulation (9 VAC 25-740-10 et seq.; available at the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality website www.deq.virginia.gov/programs/homepage.html under Water Reuse and Reclamation.)
The Virginia Water Regulation and Reuse Regulation establishes legal requirements for the reclamation and treatment of water that is to be reused. These require ments are designed to protect both water quality and public health, while encouraging the use of reclaimed water. The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, Water Quality Division has oversight over the Virginia Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulation.
The primary determinants of how reclaimed water of varying quality can be used are based on treatment processes to which the water has been subjected and on quantitative chemical, physical, and biological standards. Reclaimed water suitable for reuse in Virginia is categorized as either Level 1 or Level 2 (Table 2). The minimum standard requirements for reclaimed water for specific uses are summarized in Table 3.
Table 2. Minimum standards for treatment of Level 1 and Level 2 reclaimed water.
(Summarized from Virginia Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulations: 9 VAC 25-740-10 et seq.)
Table 3. Minimum treatment requirements for irrigation and landscape-related reuse of reclaimed water in Virginia.
(Summarized from Virginia Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulations: 9 VAC 25-740-10 et seq.)
Water quality must be considered when using reclaimed water for irrigation. The following properties are critical to plant and soil health and environmental quality.
Salinity, or salt concentration, is probably the most important consideration in determining whether water is suitable for reuse (U.S. EPA, 2004). Water salinity is the sum of all elemental ions (e.g., sodium, calcium, chloride, boron, sulfate, nitrate) and is usually measured by determining the electrical conductivity (EC, units = dS/m) or total dissolved solids (TDS, units = mg/L) concentration of the water. Water with a TDS concentration of 640 mg/L will typically have an EC of approximately 1 dS/m.
Salts in reclaimed water come from:
Most reclaimed water from urban areas is slightly saline (TDS ≤ 1280 mg/L or EC ≤ 2 dS/m). High salt concentrations reduce water uptake in plants by lowering the osmotic potential of the soil. For instance, residential use of water adds approx 200-400 mg/L dissolved salts (Lazarova et al., 2004a). Plants differ in their sensitivity to salt levels so the salinity of the particular reclaimed water source should be measured so that appropriate crops and/or application rates can be selected. Most turfgrasses can tolerate water with 200-800 mg/L soluble salts, but salt levels above 2,000 mg/L may be toxic (Harivandi, 2004). For further information on managing turfgrasses when irrigating with saline water, see Carrow and Duncan (1998).
Many other crop and landscape plants are more sensitive to high soluble-salt levels than turfgrasses, and should be managed accordingly. See Wu and Dodge (2005) for a list of landscape plants with their relative salt tolerance and Maas (1987) for information on salt-tolerant crops.
Specific dissolved ions may also affect irrigation water quality. For example, irrigation water with a high concentration of sodium (Na) ions may cause dispersion of soil aggregates and sealing of soil pores. This is a particular problem in golf course irrigation (Sheikh, 2004) since soil compaction is already a concern due to persistent foot and vehicular traffic. The Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR), which measures the ratio of sodium to other ions, is used to evaluate the potential effect of irrigation water on soil structure. For more information on how to assess and interpret SAR levels, please see Harivandi (1999).
High levels of sodium can also be directly toxic to plants both through root uptake and by accumulation in plant leaves following sprinkler irrigation. The specific concentration of sodium that is considered to be toxic will vary with plant species and the type of irrigation system. Turfgrasses are generally more tolerant to sodium than most ornamental plant species.
Although boron (B) and chlorine (Cl) are necessary at low levels for plant growth, dissolved boron and chloride ions can cause toxicity problems at high concentrations. Specific toxic concentrations will vary depending on plant species and type of irrigation method used. Levels of boron as low as 1 to 2 mg/L in irrigation water can cause leaf burn on ornamental plants, but turfgrasses can often tolerate levels as high as 10 mg/L (Harivandi, 1999). Very salt-sensitive landscape plants such as crape myrtle (Lagerstroemia sp.), azalea (Rhododendron sp.), and Chinese privet (Ligustrum sinense) may be damaged by overhead irrigation with reclaimed water containing chloride levels over 100 mg/L, but most turfgrasses are relatively tolerant to chloride if they are mowed frequently (Harivandi, 1999; Crook, 2005).
Reclaimed water typically contains more nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) than drinking water. The amounts of N and P provided by the reclaimed water can be calculated as the product of the estimated irrigation volume and the N and P concentration in the water. To prevent N and P leaching into groundwater, the Virginia Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulation requires that a nutrient management plan be written for bulk use of reclaimed water not treated to achieve biological nutrient removal (BNR), which the regulation defines as treatment that achieves an annual average of 8.0 mg/L total N and 1.0 mg/L total P. Water that has been subjected to BNR treatment processes contains such low concentrations of N and P that the reclaimed water can be applied at rates sufficient to supply a crop’s water needs without risk of surface or ground water contamination.
The Virginia Water Reclamation and Reuse Regulations require that irrigation with reclaimed water shall be limited to supplemental irrigation. Supplemental irrigation is defined as that amount of water which, in combination with rainfall, meets the water demands of the irrigated vegetation to maximize production or optimize growth.
Irrigation rates for reclaimed water are site- and crop-specific, and will depend on the following factors (U.S. EPA, 2004; Lazarova et al., 2004b).
1. First, seasonal irrigation demands must be determined. These can be predicted with:• an evapotranspiration estimate for the particular crop being grown
• determination of the period of plant growth
• average annual precipitation data
• data for soil permeability and water holding capacity
Methods for calculating such irrigation requirements can be found in the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Engineering Handbook at www.info.usda.gov/CED/ftp/CED/neh-15.htm (USDA-NRCS, 2003) and in Reed et al. (1995). These calculations are more complicated for landscape plantings than for agricultural crops or turf because landscape plantings consist of many different species with different requirements.
2. The properties of the specific reclaimed water to be used, as detailed in the section above, must be taken into account since these may limit the total amount of water that can be applied per season.
3. The availability of the reclaimed water should also be quantified, including:• the total amount available
• the time of year when available
• availability of water storage facilities for the nongrowing season
• delivery rate and type
Water reuse is actively promoted by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection since Florida law requires that the use of potable water for irrigation be limited. In 2005, 462 Florida golf courses, covering over 56,000 acres of land, were irrigated with reclaimed water. Reclaimed water was also used to irrigate 201,465 residences, 572 parks, and 251 schools. St. Petersburg is home to one of the largest dual distribution systems in the world. (A dual distribution system is one where pipes carrying reclaimed water are separate from those carrying potable water.) In existence since the 1970s, this network provides reclaimed water to residences, golf courses, parks, schools, and commercial areas for landscape irrigation, and to commercial and industrial customers for cooling and other applications.
For more information, see Crook (2005) and Florida Department of Environmental Protection (2006).
The town of Cary is the first city in the state of North Carolina to institute a dual distribution system. The system has been in operation since 2001 and can provide up to 1 million gallons of reclaimed water daily for irrigating and cooling. The reclaimed water has undergone advanced treatment and meets North Carolina water quality rules. To date, there are over 400 residential and industrial users.
For more information, see www.townofcary.org/depts/pwdept/reclaimhome.htm.
The Bayberry Hills Golf Course expansion is one of numerous water reuse projects in Massachusetts. It was initiated in 2001 as an addition to an existing golf course of seven holes irrigated with reclaimed water. These seven holes use approximately 18 million gallons of water per year, and water reuse was necessary since Yarmouth’s water supply was already operating at capacity during summer months. The reused water undergoes secondary treatment followed by ozone treatment, filtration, and UV disinfection. There are provisions for water storage during the nongrowing season. The water reuse project has reduced the nitrogen needed for golf course fertilization.
For more information on this and other reuse projects in the state of Massachusetts, see www.mapc.org/regional_planning/MAPC_Water_Reuse_Report_2005.pdf. For further information on irrigation of golf courses with reclaimed water, see United States Golf Association (1994).
The Southeast Farm in Tallahassee, Florida, has been irrigating with reclaimed water since 1966. The farm is a cooperative between the city of Tallahassee, which supplies water, and farmers who contract acreage. Until 1980, the farm was limited to 20 acres of land for hay production, but has expanded since then to 2,163 acres. The irrigation water receives secondary treatment. The crops grown are corn (Zea mays L. subsp. Mays), soybeans [Glycine max (L.) Merr], bermudagrass [Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers], and rye (Secale cereale L.).
In recent years, however, elevated nitrate levels have been found in the waters of Wakulla Springs State Park south of Tallahassee, which is one of the largest and deepest freshwater springs in the world. This has apparently resulted in excessive growth of algae and exotic aquatic plant species, causing reduced clarity and changes in the spring’s ecosystem. Dye studies have confirmed that at least a portion of the nitrate comes from the Southeast Farm’s irrigated fields, although studies are on-going. As a result, in June 2006, the city of Tallahassee removed all cattle from Southeast Farm, eliminated regular use of nitrogen fertilizer on the farm, and implemented a comprehensive nutrient management plan for the farm.
For more information, see www.talgov.com/you/water/pdf/sefarm.pdf or U.S. EPA (2004).
Water Conserv II has been in existence since 1986, and is the first project permitted by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection for crops for human consumption. Over 3,000 acres of citrus groves are irrigated with reclaimed water, in addition to nurseries, residential landscaping, a sand mine, and the Orange County National Golf Center. No problems have resulted from the irrigation. The reclaimed water provides adequate boron and phosphorus and maintains soil at correct pH for citrus growth. The adequate supply of water permits citrus growers to maintain optimum moisture levels for high yields and ample water for freeze protection, which requires more than eight times as much water as normal irrigation.
Although Water Conserv II had historically provided reclaimed water to citrus growers for no charge, the project recently began charging for water. It’s unclear if citrus growers will continue to irrigate with reclaimed water, or whether Water Conserv II’s emphasis will change to providing reclaimed water for residential, industrial, and landscape customers.
For more information, see www.waterconservii.com/ or U.S. EPA (2004).
This publication was reviewed by Adria Bordas, Bobby Clark, Erik Ervin, and Gary Felton. A draft version was reviewed by Bob Angelotti, Marcia Degen, Karen Harr, George Kennedy, Valerie Rourke, and Terry Wagner. Any opinions, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors.
www.watereuse.org/: WateReuse Association. “The WateReuse Association is a non-profit organization whose mission is to advance the beneficial and efficient use of water resources through education, sound science, and technology using reclamation, recycling, reuse, and desalination for the benefit of our members, the public, and the environment.” Page contains links to water reuse projects (mostly in the western U.S.), and other useful links.
www.cvco.org/science/vwea/navbuttons/Glossary-11-01.pdf: Virginia Water Environment Association’s Virginia Water Reuse Glossary.
www.hrsd.com/waterreuse.htm: Hampton Roads (Virginia) Sanitation District water reuse page. Description of industrial water reuse project, research reports, FAQ’s, and glossary of water reuse jargon.
www.floridadep.org/water/reuse/index.htm: Florida Department of Environmental Protection water re-use page. Links to many water reuse-related resources on site, including general education/information materials, and Florida-specific links on water reuse policy, regulations, and projects.
www.gaepd.org/Files_PDF/techguide/wpb/reuse.pdf: Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division’s “Guidelines for Water Reclamation and Urban Water Re-Use (2002).
www.mass.gov/dep/water/wastewater/wrfaqs.htm: Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection FAQ on water reuse.
www.bcua.org/WPC_VT_WasteWaterReUse.htm: Bergen County (New Jersey) Utilities Authority. Describes reuse of wastewater effluent re-use in cooling towers and for sewer cleaning.
www.owasa.org/pages/WaterReuse/questionsandanswers.html: FAQ about Orange Water and SewerAuthority’s (Carrboro, NC) water reuse project for the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Carrow, R.N. and R.R. Duncan. 1998. Salt-affected turfgrass sites: Assessment and management. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y.
Crook, James. 2005. St. Petersburg, Florida, dual water system: A case study. Water conservation, reuse, and recycling: Proceedings of an Iranian-American workshop. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 2006. 2005 reuse inventory. FDEP, Tallahassee, FL. Available on-line at www.floridadep.org/water/reuse/inventory.htm.
Harivandi, M. Ali. 1999. Interpreting turfgrass irrigation water test results. Publication 8009. University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Oakland, Calif. Available on-line at anrcatalog.ucdavis.edu/pdf/8009.pdf.
Harivandi, M. Ali. 2004. Evaluating recycled waters for golf course irrigation. U.S. Golf Association Green Section Record 42(6): 25-29. Available on-line at turf.lib.msu.edu/2000s/2004/041125.pdf.
Landschoot, Peter. 2007. Irrigation water quality guidelines for turfgrass sites. Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Cooperative Extension. Penn State University, State College, Pa. Available on-line at turfgrassmanagement.psu.edu/irrigation_water_quality_for_turfgrass_sites.cfm.
Lazarova, Valentina and Takashi Asano. 2004. Challenges of sustainable irrigation with recycled water. p. 1-30. In Valentina Lazarova and Bahri (ed.). Water reuse for irrigation: agriculture, landscapes, and turf grass. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Lazarova, Valentina, Herman Bouwer, and Akica Bahri. 2004a. Water quality considerations. p. 31-60. In Valentina Lazarova and Akica Bahri (ed.). Water reuse for irrigation: agriculture, landscapes, and turf grass. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Lazarova, Valentina, Ioannis Papadopoulous, and Akica Bahri. 2004b. Code of successful agronomic practices. p. 103-150. In Valentina Lazarova and Akica Bahri (ed.). Water reuse for irrigation: agriculture, landscapes, and turf grass. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Maas, E.V. 1987. Salt tolerance of plants. p. 57–75. In B.R. Christie (ed.) CRC handbook of plant science in agriculture, Vol. II. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Metropolitan Area Planning Council. 2005. Once is not enough: A guide to water reuse in Massachusetts. MAPC, Boston, Mass. Available on-line at www.mapc.org/regional_planning/MAPC_Water_Reuse_Report_2005.pdf.
Reed, Sherwood C., Ronald W. Crites, and E. Joe Middlebrooks. 1995. Natural systems for waste management and treatment. 2nd edition. McGraw-Hill, Inc. New York, N.Y.
Sheikh, Bahman. 2004. Code of practices for landscape and golf course irrigation. In Valentina Lazarova and Akica Bahri (ed.). Water reuse for irrigation: agriculture, landscapes, and turf grass. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
USDA-NRCS. 2003. Irrigation water requirements. Section 15, Chapter 2. p. 2-i-2-284. In Part 623 National Engineering Handbook. U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C. Available on-line at www.info.usda.gov/CED/ftp/CED/neh-15.htm.
U.S. EPA. 2003. National primary drinking water standards. EPA 816-F-03-016. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
U.S. EPA. 2004. Guidelines for water reuse. EPA 645-R-04-108. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. Available on-line at www.epa.gov/ORD/NRMRL/pubs/625r04108/625r04108.pdf.
United States Golf Association. 1994. Wastewater reuse for golf course irrigation. Lewis Publishers, Chelsea, Mich. 294 p.
VAAWW-VWEA. 2000. A Virginia water reuse glossary. Virginia Section, American Water Works Association and Virginia Water Environment Federation. Available on-line at www.cvco.org/science/vwea/navbuttons/Glossary-11-01.pdf.
Wu, Lin, and Linda Dodge. 2005. Landscape plant salt tolerance guide for recycled water irrigation. Slosson Research Endowment for Ornamental Horticulture, Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, Calif. Available on-line at ucce.ucdavis.edu/files/filelibrary/5505/20091.pdf.
Reviewed by Greg Evanylo, Extension Specialist, Crop and Soil Environmental Sciences
Virginia Cooperative Extension materials are available for public use, re-print, or citation without further permission, provided the use includes credit to the author and to Virginia Cooperative Extension, Virginia Tech, and Virginia State University.
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Virginia State University, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture cooperating. Alan L. Grant, Dean, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences; Edwin J. Jones, Director, Virginia Cooperative Extension, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg; Jewel E. Hairston, Administrator, 1890 Extension Program, Virginia State, Petersburg.
May 1, 2009

Galaxy Cluster Abell 520's mass (HST WFPC2)
This image shows the location of most of the mass in merging galaxy cluster Abell 520's core, which is dominated by dark matter. Dark matter is an invisible substance that makes up most of the Universe's mass. The dark-matter map was derived from Hubble Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 observations, by detecting how light from distant objects is distorted by the cluster galaxies, an effect called gravitational lensing.
Abell 520 resides 2.4 billion light-years away.
About the Image
About the Object
|Type:||• Early Universe : Galaxy : Grouping : Cluster|
• Early Universe : Cosmology : Phenomenon : Dark Matter
• Cosmology Images/Videos
|Distance:||2 billion light years|

What took Mother Nature thousands of years to create, recent humanity has taken for granted and has selfishly destroyed. In the last 75 years, modern U.S. economic agricultural practices have nearly eradicated all of the naturally occurring organically (carbon containing) complexed trace minerals, poly-electrolytes and metalo-enzymes from our diet. Two-time Nobel prize winner and renowned scientist Linus Pauling categorically stated to the 74th Congress of the U.S. that, "Every ailment, every sickness and every disease can be traced back to an organic trace mineral deficiency."
Without a doubt, organic trace minerals are "the gift of life" and cellular function becomes impossible without them. The 74th Congress, 2nd session, of the United States declared that 99 percent of Americans are deficient in 100 percent organically complexed trace minerals. Why? Because our foods no longer contain adequate amounts of critical, essential, and life sustaining organic trace minerals, poly-electrolytes and metalo-enzymes! Dr. Charles Northern in Senate Document 264 indicated that, when an organic soil-based bed is destroyed, plants and crops harvested in that soil lack virtually all of the critical organic trace minerals and more. There is enormous scientific evidence proving organic trace minerals and fulvic acid are both critically necessary to maintain health, promote healing and prevent illnesses and disease. Further, they may be the solution to the world’s health problems and may even be the key to preservation of life on earth for many centuries to come. Lastly, they are proving indispensable to every organ, gland and muscle in the body. Without them, life cannot exist because they are both the stimulus (neuro-electrical catalyst) and the "spark" that single-handedly produces all life functions.
What is fulvic acid? Where does it come from and how does it work?
Fulvic acid is a humic substance or extract. It is the end product of nature’s humification process, which is the ultimate breakdown and recycling of once-living plant matter. Fulvic acid contains all the phytochemical protective substances, amino acid peptides, nucleic acids, poly-saccharides and muco-polysaccharides from the original living and organic (carbon containing) plant matter. Thus, fulvic acid is highly concentrated, refined, transformed, and enhanced over hundreds of years by the actions of innumerable and microscopic organically complexed plants. This humification process does not break down the original phytochemical protective components and prevents them from turning back into their basic mineral elements and micro-structures. Even the smallest strands of RNA, DNA, and organic plant photosynthetic materials still remain intact. Over time, the original components become organically complexed and enriched with organic and carbonaceous materials.
In addition, because fulvic acid is so highly refined and so naturally chelated (i.e., ultra tiny and low molecular weight) by nature itself, it consists of 100 percent organically complexed and ultra tiny molecules which can easily penetrate human tissue and cells. It is highly bio-active on the cellular level, providing innumerable bio-chemical and metabolic detoxification functions. The short term health benefits and long term clinical results are scientifically phenomenal and medically outstanding. Fulvic acid is one of nature’s most precious forms of protection and defense for plants, animals and, possibly, man. Unquestionably, it is tied very closely with immune system functions and has exceptionally powerful antioxidant qualities.
What scientific facts do we know about fulvic acid and its vast applications?
Because fulvic acid is naturally chelated and organically complexed by nature itself, it has been entirely and perhaps wrongly misunderstood and overlooked by most of medicine and science.
We believe nearly every pharmaceutical drug, herbal extract, health supplement and therapeutic substance from nature can, somehow, be traced to the functions and the actual chemical makeup of fulvic acid.
We also believe the DNA of every living and extinct species of organism on Earth—be it plant, animal or microbe—has eventually become a component of fulvic acid. The original life-giving, protective, and healing components from plants (phytochemicals) do not disintegrate during nature’s fulvic acid production process; rather, they become highly concentrated.
Many species of plants, particularly microscopic plants, seem to be involved in the fulvic acid production process. Fulvic acid production appears to be the end result of nature’s perfect recycling process, and may provide a steady increase in health to subsequent generations of living organisms. Modern agricultural practices appear to have completely broken nature’s recycling process, resulting in progressively deteriorating crops yielding hollow foods and, subsequently, affecting our health.
In fact, the use and consumption of a homeostatic balanced amount of fulvic acid on a regular basis could possibly reverse the steady chronic cycle of deteriorating health.
Based on medical research, what are the known health benefits of fulvic acid?
There are many beneficial therapeutic uses of fulvic acid. Below are findings from some of the latest medical research.
1. Anti-inflammatory agent: Fulvic acid seems to inhibit an enzyme secreted from an infected area, and regulates the level of the trace elements zinc and copper, activating a super-oxide called dismutates. Free radicals generated in the infected area are dismutated, utilized, and eliminated by this agent.
2. Stimulates blood circulation and enhances blood coagulation: Many diseases are caused by circulation malfunction in the capillary blood system. A therapeutic effect of fulvic acid seems to be is its ability to restore and improve blood circulation in the capillary system. Fulvic acid also appears to serve as a blood coagulant when there is bleeding or blood seeping from the vascular bed.
3. Digestive tract ulcers: Another healing effect of fulvic acid is its ability to stimulate blood circulation in the stomach wall and inhibit excessive secretion of acid. It also seems to stimulate the secretion of the glands in the stomach that have the ability to protect the stomach inner wall, thereby potentially preventing and healing stomach ulcers.
4. Immunology: There are indications that, with injection of fulvic acid into the abdominal region, the size of thymus in experimental animals increased, together with indications of macrophage activation. A dosage of 5 mg/kg of fulvic acid when injected into the abdominal cavity appears to be beneficial.
5. Endocrinology: Fulvic acid appears to regulate abnormal thyroid hormone secretion because it is able to regulate cyclic nucleotides at the cellular level.
6. Anti-cancer: In general, fulvic acid does not seem to kill cancer cells directly. However, it serves as a regulating agent in the immune system and can be used therapeutically in conjunction with other anti-cancer medicines.
Further research may show that humic acids can also be used to resuscitate some of our soils, and possibly our food sources. Until this can be accomplished, good quality nutritional supplements containing fulvic acid remain our best defense against food devoid of life-sustaining organically complexed minerals and nutrients.
Dr. Drucker has a Master’s of Science in Natural Health and a Doctorate in Naturopathy. He is a highly respected doctor in the field of natural health and the CEO of Drucker Labs, which manufactures and distributes health, wellness and nutritional products. These products use a breakthrough technology called intraCELL™ V, which yields unique carbon-bond organic microcomplexed structures that are highly bio-available and extremely effective.

SAN PEDRO, Calif.
If the tide is high, the weather is warm, the clock is approaching midnight and the beach you're standing on is in Southern California, it's a given that romance is in the air – or the water. In these parts, it's a time for grunion love.
The California grunion does something no other fish on the planet is known to do. It surfs a wave right out of its world and into ours. Then it plops itself down on the sand to lay and fertilize its eggs before waiting patiently for another big wave to carry it home.
Sometimes, before it hitches a ride back to the ocean, someone like 13-year-old Judy Feng will catch it – or at least try to (they're slippery).
"At first I was trying to get it, but it was all slippery and I dropped it," a delighted Feng said during a recent midnight run at Cabrillo Beach in San Pedro, where more than 2,000 people lined the shore for a good half-mile in search of the legendary but elusive aquatic wonder, known scientifically as leuresthes tenuis.
"I was going to let it go, but then my friend said, 'It's at my feet, don't let it get away!' And I grabbed it again," she squealed, still bouncing up and down with excitement as she held her catch in a water-filled plastic bag.
Feng had officially become a grunion hunter, a distinction as uniquely Californian as the fish she was now holding at eye level. The California grunion is found nowhere else but along a thousand-mile stretch of coastline extending from central California to the southern half of Baja California, Mexico.
It's along that region's scores of flat, sandy beaches that people line up every spring and summer by the tens of thousands to watch the female grunion burrow tail first into the sand as the males wrap themselves around it.
"When they flop up against your feet, it sounds sort of like this," says veteran grunion watcher Mimi DiMatteo, popping her cheeks with her fingers and making a noise that sounds something like "whuppa, whuppa, whuppa."
Although many come just to watch the grunion spawn, in these hard economic times some people are trekking to the beach to bring home fish to eat. Veteran grunion watcher Chris Lindeman says he counted more than 200 people on a recent night who said that was their plan.
Like DiMatteo, Lindeman is a "Grunion Greeter," one of some 550 volunteers who go out and count the fish during their runs from March through August to help marine biologists make sure their numbers remain strong, and that people aren't taking them without fishing licenses or breaking state law by using anything other than their hands to catch them.
For those who plan on taking the fish home to eat, veteran grunion hunter Matt Christopherson warns that one taste of the skinny, crunchy little silver fish is often enough to last a lifetime.
"If you want to eat fish, go to the store and get a salmon steak – it's so much better" says Christopherson, who puts on grunion lectures from time to time at the Cabrillo Marine Aquarium on nights when runs take place on the beach outside.

Basindra Village, Ratlam District, Madhya Pradesh, is watered by the perennial Jhamand River. The river flows about 100 ft below the village and was once its only source of water. The 2-3 handpumps installed here in the 1970’s by the Public Health and Engineering Department (PHED) used to run dry in the summer. When the river would shrink in the summer, people would dig holes in the riverbed to procure water for their daily needs.
Today the village has 13 handpumps and 2 tubewells. Groundwater therefore, is heavily relied upon for meeting daily water needs. This however, is not a daunting prospect for this village at least in the current scenario, for recharge measure have been taken in the form of an earthen dam, a solid weir and a check dam, all built on the Jhamand. “These structures don’t just recharge groundwater in this area, but also ensure that the river never dries up” informs Bhandari, a PHED engineer. PHED believes that the river has been made perennial by the dam even as they see that the river has actually shrunk because of it. The Dholavar earthen dam is over a kilometre long and manages to amass a large amount of water in the reservoir it creates. The dam has a live storage capacity of about 50 million cubic meters, submerging 600 ha of land. The riverbed on the other side of the dam is totally dry for a distance, till it is revived again by groundwater accrual. The multi-purpose dam has been supplying water to Ratlam city since 1984 (about 5 mld) and canal irrigation to neighbouring villages.
While currently seeming like a solution, one wonders what the adverse effects of this structure could be in the long-run, on the riverine ecology. The impact canal irrigation and all-year-round agriculture is having on the soil is already visible, “we never needed artificial fertilisers before, now they are a necessity, the soil seems tired” observed Juvan Singh, an elderly citizen of the village. Other than impacts in the immediate environment, dams of this size typically have severe downstream impacts as well.
Basindra has piped water supply today, brought to the village from 2 tubewells. The dugwell this village possessed, has typically fallen out of use, with the introduction of handpumps and tubewells. With an electricity-run motor now providing water in people’s houses, consumption has obviously increased. This, they say is not a problem as the reservoir has enough water. Since only about 35 families have opted for individual tap connections, the panchayat is not able to collect enough funds for the operation and maintenance of the scheme. In fact, the funds collected through community contribution (Rs.30/month/family) are not enough even to pay the electricity charges of the motor. “With the river and the handpumps close by, people don’t feel the need to spend money on piped water supply” says Anankuar, an elderly woman of the village. “Due to constant power cuts, we never have water in our taps anyway” she mournfully adds.
Rowty village, close by, is plagued with similar problems. Although electricity problems persist, here 80% of the people have individual tap connections. The only ones who don’t are the tribals, typically living in hamlets in the outskirts of the village, where pipes don’t reach. The charges for this facility are Rs.40/month/family, with an initial contribution of Rs.500.
Till the 1980’s Rowty was sufficiently watered by 3 dugwells, 1 baori (stepwell) and a seasonal stream. Gradually with climate change, deforestation etc, rainfall began to reduce, but the population pressure kept mounting. “We used to have a good monsoon every year back in the day, the dugwell and baori used to last us the entire year” reminisced a group of villagers. “In 1978 PHED started a pipeline system from the baori, connected to public standposts, but in 1984-85 water scarcity became acute, that’s when we built a stop-dam on the seasonal stream and an overhead tank along with individual tap connections” explained Bhandari. While these measures took care of the problem temporarily, in the 1990’s scarcity rose its ugly head once again as the sources kept drying up. The PHED then decided to build dykes and check dams in the watershed of the village, for recharging groundwater. Tubewells were also drilled, but the water they yielded suffered from bad quality. The handpumps wouldn’t just have bad quality water, but also run dry in the lean season. It was in the late 1990’s when the panchayat demanded water from the Jhamand, through long distance pipes. And only in 2006 was this scheme launched. It is managed by the panchayat, which apart from community contributions, also uses its own funds from other sources to run the system.
With the introduction of tap water, the baori and dugwells have been rendered useless and fallen into a dilapidated condition. While the PHED boasts of these two villages as success stories, it is essential to identify the loopholes. It is commendable that piped water supply has been taken seriously here, as opposed to most other villages, where water isn’t available even in public standposts and handpumps. However, the engineers themselves acknowledge that they do not factor in the electricity problem and therefore end up designing unrealistic schemes which are successful only on paper. They assert that designing schemes with lower consumption of electricity is possible, but they never consider it. Technically therefore, they have 24 x 7 water supply, but the ground reality speaks a different language.
The other point to ponder over is the environmental short-sightedness displayed by their schemes. PHED needs a drastic shift in its approach while designing drinking water schemes. The focus continues to remain on groundwater extraction by way of tubewells, ignoring dugwells and throwing traditional systems into disuse. The sustainability of the source or of the system is almost never considered. Even though they have now begun to make recharge structures to insure against falling water tables, simpler and less energy-intensive techniques are not considered. Many a times, their recharge structures involve dams, solid-weirs etc, which are ecologically myopic in nature and prove to be disastrous for the environment in the long-run. It is an imperative that the PHED tries to revive traditional and indigenous wisdom that is culture and geography specific, and apply technology to that, so as to make it relevant to modern times.
Moreover, PHED has not bothered to involve the community in either of these cases. Villagers are hardly ever consulted before designing a scheme. Their opinions or needs simply don’t matter. If at all any interaction takes place between the village community and the PHED prior to the installation of a water supply scheme, it is one-sided, in the form of information-education-communication (IEC). In these two villages, no IEC activity was undertaken, neither were the locals consulted at any stage of planning or implementation. For this reason, the Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC) continues to lie defunct and it is the panchayat that runs the show. In the former example of Basindra, the scheme was not demand-driven and is running into losses.
“PHED schemes are not demand driven but politics driven” the engineers themselves claim. “Where water will be supplied and where it wont is not a matter of need at all, it is based on politics between panchayats, the PHED and MLAs” they discuss amongst each other. When villagers refuse to pay for the installed scheme, PHED engineers lash out at them with hostility, failing to draw a connection between their own observation that they don’t need it and their refusal to pay.
The point that squarely drives home is the compelling need for structural and systemic change within the governmental edifice, and more specifically, within the PHED. Under the new guidelines for provision of drinking water in villages, issued by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), PHED engineers are expected to involve communities in their schemes right from the planning stage. While very much in line with the participatory governance rhetoric, this idea has few takers as it is designed by those sitting in Delhi, far removed from ground-realities. Policies such as these are issued in a top-down manner by central departments, much in contradiction to what they ask of the engineers at the village level.
Community participation is a bottom-up process that involves consistent investment of time and effort by the engineers. It is not a one-day event or a one-visit job. Involving villagers in the planning, implementation and operation processes of a drinking water scheme entails gaining ground within all sections of the community, winning their trust, dealing with caste and gender issues, local politics and becoming aware of all the minute details of the problems they face. Mobilising the people and sustaining their confidence is a long drawn process that does not terminate once the scheme has been installed, for that is just the beginning, and running the scheme successfully henceforth requires much cooperation from the villagers.
However, this is not something the PHED engineers feel they are equipped to do. “We are expected to do IEC activities among other aspects of community participation, but neither do we have the skill nor the time for such activities” they claim. “I have over 600 villages under me, how can I undertake a two-year process of community mobilisation for each one of them?” exclaims a sub-engineer from Ratlam district. Another sub-engineer threw light on the loopholes in their planning process, “we are asked to design schemes overnight, how can we ensure people’s involvement in this manner? Our schemes therefore do not factor in local issues – geographical or social, and are unrealistic, thereby causing their own failure.” What these statements elucidate is a desperate need to bring in structural changes so as to enable PHED to respond to these local problems, which the central department often turns a blind eye to.
It is clear that many of the engineers are well aware of their limitations and weaknesses, one of them being their inability to involve communities for the reasons stated above. Lack of skill, time and manpower, as well as bureaucratic procedures are only some the barriers. The need of the hour isn’t just to convey the importance of bottom-up planning and participatory governance, but to bring about systemic changes within government bodies to make them more responsive towards current realities. Government bodies, whether the PHED, the municipalities, the development authorities or any other, cannot consist solely of engineers, but will have to have a wing of social scientists who have the skill that engineers lack to work at the village level, with the people.
Whether socially blind or ecologically short-sighted, the PHED interventions require a massive shift from being top-down, technocratic schemes to demand-driven, sustainable and people-managed system. What is needed is not a just a scheme but an entire system.

Teenage vegetarians may be at greater risk of eating disorders and suicide than their meat-eating peers, according to US researchers.
A study from the University of Minnesota found that adolescent vegetarians were more weight- and body-conscious, and more likely to have been diagnosed with an eating disorder, and to have tried a variety of healthy and unhealthy weight-control practices such as diet pills, laxatives and vomiting. They were also more likely than their peers to have contemplated or attempted suicide.
The findings also indicated that adolescents were more likely than adults to be vegetarians for weight-control rather than for health or moral reasons.
Although the authors acknowledge that a vegetarian diet can be more healthy than one that contains red meat, they also note that, in some teens, being a vegetarian may be taken as a red flag for eating and other disorders related to self-image (J Adolesc Health, 2001; 29: 406-16).

Products marketed for infants or billed as "microwave safe" release toxic doses of the chemical bisphenol A when heated, an analysis by the Journal Sentinel has found.
The newspaper had the containers of 10 items tested in a lab - products that were heated in a microwave or conventional oven. Bisphenol A, or BPA, was found to be leaching from all of them.
The amounts detected were at levels that scientists have found cause neurological and developmental damage in laboratory animals. The problems include genital defects, behavioral changes and abnormal development of mammary glands. The changes to the mammary glands were identical to those observed in women at higher risk for breast cancer.
The newspaper's test results raise new questions about the chemical and the safety of an entire inventory of plastic products labeled as "microwave safe." BPA is a key ingredient in common household plastics, including baby bottles and storage containers. It has been found in 93% of Americans tested.
The newspaper tests also revealed that BPA, commonly thought to be found only in hard, clear plastic and in the lining of metal food cans, is present in frozen food trays, microwaveable soup containers and plastic baby food packaging.
Food companies advise parents worried about BPA to avoid microwaving food in plastic containers, especially those with the recycling No. 7 stamped on the bottom.
But the Journal Sentinel's testing found BPA leaching from containers with different recycling numbers, including Nos. 1, 2 and 5.
"There is no such thing as safe microwaveable plastic," said Frederick vom Saal, a University of Missouri researcher who oversaw the newspaper's testing.
The American Chemistry Council disputed the findings, saying publishing the results amounts to a "serious disservice by drawing a conclusion about product safety that simply cannot be drawn from either this study or the overall body of scientific research."
Food company officials say the doses detected in the tests are so low that they are insignificant to human health.
"These levels are EXTREMELY low," wrote John Faulkner, director of brand communications for Campbell Soup Co. Tests of the company's Just Heat & Enjoy tomato soup showed its container leached some of the lowest levels of BPA found. "In fact, you might just be able to find similar levels in plain old tap water due to 'background' levels. We are talking 40 to 60 parts per trillion (ppt). What is 40 to 60 ppt? 40 to 60 seconds in 32,000 years!"
But the Journal Sentinel identified several peer-reviewed studies that found harm to animals at levels similar to those detected in the newspaper's tests - in some cases, as low as 25 parts per trillion. Scientists with an expertise in BPA say the findings are cause for concern, especially considering how vulnerable a baby's development is and how even tiny amounts of BPA can trigger cell damage.
Harm done during this critical window of development is irreparable and can be devastating, they say.
"This is stuff that shouldn't be in our babies' and infants' bodies," said Patricia Hunt, a professor at Washington State University who pioneered studies linking BPA to cancer.
Scientists say BPA and other chemicals that disrupt the endocrine system do not act like other toxins that become more potent as their doses increase. BPA behaves like a hormone. It mimics estrogen with effects that are ultra-potent. Even tiny amounts can trigger cell change.
Nira Ben-Jonathan, a professor at the University of Cincinnati whose studies found that BPA interferes with chemotherapy, said the chemical's effects might not be immediately obvious, but can be devastating over time.
"They used to say DDT was safe, too," Ben-Jonathan said.
The Journal Sentinel's tests were done to determine the prevalence of BPA in a typical modern diet for babies and small children.
Based on the test results, the newspaper then estimated the amount of BPA a child might consume and compared it with low-dose amounts of BPA used by researchers in animal studies.
In what is believed to be the first analysis of its kind by a newspaper, the Journal Sentinel found that an average 1-month-old girl is exposed to the same amount of BPA that caused mammary gland changes in mice. Those same changes in humans can lead to breast cancer.
The label "microwave safe" is stamped on thousands of products sold across the country. But that is not an official designation regulated by the government.
Companies are able to place it on their products without any official testing by the Food and Drug Administration.
BPA makes its way into food from plastic packaging when those containers are heated.
In the Journal Sentinel's tests, the highest amounts of leaching were found in two items: a can of Enfamil liquid infant formula and a Rubbermaid plastic food-storage container. The lowest levels, trace amounts, were found to be leaching from disposable frozen-food containers.
Hunt, the Washington State University scientist, called the levels found leaching from the plastic food-storage containers "real doozies."
It is likely that the newspaper's tests underestimated the amounts of BPA that normally would be leaching from reusable products, BPA experts say. All products the newspaper had tested were new. Studies show that as products age and are repeatedly heated and washed, they are more likely to leach higher amounts of BPA.
"You can't see this happening," vom Saal said. "You can't taste it, you can't smell it, but you are getting dosed at a higher and higher amount."
Also, testers did not examine the food in those containers for BPA levels. They replaced food with a mixture of water and alcohol, a standard laboratory practice that makes measuring easier and more accurate. But that also eliminates other variables that are in the food, such as fats and acids that are more likely to encourage BPA to leach.
BPA's effects also can be magnified by other chemicals in the plastic. This has been proved in one experiment after another, said vom Saal, who has become a vocal critic of the chemical industry. While BPA is potentially dangerous to all humans, scientists are especially concerned about how the chemical affects fetuses and newborns, whose systems are not developed. Babies up to age 12 months or so can't metabolize BPA as efficiently as adults.
But no one is more exposed to BPA than a newborn. A newborn's small size means that he or she gets a more concentrated dose of the chemical. Many products that contain BPA - such as baby bottles, infant formula, some pacifiers and toys - are marketed for mothers and newborns.
Exposure for babies can be exaggerated by the fact that many have diets exclusively made up of liquid baby formula from cans lined with BPA.
Babies who drink liquid formula from bottles made with BPA are effectively getting a super-dose of the chemical, said Hunt, the Washington State University scientist.
The U.S. surgeon general has advised that breast milk is the healthiest food for newborns, though BPA has been found in breast milk, too.
Less than one-third of babies are breastfed until they are 3 months old, and just one in 10 is exclusively breastfed to 6 months, a 2004 study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found.
Gail McCarver, a physician at the Medical College of Wisconsin who led the National Toxicology Program's investigation of BPA earlier this year, declined to be interviewed for this article.
But McCarver said at an FDA hearing in September that she is particularly concerned about premature babies who are exposed to plastic tubing in hospitals.
The government should be protecting the smallest, most vulnerable baby, not just the average child, she said. Four million babies are born in the United States each year, and roughly 500,000 are born prematurely.
Christina Deppoleto, 36, of Hartland says she does her best to protect her 18-month-old son, Carson. Deppoleto, interviewed recently at the Milwaukee County Zoo, said she was troubled to hear about the newspaper's test results - especially findings that showed BPA to be leaching from "microwave safe" containers.
"I try to be a good consumer and a good parent," she said. "But you have to be able to trust the labels."
Reviewing scientific studies
The newspaper examined all the published literature on BPA spanning two decades. A total of 21 studies have looked at effects on mammals at doses that were similar to the amounts found leaching from the products. All but four concluded that BPA caused damage to animals.
In one 2006 study, pregnant mice were exposed to BPA from the eighth day of pregnancy to the 16th, a period critical for the development of neurons that regulate sexual behavior.
Scientists found the female offspring had fewer such neurons than usual. Their activity levels dropped and mirrored that of their brothers.
In another experiment, newborn mice were fed BPA at doses common in human diets. They were found to have changes in the patterns of their mammary glands at the time of puberty. They had more ducts and duct extensions, more developed fat areas and additional cell changes associated with a more mature gland. The consequences of this early alteration in breast tissue development are likely to increase vulnerability to breast cancer later in life, the scientists found.
Animals tested were fed BPA through pumps under the skin that regularly administered the chemical. Some critics say that method exaggerates the chemical's effects. But others say it is an acceptable method because newborns are constantly feeding.
Scientists also add that the Journal Sentinel analysis of how much BPA a baby might ingest is just a small window into a child's typical day of exposure.
Studies have shown the chemical can be absorbed through the skin. And babies also put items other than food in their mouths, including pacifiers and toys that might contain the chemical.
The findings have disturbed and angered parents and consumer advocates who say the government needs to do a better job of protecting people from potentially harmful chemicals.
"The safety of this compound is in major question, and our government is not taking steps to address this," said Urvashi Rangan, senior analyst for Consumers Union, a watchdog group that regularly tests products. "Consumers shouldn't have to be the guinea pigs here."
Canada has declared BPA a toxin and is moving to ban it from baby bottles, infant formula and other children's products. But U.S. regulators have been conflicted.
The National Toxicology Program has expressed concern about the chemical for fetuses, newborns and young children. But the FDA has declared it to be safe. That assessment, however, was found to be flawed, and the FDA since has reopened its examination.
The conflict has further heightened consumer anxiety about how much BPA, if any, is safe.
Bradley Kirschner, a pediatrician at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin and the father of three young girls, said his patients are increasingly concerned about the chemical.
"If an entire country is banning it, that makes it hard to ignore," he said.
Parents are confused, he said. And he is not certain how to advise them.
"If you ask, 'Should a baby sleep on his back?' I can tell you what to do," he said. "But this is muddy."
Kirschner said he would like a more definitive answer from U.S. regulators about whether BPA is safe.
Increasingly, consumer groups are calling for BPA to be banned. Last month, the consumer watchdog Environmental Working Group sent letters to infant formula makers, asking them to stop packaging their products in containers made with BPA.
The attorneys general in New Jersey, Connecticut and Delaware sent letters to 11 companies that make baby bottles and baby formula containers, asking that they voluntarily stop using BPA.
Six U.S. senators have called for a federal ban on the chemical, and more than 35 lawsuits have been filed in recent years against companies using BPA, claiming the chemical has caused physical harm.
Companies are beginning to proactively back away from BPA. In April, after Canada's announcement of a ban, several corporations said they would stop producing and selling certain products made with BPA. The companies and retailers include Nalgene, Wal-Mart, Toys "R" Us, Playtex and CVS pharmacies.
But plenty of products designed for heating food still contain BPA.
Many companies that use BPA now include safety information about the chemical on their Web sites. But those sites maintain that BPA is safe at low doses. Their claims are based largely on studies that were paid for by the chemical industry.
Jackie Chesney, a grandmother from Spring Grove, Ill., said she assumes a certain level of safety in products that are allowed to be sold.
"You should think the things you are using would be safe," Chesney said as she strolled through the Milwaukee County Zoo with her daughter and grandchildren.
Chesney said things have changed a lot since her children were small. There is so much more plastic these days, and food is more likely to be individually wrapped, she said.
The proliferation of plastic worries her.
"Yes, it's handy and convenient," she said. "But at what cost?"

- About Us
- Global Vision
- News and Events
- Ways to Help
Genetic Causes of Mental Retardation
What is genetics?
Genetics is "the science that studies the principles and mechanics of heredity, or the means by which traits are passed from parents to offspring" (Glanze, 1996). Through genetics a number of specific disorders have been identified as being genetically caused. One example is fragile X syndrome, a common genetic cause of mental retardation, which is caused by the presence of a single non-working gene (called the FMR-1 gene) on a child's X chromosome.
Genetics originated in the mid-19th century when Gregor Mendel discovered over a ten year period of experimenting with pea plants that certain traits are inherited. His discoveries provided the foundation for the science of genetics. Mendel's findings continue to spur the work and hopes of scientists to uncover the mystery behind how our genes work and what they can reveal to us about the possibility of having certain diseases and conditions. The scientific field of genetics can help families affected by genetic disorders to have a better understanding about heredity, what causes various genetic disorders to occur, and what possible prevention strategies can be used to decrease the incidence of genetic disorders.
Can a person's genes cause mental retardation?
Some genetic disorders are associated with mental retardation, chronic health problems and developmental delay. Because of the complexity of the human body, there are no easy answers to the question of what causes mental retardation. Mental retardation is attributable to any condition that impairs development of the brain before birth, during birth or in the childhood years (The Arc, 1993). As many as 50 percent of people with mental retardation have been found to possess more than one causal factor (AAMR, 1992). Some research has determined that in 75 percent of children with mild mental retardation the cause is unknown (Kozma & Stock, 1993).
The field of genetics has important implications for people with mental retardation. Over 350 inborn errors of metabolism have been identified, most of which lead to mental retardation (Scriver, 1995). Yet, the possibility of being born with mental retardation or developing the condition later in life can be caused by multiple factors unrelated to our genetic make-up. It is caused not only by the genotype (or genetic make-up) of the individual, but also by the possible influences of environmental factors. Those factors can range from drug use or nutritional deficiencies to poverty and cultural deprivation.
How often is mental retardation inherited?
Since the brain is such a complex organ, there are a number of genes involved in its development. Consequently, there are a number of genetic causes of mental retardation. Most identifiable causes of severe mental retardation (defined as an IQ of 50 or less) originate from genetic disorders. Up to 60 percent of severe mental retardation can be attributed to genetic causes making it the most common cause in cases of severe mental retardation (Moser, 1995). People with mild mental retardation (defined as an IQ between 50 and 70-75) are not as likely to inherit mental retardation due to their genetic make-up as are people with severe mental retardation. People with mild mental retardation are more likely to have the condition due to environmental factors, such as nutritional state, personal health habits, socioeconomic level, access to health care and exposure to pollutants and chemicals, rather than acquiring the condition genetically (Nelson-Anderson & Waters, 1995). Two of the most common genetically transmitted forms of mental retardation include Down syndrome (a chromosomal disorder) and fragile X syndrome (a single-gene disorder).
What causes genetic disorders?
Over 7,000 genetic disorders have been identified and catalogued, with up to five new disorders being discovered every year (McKusick, 1994). Genetic disorders are typically broken down into three types: Chromosomal, single-gene and multifactorial.
Chromosomal disorders affect approximately 7 out of every 1,000 infants. The disorder results when a person has too many or too few chromosomes, or when there is a change in the structure of a chromosome. Half of all first-trimester miscarriages or spontaneous abortions occur as a result of a chromosome abnormality. If the child is born, he or she usually has multiple birth defects and mental retardation.
Most chromosomal disorders happen sporadically. They are not necessarily inherited (even though they are considered to be genetic disorders). In order for a genetic condition to be inherited, the disease-causing gene must be present within one of the parent's genetic code. In most chromosomal disorders, each of the parent's genes are normal. However, during cell division an error in separation, recombination or distribution of chromosomes occurs. Examples of chromosomal disorders include Down syndrome, Trisomy 13, Trisomy 18 and Cri du chat.
Single-gene disorders (sometimes called inborn errors of metabolism or Mendelian disorders) are caused by non-working genes. Disorders of metabolism occur when cells are unable to produce proteins or enzymes needed to change certain chemicals into others, or to carry substances from one place to another. The cell's inability to carry out these vital internal functions often results in mental retardation. Approximately 1 in 5,000 children are born with defective enzymes resulting in inborn errors of metabolism (Batshaw, 1992). Although many conditions are generally referred to as "genetic disorders," single-gene disorders are the most easy to identify as true genetic disorders since they are caused by a mutation (or a change) within a single gene or gene pair.
Combinations of multiple gene and environmental factors leading to mental retardation are called multifactorial disorders. They are inherited but do not share the same inheritance patterns typically found in single-gene disorders. It is unclear exactly why they occur. Their inheritance patterns are usually much more complex than those of single gene disorders because their existence depends on the simultaneous presence of heredity and environmental factors. For example, weight and intelligence are traits inherited in this way (Batshaw, 1992). Other common disorders, including cancer and hypertension, are examples of health problems caused by the environment and heredity. Multifactorial disorders are very common and cause a majority of birth defects. Examples of multifactorial disorders include heart disease, diabetes, spina bifida, anencephaly, cleft lip and cleft palate, clubfoot and congenital heart defects.
How are genetic disorders inherited?
Genetic disorders can be inherited in much the same way a person can inherit other characteristics such as eye and hair color, height and intelligence. Children inherit genetic or hereditary information by obtaining genes from each parent. There are three common types or modes of inheritance: dominant, recessive and X-linked (or sex-linked).
Dominant inheritance occurs when one parent has a dominant, disease-causing gene which causes abnormalities even if coupled with a healthy gene from the other parent. Dominant inheritance means that each child has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disease-causing gene. An example of dominant inheritance associated with mental retardation is tuberous sclerosis.
Recessive inheritance occurs when both parents carry a disease-causing gene but outwardly show no signs of disease. Parents of children with recessive conditions are called "carriers" since each parent carries one copy of a disease gene. They show no symptoms of having a disease gene and remain unaware of having the gene until having an affected child. When parents who are carriers give birth, each child has a 25 percent chance of inheriting both disease genes and being affected. Each child also has a 25 percent chance of inheriting two healthy genes and not being affected, and a 50 percent chance of being a carrier of the disorder, like their parents. Examples of disorders which are inherited recessively and are also associated with mental retardation include phenylketonuria (PKU) and galactosemia.
X-linked or sex-linked inheritance affects those genes located on the X chromosome and can be either X-linked recessive or X-linked dominant. The X-linked recessive disorder, which is much more common compared to X-linked dominant inheritance, is referred to as a sex-linked disorder since it involves genes located on the X chromosome. It occurs when an unaffected mother carries a disease-causing gene on at least one of her X chromosomes. Since females have two X chromosomes, they are usually unaffected carriers because the X chromosome that does not have the disease-causing gene compensates for the X chromosome that does. Therefore, they are less likely than males to show any symptoms of the disorder unless both X chromosomes have the disease-causing gene.
If a mother has a female child, the child has a 50 percent chance to inherit the disease gene and be a carrier and pass the disease gene on to her sons (March of Dimes, 1995). On the other hand, if a mother has a male child, he has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disease-causing gene since he has only one X chromosome. Consequently, males cannot be carriers of X-linked recessive disorders. If a male inherits an X-linked recessive disorder, he is affected. Some examples of X-linked inheritance associated with mental retardation include fragile X syndrome, Hunter syndrome, Lesch Nyhan syndrome and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Can genetic disorders which cause mental retardation be fixed?
In the past, only a few genetic disorders could be detected and treated early enough to prevent disease. However, the Human Genome Project, an international project among scientists to identify all the 60,000 to 100,000 genes within the human body, is significantly increasing our ability to discover more effective therapies and prevent inherited disease (National Center for Human Genome Research, 1995). As more disease-causing genes are identified, scientists can begin developing genetic therapies to alter or replace a defective gene. However, the development of gene therapies is still in the infancy stage.
Gene therapy (also called somatic-cell gene therapy) is a procedure in which "healthy genes" are inserted into individuals to cure or treat an inherited disease or illness. Although there is a role for gene therapy in the prevention of mental retardation, it will most likely benefit only those people who have single-gene disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan disease, Gaucher disease and phenylketonuria (PKU) that cause severe mental retardation (Moser, 1995). Gene therapy is far less likely to provide treatment of mild mental retardation which accounts for 87 percent of all cases of mental retardation (The Arc, 1993).
- AAMR (1992). Mental retardation: Definition, classification, and systems of supports, 9th edition.
- Batshaw, M.L. & Perret, Y.M. (1992). Children with disabilities: A medical primer (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
- Glanze, W. (Ed.). (1996). The signet Mosby medical encyclopedia (revised edition). New York: Penguin Books Ltd.
- Kozma, C. & Stock, J. (1992). "What is mental retardation." In Smith, R.S. Children with Mental Retardation: A Parent's Guide. Maryland: Woodbine House.
- March of Dimes (1995). Birth defects. (Publication No. 09-026-00). White Plains, New York: Author.
- McKusick, V.A. (1994). Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Catalogs of Human Genes and Genetic Disorders. (Eleventh edition). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Moser, H. G. (1995) A role for gene therapy in mental retardation. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews: Gene Therapy, 1, 4-6.
- National Center for Human Genome Research, National Institutes of Health. (1995). The Human Genome Project: From Maps to Medicine (NIH Publication No. 95-3897). Bethesda, MD.
- Scriver, C. R. (1995). The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease. (Seventh edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.

John F. Kennedy said in both his inaugural address and at the time the stamp was issued, "Together let us explore the stars, conquer the deserts, and eradicate disease." Kennedy's invitation and challenge reflected the significance the United States and other nations, eighty of which issued similar stamps, attached to the objective of "A World United Against Malaria."
Its name derived from the Italian for "bad air," malaria has cursed human history for more than 4,000 years. Civilizations had struggled to control it long before 1632, when quinine (cinchona bark) was found to be the first successful treatment.
Malaria has been virtually eradicated in most of North America and Europe thanks to the use of insecticides and environmental management, the very things which have hampered similar efforts in Africa, Asia, Latin and South America.
The 4-cent commemorative Malaria Eradication Stamp was issued March 30, 1962, in Washington, DC. The design depicts the Great Seal of the US and an adaptation of the World Health Organization (WHO) emblem. Charles R. Chickering designed the blue and ocher stamp for the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. All lettering is in sans-serif type, L-type perforations.
The stamp measures 0.84 x 1.44 inches in dimension, arranged horizontally, printed on the Giori presses, issued in panes of fifty with an initial printing of 100 million.
World Health Organization. A Global Strategy for Malaria Control. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1993.
Malaria. (2008). In Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved June 30, 2008, from Encyclopedia Britannica Online.
Postal Bulletin (February 15, 1962).

Radiation Exposure from CT Scans
GIST Support International asked questions about radiation exposure from CT exams to Donald P. Frush, MD of Duke University Medical Center. At Duke Dr. Frush is a Professor of Radiology, a Pediatrics Faculty member, as well as Chief of the Medical Physics Graduate Program, Division of Pediatric Radiology. Dr. Frush’s research interests are predominantly involved with pediatric body multidetector CT, including techniques, assessment of image quality, and radiation dosimetry. Dr. Frush has published very widely and has served as a guest editor and invited reviewer for numerous medical journals. He is currently the associate editor (North American) of the journal Pediatric Radiology.
Here are Dr. Frush's responses to our questions.
1. What is the radiation dose from CT scans of the chest/abdomen/pelvis? How does this compare to chest X-rays and to normal daily-life annual background radiation?
Radiation dose from CT scans of the chest, abdomen, or pelvis varies depending on the individual patient, and the technique used. In general, in adults, most abdomen CTs are performed at approximately 10 mSv. The dose is less for a chest CT. The doses should be the same-to-less, if size adjusted, for children. Head CT doses are generally less than about 2-4 mSv. As a rough approximation, one abdomen pelvis CT in an adult is equal to 100-250 chest x-rays. The average background radiation (just from living…) that individuals get is about 3-3.5 mSv per year.
2.What is the risk to health from quarterly CT scans of the chest/abdomen/pelvis over many years?
The risk of low-level radiation, such as that used in CT, is unknown. There are established scientific data that show that doses > 100-200 mSv have a significant association with the risk of developing cancer but we do not know for sure about doses, such as from infrequent CT, which are under that amount. The risk is either zero or very small. In general, radiologists and healthcare providers should assume that any unnecessary amount of radiation should be avoided and that the benefit of the CT examination (for example the probability of detection of recurrent tumor, or the satisfaction of knowing that there is no recurrence) outweigh the risks (small, at most with CT examinations).
In general, the dose of CT (or any medical radiation, such as an x-ray) is cumulative. That is, 4 examinations at 5.0 mSv each done over three years is the equivalent of 20 mSv of dose (4x5=20). This is accumulated over the lifetime. Similarly, if quarterly abdominal CT scans (at 10 mSv each) were given for 5 years, the cumulative dose would be 4x10x5 mSv = 200 mSv.
3. What is the latency period for development of radiation-induced cancers?
The latency for development of solid tumors can be more than a decade.
4. Is sensitivity to radiation exposure greater in growing children and adolescents in whom tissues are still developing?
When discussing a potential risk of CT scan, the radiation dose risk is higher for children than young adults. While there is no agreed upon age cut-off where the potential risk is zero, generally the younger the patient (i.e. under 30 years of age) the risk is higher due to potential accumulation of multiple CT examinations over a longer lifetime and increase radiation sensitivity of developing tissues, particularly in children. Sensitivity for children is 2-10 times that for adults; most favor the lower part of the range.
5. What strategies exist for minimizing the radiation dose in CT scans by altering the technique or settings?
There are multiple strategies for minimizing radiation risks. First, when imaging is necessary, imaging evaluation considerations should be those that have the least amount of risk, including radiation. For example, if MR imaging (or sonography) will answer the question, then these should be performed. MR may not be the best evaluation, for example if lung parenchyma needs to be assessed. The decision about the type of frequency of examinations needs to come from a discussion between the individual patient and the healthcare team caring for the patient.
When a CT is indicated, only as much radiation as is necessary for evaluation should be used. For example, protocols should based on patient size in the pediatric population. Only the necessary region should be scanned, and repeat scans through the area during the CT examination (multiphase examinations) should be minimized in frequency. Additional technical considerations for certain regions need to be considered, such as slightly lower dose to the chest as opposed to the abdomen during CT examinations.
6. Can MRI yield equally useful images to monitor growth or shrinkage or density change of existing tumors, and to detect new metastases in the liver and peritoneum? Are there any disadvantages of MRI?
MR examination of the abdomen and pelvis is often an excellent modality for detecting solid organ tumors, as well as tumors elsewhere in the abdomen. The decision about whether this type of study needs to be performed versus a CT, again, needs to be arrived at through discussions between the healthcare team and the patient.

Introduction to basic grammatical concepts and terminology. Specifically intended for students planning to take a foreign language or linguistics. Does not count toward the linguistics major or minor.
This course introduces fundamentals of grammar, with primary emphasis on description of English. We will discuss parts of speech, the structure of phrases (modifiers and complements), the components of clauses (subject and predicate), types of clauses, types of subordination, and constructions which vary the order or relations of words, such as passive voice. The course also discusses common differences between languages with respect to basic phenomena such as word order, how questions are formed, agreement, tenses, and so forth. The primary goals of the course are: first, to bring to the studentís awareness the fact that many properties of all languages can be described in terms of a limited set of basic concepts, and second, to develop the studentís skill in analyzing sentences, using English as an example.
Requirements include timely completion of homeworks, at least one midterm and a final exam.
Student learning goals
General method of instruction
Class assignments and grading

Extremely obese women may not need to gain as much weight during pregnancy as current guidelines suggest, according to a new study presented today at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine annual meeting.
Severely obese women who gained less than the recommended amount of weight during the second and third trimester of pregnancy suffered no ill effects, nor did their babies. In contrast, obese and non-obese women who gained less weight in the second and third trimester had undesirable outcomes, including a higher likelihood of delivering a baby that is small for gestational age – smaller than the usual weight for the number of weeks of pregnancy.
"The study suggests that even the recommended amounts of weight gain might be more than is needed for the most obese women," said Eva Pressman, M.D., director of Maternal Fetal Medicine at the University of Rochester Medical Center.
In 2009, the Institute of Medicine released new guidelines for how much weight a woman should gain during pregnancy, taking into account changes in the population, particularly the increase in the number of women of childbearing age who are overweight and obese.
"At some point, there may be even more tailored guidelines than what exists right now for women with different levels of obesity," said Danielle Durie, M.D., M.P.H, lead study author from the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Medical Center.
The study sought to determine the impact of weight gain outside recommended ranges during the second and third trimester of pregnancy on women and their babies. Women were grouped according to pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) as underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese classes I, II, and III. Obese classes II and III include women considered severely and morbidly obese.
Gaining less weight than recommended in the second and third trimester was associated with increased likelihood of having a baby that is small for gestational age in all BMI groups except obese class II and III. Gaining more weight than recommended in the second and third trimester was associated with increased likelihood of having a baby that is large for gestational age in all BMI groups.
Newborns that are very large or very small may experience problems during delivery and afterwards. Small babies may have decreased oxygen levels, low blood sugar and difficulty maintaining a normal body temperature. Large babies often make delivery more difficult and may result in the need for a cesarean delivery, which increases the risk of infection, respiratory complications, the need for additional surgeries and results in longer recovery times for the mother.
In addition to weight gain rates outside the recommended ranges, increasing BMI alone was associated with negative outcomes for mothers and newborns as well. For all BMI groups above normal weight, the likelihood of cesarean delivery, induction of labor and gestational diabetes increased.
The study included 73,977 women who gave birth to a single child in the Finger Lakes Region of New York between January 2004 and December 2008. Of the study participants, 4 percent were underweight, 48 percent normal weight, 24 percent overweight and 24 percent obese (13 percent class I, 6 percent class II and 5 percent class III).
Researchers from Rochester also reported that overweight and obese women undergoing labor induction may benefit from higher doses of oxytocin, a medication used to induce labor by causing contractions. They tested the effectiveness of two oxytocin protocols – one including a lower dose every 45 minutes and another using a slightly higher dose every half hour – in women based on BMI.
Overweight and obese women administered the lower, less frequent dose were less likely to deliver vaginally – the preferred method of delivery – than overweight and obese women administered the higher, more frequent dose.
"If you give more oxytocin to overweight and obese patients they may be more likely to delivery vaginally, which is what we want, as opposed to having a cesarean section, which can introduce more complications," according to Pressman, an author of the study. "The study is important because the effect of BMI on induction has not been well described before."
The oxytocin protocols tested in the study are relatively standard and were used to induce labor in nearly 500 women who delivered at the University of Rochester Medical Center between October 2007 and September 2008. Study participants were induced for a variety of reasons, including going a week or more past the estimated due date, when there is no longer any benefit to the fetus from remaining inside the womb.
In addition to Pressman and Durie, David Hackney, M.D., and Nigel Campbell, M.D., also participated in the oxytocin research. Christopher Glantz, M.D., M.P.H, and Loralei Thornburg, M.D., contributed to the research on weight gain during the second and third trimester of pregnancy. Both studies were funded by the University of Rochester Medical Center.
AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert! system.

- Special Sections
- Public Notices
CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) — The world's biggest extraterrestrial explorer, NASA's Curiosity rover, rocketed toward Mars on Saturday on a search for evidence that the red planet might once have been home to itsy-bitsy life.
It will take 8½ months for Curiosity to reach Mars following a journey of 354 million miles.
An unmanned Atlas V rocket hoisted the rover, officially known as Mars Science Laboratory, into a cloudy late morning sky. A Mars frenzy gripped the launch site, with more than 13,000 guests jamming the space center for NASA's first launch to Earth's next-door neighbor in four years, and the first send-off of a Martian rover in eight years.
NASA astrobiologist Pan Conrad, whose carbon compound-seeking instrument is on the rover, had a shirt custom made for the occasion. Her bright blue, short-sleeve blouse was emblazoned with rockets, planets and the words, "Next stop Mars!"
Conrad jumped and cheered as the rocket blasted off a few miles away.
"It's amazing," she said, "and it's a huge relief to see it all going up in the same direction."
The 1-ton Curiosity — as large as a car — is a mobile, nuclear-powered laboratory holding 10 science instruments that will sample Martian soil and rocks, and analyze them right on the spot. There's a drill as well as a stone-zapping laser machine.
It's "really a rover on steroids," said NASA's Colleen Hartman, assistant associate administrator for science. "It's an order of magnitude more capable than anything we have ever launched to any planet in the solar system."
The primary goal of the $2.5 billion mission is to see whether cold, dry, barren Mars might have been hospitable for microbial life once upon a time — or might even still be conducive to life now. No actual life detectors are on board; rather, the instruments will hunt for organic compounds.
Curiosity's 7-foot arm has a jackhammer on the end to drill into the Martian red rock, and the 7-foot mast on the rover is topped with high-definition and laser cameras. No previous Martian rover has been so sophisticated or capable.
With Mars the ultimate goal for astronauts, NASA also will use Curiosity to measure radiation at the red planet. The rover also has a weather station on board that will provide temperature, wind and humidity readings; a computer software app with daily weather updates is planned.
The world has launched more than three dozen missions to the ever-alluring Mars, which is more like Earth than the other solar-system planets. Yet fewer than half those quests have succeeded.
Just two weeks ago, a Russian spacecraft ended up stuck in orbit around Earth, rather than en route to the Martian moon Phobos.
"Mars really is the Bermuda Triangle of the solar system," Hartman said. "It's the death planet, and the United States of America is the only nation in the world that has ever landed and driven robotic explorers on the surface of Mars, and now we're set to do it again."
Curiosity's arrival next August will be particularly hair-raising.
In a spacecraft first, the rover will be lowered onto the Martian surface via a jet pack and tether system similar to the sky cranes used to lower heavy equipment into remote areas on Earth.
Curiosity is too heavy to use air bags like its much smaller predecessors, Spirit and Opportunity, did in 2004. Besides, this new way should provide for a more accurate landing.
Astronauts will need to make similarly precise landings on Mars one day.
Curiosity will spend a minimum of two years roaming around Gale Crater, chosen as the landing site because it's rich in minerals. Scientists said if there is any place on Mars that might have been ripe for life, it would be there.
"I like to say it's extraterrestrial real estate appraisal," Conrad said with a chuckle earlier in the week.
The rover — 10 feet long and 9 feet wide — should be able to go farther and work harder than any previous Mars explorer because of its power source: 10.6 pounds of radioactive plutonium. The nuclear generator was encased in several protective layers in case of a launch accident.
NASA expects to put at least 12 miles on the odometer, once the rover sets down on the Martian surface.
This is the third astronomical mission to be launched from Cape Canaveral by NASA since the retirement of the venerable space shuttle fleet this summer. The Juno probe is en route to Jupiter, and twin spacecraft named Grail will arrive at Earth's moon on New Year's Eve and Day.
NASA hails this as the year of the solar system.

Depending on a building’s size, location, amount of thermal insulation, and energy costs, a reflective coating can provide energy savings by reducing a building’s cooling loads. While each building obviously is different, a typical building located in a southern climate with large enough roof area and minimal amounts of insulation will generate energy savings. in many cases, these savings can be sufficient to pay back the coating installation cost in five to seven years.
Weighing the Options
Elastomeric coatings seem to encompass an even wider variety of base materials than bituminous coatings. Base materials include latex, acrylic, Hypalon, neoprene, silicone, urethane, and hybrid materials.
Manufacturers regularly introduce new types of coatings. Elastomeric coatings are compatible with most types of roof systems, but managers use them most on single-ply systems, spray-applied polyurethane foam, and metal roofs. Managers also can specify elastomeric coatings for use on most built-up and modified bitumen systems.
Matching Coatings and Needs
Selecting the appropriate coating product requires research into available products offered in the area, their advantages and disadvantages, potential energy savings, their compatibility with the roofing system to be coated. Nothing is more discouraging than watching a coating – and energy savings – flake off after a few short months because the coating was not compatible with the roof.
Adhesion is paramount. Coatings that do not adhere to the roof will not perform. Reflective is the method by which the coating provides energy savings. If the reflectivity fades, so goes the energy savings. The ability to withstand anticipated events is important to coating longevity.
One final thing managers need to consider in selecting a roof coating is compliance with regulations governing volatile organic compounds(VOC). Most coatings are manufactured with solvents. Depending on the building’s location and the applicable VOC-compliant coating might be required.
As energy costs rise, more managers will look to coatings as one way to decrease cooling loads and reduce energy costs. Proven performance is the key to a good coating, and the only way to truly verify performance is to visit similar local projects.
Coating manufacturers whose products comply with the provisions of the Energy Star program are good starting points in selecting a coating that can reduce peak cooling demand by 10-15 percent.
*Curtis L. Liscum, RRC – is a Registered Roof Consultant and senior consultant with Benchmark Inc. – a nationwide roof and pavement consulting firm based in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. He has more than 20 years of experience as a roof consultant.

- Digital Programs
Hidden in the Walls: The Time Capsule from San Francisco's Lost Sanctuary
On view:Wednesday, January 1, 2003 - Thursday, January 1, 2004
In 2003, the Judah L. Magnes Museum and the Jewish Museum San Francisco worked together to create an exhibition around a recently uncovered time capsule found in an old temple on Bush Street.
The Magnes Museum exhibit highlighted the building's changing role in San Francisco. It was built in 1895 as a synagogue for Ohabai Shalome, a Reform congregation. The temple closed in 1934, and the building became home to an African-American Baptist church, a Zen Buddhist mission, and now is an assisted-living facility for Japanese-American seniors.

In January I wrote an essay for Cyborgology on the subject of technological autonomy and its implications for the environment. There’s no more important dynamic when it comes to understanding our relationship with machines and where they’re taking us.
Technological autonomy is shorthand for the idea that, once advanced technologies pass a certain stage of development, we lose our ability to control them. I generally use the phrase “de facto technological autonomy” to underscore that what’s being talked about is a loss of practical rather than literal control. Loss of practical control occurs for a number of reasons, among them the fact that the economies of modern societies have come to depend, completely, on various technologies. Remove those technologies and the economies collapse.
A striking example of this is the dilemma facing Japan as it contemplates whether to resume its dependence on nuclear energy in the wake of the post-tsunami meltdowns at the Fukushima Daiichi reactors last year.
Since the meltdowns, operations at all the nation’s 54 nuclear reactors have been gradually suspended. Public concern has kept the plants offline despite increasingly strident warnings from officials there that without them the nation faces (as one publication put it) an “energy death spiral.” The threat is that without power sufficient to supply its manufacturing needs, Japan’s largest employers will be forced to abandon domestic production, initiating a process of “deindustrialization” that would cripple the economy. These concerns are exacerbated by uncertainties regarding international oil supplies and the prognosis that this coming summer may be unusually hot, prompting a spike in energy demands.
The dilemma is an excruciating one. The nation’s citizens are essentially being told that they must welcome back into their midst an industry that’s made whole towns uninhabitable and that’s undermined confidence in their food supply, not to mention their officials. The alternative is widespread unemployment and poverty. In other words, while it’s literally possible to shut down the reactors permanently, practically speaking Japan may have no choice but to turn them back on. That’s de facto technological autonomy.
Global warming doubles the bind. Without the reactors, Japan will make up some of its energy deficit with fossil fuels, thereby increasing its emissions of greenhouse gases.
Japan’s distinction is that the tsunami has forced it to confront the issue of technological autonomy sooner than other industrialized countries. Their time (our time) will come.
This post is also available on Doug Hills personal blog: The Question Concerning Technology.

Minimizing Exposure at Work
All pesticides have some level of risk. If you work with pesticides like herbicides, insecticides, or cleaning products containing antimicrobials on a regular basis, your risk is greater because your exposure is greater. Even though some pesticides may not make you sick on a daily basis, long-term (chronic) exposure to certain pesticides may increase your risk of chronic health effects. Therefore, it is important to take steps to reduce your risk by minimizing your exposure to all the pesticides you work with.
Tips for reducing pesticide risks at work (and at home):
- Always follow the label. The directions on a pesticide label are there to protect you and others from becoming over-exposed.
- Consider using the least toxic methods of pest control to get the job done. Integrated Pest Management options can be less costly and more effective than traditional chemical control.
- Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) can be uncomfortable to wear, but it can protect you from being over-exposed. Read the label to find the appropriate PPE or contact your state lead pesticide agency for help.
- Inspect your PPE to make sure it will do its job effectively. Check for signs of cracking, swelling, stiffness, sponginess, or any change of color in the rubber or plastic of your PPE.
- Frequently washing the pesticide off your chemical resistant clothes, like aprons, boots and gloves, can minimize your exposure and help your equipment last longer. Cleaning this kind of PPE at work may reduce your family's exposure.
- Wear your PPE when you are mixing, loading, or when you are cleaning the equipment. Consider bringing an extra set of clothes to change into at work in case you get pesticides on your clothes.
- Remove your shoes before entering your house, take a shower immediately and clean work clothes properly to reduce your family's exposure.
- If you want to report a workplace concern, call NPIC or contact your local regulatory agency or OSHA contacts.
If you have questions about this, or any pesticide-related topic, please call NPIC at 1-800-858-7378 (7:30am-3:30pm PST), or email us at email@example.com.
- Washing Pesticide Work Clothing - California Department of Pesticide Regulation
- Chemical Resistant Clothing Guide - Oregon OSHA
- Personal Protective Equipment: EPA Chemical Resistance Category Chart - Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
- Coveralls, Gloves and Other Skin Protection Guide - Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
- Eye Protection Guide - Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
- What You Need to Know about Protecting Yourself From Pesticides - Pennsylvania State University Cooperative Extension
- Personal Protective Equipment for Working With Pesticides - University of Missouri Extension
- Respiratory Protective Devices for Pesticides - Pennsylvania State University Cooperative Extension
- Occupational Chemical Database - Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
- Preventing worker illness from indoor pesticide exposure - California Department of Public Health

Many people do not eat after exercise because they might not be hungry or don’t have time, but nourishing the body with nutrients post-exercise is a good habit to practice.
Studies have shown that the 60 minutes following exercise is the optimal time to eat carbohydrate-rich foods and drinks. It is the “Golden Hour” when the muscles absorb the most nutrients and when glycogen, an energy reserve in your muscles, is replaced most efficiently. The carbs replenish the used-up energy that is normally stored as glycogen in muscle and in the liver.
Protein is also important in post-exercise nutrition because it aids in recovery to build back the muscles that were fatigued during exercise. Most experts suggest a post exercise meal consisting of protein and carbohydrates.

By Grace Rubenstein
We think of domestic violence as something that happens among adults. But as some young survivors from Contra Costa County recently told me, abuse is also alarmingly common between teen boyfriends and girlfriends.
Evidence has been growing that it starts even younger than we previously imagined. A study published in March surveyed more than 1,400 seventh graders of diverse races. More than one in three reported being psychologically abused by a boyfriend or girlfriend within the past six months. Nearly one in three reported experiencing physical dating violence within the same timeframe.
Their average age? 12.
The study was commissioned by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Blue Shield of California.
Revelations like that are slowly making the long-hidden problem of teen dating abuse more visible – especially at schools, ground zero for teen romance. Shocking events like the murder of 17-year-old Cindi Santana, stabbed by her ex-boyfriend on campus at her Los Angeles high school last September, have put the issue more on the radar.
“The difference between domestic violence and teen relationship violence is that school is often the platform for teen relationship violence, so there’s an even greater urgency for schools and policymakers to address it,” Los Angeles Unified School District board member Steve Zimmer told me in a recent phone interview.
Research also shows that people’s relationship habits are laid down early, and the effects of childhood abuse can last a lifetime. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report [PDF] that among adult women who suffer rape, physical violence or stalking, 22 percent experienced their first incident of abuse between ages 11 and 17.
Schools are a pivotal place for prevention. Yet so far, only two California school districts – Oakland and Los Angeles – have explicit policies on dating violence, according to the California Partnership to End Domestic Violence. (Oakland’s passed in 2006. Los Angeles adopted its policy last October, but it was in the works before Cindi Santana’s murder.)
Contra Costa County is mounting a countywide effort and hopes some of its school districts will be next. A bill by California Assembly Member Ricardo Lara (D – Bell Gardens) that would have required middle and high schools to spell out teen dating abuse policies in their safety plans recently stalled in a state Senate committee.
At the same time, recent research [PDF] shows that the classic prevention tactic – classroom lessons – by itself is not enough. To really change teens’ behavior, you have to change their environment. The CPEDV is leading a statewide campaign to get more schools to do this.
“If you look a the ecology of things, not one single intervention is going to do it. It’s got to be all these multitudes,” said Sharon Turner, regional director of the nonprofit STAND! for Families Free of Violence in Contra Costa County. “You need policy. You need conversations happening in the community about these things. You need visual reminders. You need the jargon and slogans about it. You need the social media piece.”
The LAUSD policy calls for a designated coordinator at each middle and high school to arrange for education on healthy relationships, awareness efforts, and intervention when abuse does occur. These coordinators would also reach out to parents and arrange ongoing training for school staff.
Zimmer, a key architect of the policy, said the training is critical. Without it, schools may mistakenly treat abuse as simply bad behavior that needs punishment, when in fact it’s a complex pattern that needs a more holistic intervention. Plus, untrained staff members may not know how to respond to reports of abuse.
“Without a protocol to deal with it, you do have moments of confusion that can become very dangerous for a child,” Zimmer said.
Yet even the communities most committed to preventing teen dating violence are running up against a hard wall: money. LAUSD’s policy, for the moment, exists only on paper. To fully implement it would cost about $2 million a year. There’s no spare money in the district budget, and Zimmer has struggled to get outside donations.
Compared to academics, he said, “I’ve had a really hard time convincing folks that this is as important as any performance metric or evaluation tool.”

Submitted by brad on Fri, 2009-06-12 13:49.
Our world has not rid itself of atrocity and genocide. What can modern high-tech do to help? In Bosnia, we used bombs. In Rwanda, we did next to nothing. In Darfur, very little. Here’s a proposal that seems expensive at first, but is in fact vastly cheaper than the military solutions people have either tried or been afraid to try. It’s the sunlight principle.
First, we would mass-produce a special video recording “phone” using the standard parts and tools of the cell phone industry. It would be small, light, and rechargeable from a car lighter plug, or possibly more slowly through a small solar cell on the back. It would cost a few hundred dollars to make, so that relief forces could airdrop tens or even hundreds of thousands of them over an area where atrocity is taking place. (If they are $400/pop, even 100,000 of them is 40 million dollars, a drop in the bucket compared to the cost of military operations.) They could also be smuggled in by relief workers on a smaller scale, or launched over borders in a pinch. Enough of them so that there are so many that anybody performing an atrocity will have to worry that there is a good chance that somebody hiding in bushes or in a house is recording it, and recording their face. This fear alone would reduce what took place.
Once the devices had recorded a video, they would need to upload it. It seems likely that in these situations the domestic cell system would not be available, or would be shut down to stop video uploads. However, that might not be true, and a version that uses existing cell systems might make sense, and be cheaper because the hardware is off the shelf. It is more likely that some other independent system would be used, based on the same technology but with slightly different protocols.
The anti-atrocity team would send aircraft over the area. These might be manned aircraft (presuming air superiority) or they might be very light, autonomous UAVs of the sort that already are getting cheap in price. These UAVs can be small, and not that high-powered, because they don’t need to do that much transmitting — just a beacon and a few commands and ACKs. The cameras on the ground will do the transmitting. In fact, the UAVs could quite possibly be balloons, again within the budget of aid organizations, not just nations. read more »
Submitted by brad on Sat, 2009-04-18 19:37.
My prior post about USB charging hubs in hotel rooms brought up the issue of security, as was the case for my hope for a world with bluetooth keyboards scattered around.
Is it possible to design our computers to let them connect to untrusted devices? Clearly to a degree, in that an ethernet connection is generally always untrusted. But USB was designed to be fully trusted, and that limits it.
Perhaps in the future, an OS can be designed to understand the difference between trusted and untrusted devices connected (wired or wirelessly) to a computer or phone. This might involve a different physical interface, or using the same physical interface, but a secure protocol by which devices can be identified (and then recognized when plugged in again) and tagged once as trusted the first time they are plugged in.
For example, an unknown keyboard is a risky thing to plug in. It could watch you type and remember passwords, or it could simply send fake keys to your computer to get it to install trojan software completely taking it over. But we might allow an untrusted keyboard to type plain text into our word processors or E-mail applications. However, we would have to switch to the trusted keyboard (which might just be a touch-screen keyboard on a phone or tablet) for anything dangerous, including of course entry of passwords, URLs and commands that go beyond text entry. Would this be tolerable, constantly switching like this, or would we just get used to it? We would want to mount the inferior keyboard very close to our comfy but untrusted one.
A mouse has the same issues. We might allow an untrusted mouse to move the pointer within a text entry window and to go to a set of menus that can’t do anything harmful on the machine, but would it drive us crazy to have to move to a different pointer to move out of the application? Alas, an untrusted mouse can (particularly if it waits until you are not looking) run applications, even bring up the on-screen keyboard most OSs have for the disabled, and then do anything with your computer.
It’s easier to trust output devices, like a printer. In fact, the main danger with plugging in an unknown USB printer is that a really nasty one might pretend to be a keyboard or CD-Rom to infect you. A peripheral bus that allows a device to only be an output device would be safer. Of course an untrusted printer could still record what you print.
An untrusted screen is a challenge. While mostly safe, one can imagine attacks. An untrusted screen might somehow get you to go to a special web-site. There, it might display something else, perhaps logins for a bank or other site so that it might capture the keys. Attacks here are difficult but not impossible, if I can control what you see. It might be important to have the trusted screen nearby somehow helping you to be sure the untrusted screen is being good. This is a much more involved attack than the simple attacks one can do by pretending to be a keyboard.
An untrusted disk (including a USB thumb drive) is actually today’s biggest risk. People pass around thumb drives all the time, and they can pretend to be auto-run CD-roms. In addition, we often copy files from them, and double click on files on them, which is risky. The OS should never allow code to auto-run from an untrusted disk, and should warn if files are double-clicked from them. Of course, even then you are not safe from traps inside the files themselves, even if the disk is just being a disk. Many companies try to establish very tight firewalls but it’s all for naught if they allow people to plug external drives and thumbsticks into the computers. Certain types of files (such as photos) are going to be safer than others (like executables and word processor files with macros or scripts.) Digital cameras, which often look like drives, are a must, and can probably be trusted to hand over jpegs and other image and video files.
A network connection is one of the things you can safely plug in. After all, a network connection should always be viewed as hostile, even one behind a firewall.
There is a risk in declaring a device trusted, for example, such as your home keyboard. It might be compromised later, and there is not much you can do about that. A common trick today is to install a key-logger in somebody’s keyboard to snoop on them. This is done not just by police but by suspicious spouses and corporate spies. Short of tamper-proof hardware and encryption, this is a difficult problem. For now, that’s too much cost to add to consumer devices.
Still, it sure would be nice to be able to go to a hotel and use their keyboard, mouse and monitor. It might be worth putting up with having to constantly switch back to get full sized input devices on computers that are trying to get smaller and smaller. But it would also require rewriting of a lot of software, since no program could be allowed to take input from an untrusted device unless it has been modified to understand such a protocol. For example, your e-mail program would need to be modified to declare that a text input box allows untrusted input. This gets harder in web browsing — each web page would need to have to declare, in its input boxes, whether untrusted input was allowed.
As a starter, however, the computer could come with a simple “clipboard editor” which brings up a box in which one can type and edit with untrusted input devices. Then, one could copy the edited text to the OS clipboard and, using the trusted mouse or keyboard, paste it into any application of choice. You could always get back to the special editing windows using the untrusted keyboard and mouse, you would have to use the trusted ones to leave that window. Cumbersome, but not as cumbersome as typing a long e-mail on an iPhone screen.
Submitted by brad on Thu, 2009-03-05 00:35.
I’m looking at you Ubuntu.
For some time now, the standard form for distributing a free OS (ie. Linux, *BSD) has been as a CD-ROM or DVD ISO file. You burn it to a CD, and you can boot and install from that, and also use the disk as a live CD.
There are a variety of pages with instructions on how to convert such an ISO into a bootable flash drive, and scripts and programs for linux and even for windows — for those installing linux on a windows box.
And these are great and I used one to make a bootable Ubuntu stick on my last install. And wow! It’s such a much nicer, faster experience compared to using CD that it’s silly to use CD on any system that can boot from a USB drive, and that’s most modern systems. With a zero seek time, it is much nicer.
So I now advocate going the other way. Give me a flash image I can dd to my flash drive, and a tool to turn that into an ISO if I need an ISO.
This has a number of useful advantages:
- I always want to try the live CD before installing, to make sure the hardware works in the new release. In fact, I even do that before upgrading most of the time.
- Of course, you don’t have old obsolete CDs lying around.
- Jumping to 1 gigabyte allows putting more on the distribution, including some important things that are missing these days, such as drivers and mdadm (the RAID control program.)
- Because flash is a dynamic medium, the install can be set up so that the user can, after copying the base distro, add files to the flash drive, such as important drivers — whatever they choose. An automatic script could even examine a machine and pull down new stuff that’s needed.
- You get a much faster and easier to use “rescue stick.”
- It’s easier to carry around.
- No need for an “alternate install” and perhaps easier as well to have the upgrader use the USB stick as a cache of packages during upgrades.
- At this point these things are really cheap. People give them away. You could sell them. This technique would also work for general external USB drives, or even plain old internal hard drives temporarily connected to a new machine being built if boot from USB is not practical. Great and really fast for eSata.
- Using filesystems designed not to wear out flash, the live stick can have a writable partition for /tmp, installed packages and modifications (with some security risk if you run untrusted code.)
Submitted by brad on Sat, 2009-02-14 19:34.
Product recalls have been around for a while. You get a notice in the mail. You either go into a dealer at some point, any point, for service, or you swap the product via the mail. Nicer recalls mail you a new product first and then you send in the old one, or sign a form saying you destroyed it. All well and good. Some recalls are done as “hidden warranties.” They are never announced, but if you go into the dealer with a problem they just fix it for free, long after the regular warranty, or fix it while working on something else. These usually are for items that don’t involve safety or high liability.
Today I had my first run-in with a recall of a connected electronic product. I purchased an “EyeFi” card for my sweetie for valentines day. This is an SD memory card with an wifi transmitter in it. You take pictures, and it stores them until it encounters a wifi network it knows. It then uploads the photos to your computer or to photo sharing sites. All sounds very nice.
When she put in the card and tried to initialize it, up popped a screen. “This card has a defect. Please give us your address and we’ll mail you a new one, and you can mail back the old one, and we’ll give you a credit in our store for your trouble.” All fine, but the product refused to let her register and use the product. We can’t even use the product for a few days to try it out (knowing it may lose photos.) What if I wanted to try it out to see if I was going to return it to the store. No luck. I could return it to the store as-is, but that’s work and may just get another one on the recall list.
This shows us the new dimension of the electronic recall. The product was remotely disabled to avoid liability for the company. We had no option to say, “Let us use the card until the new one arrives, we agree that it might fail or lose pictures.” For people who already had the card, I don’t know if it shut them down (possibly leaving them with no card) or let them continue with it. You have to agree on the form that you will not use the card any more.
This can really put a damper on a gift, when it refuses to even let you do a test the day you get it.
With electronic recall, all instances of a product can be shut down. This is similar to problems that people have had with automatic “upgrades” that actually remove features (like adding more DRM) or which fix you jailbreaking your iPhone. You don’t own the product any more. Companies are very worried about liability. They will “do the safe thing” which is shut their product down rather than let you take a risk. With other recalls, things happened on your schedule. You were even able to just decide not to do the recall. The company showed it had tried its best to convince you to do it, and could feel satisfied for having tried.
This is one of the risks I list in my essays on robocars. If a software flaw is found in a robocar (or any other product with physical risk) there will be pressure to “recall” the software and shut down people’s cars. Perhaps in extreme cases while they are driving on the street! The liability of being able to shut down the cars and not doing so once you are aware of a risk could result in huge punitive damages under the current legal system. So you play it safe.
But if people find their car shutting down because of some very slight risk, they will start wondering if they even want a car that can do that. Or even a memory card. Only with public pressure will we get the right to say, “I will take my own responsibility. You’ve informed me, I will decide when to take the product offline to get it fixed.”
Submitted by brad on Mon, 2008-09-29 22:40.
Most of us have had to stand in a long will-call line to pick up tickets. We probably even paid a ticket “service fee” for the privilege. Some places are helping by having online printable tickets with a bar code. However, that requires that they have networked bar code readers at the gate which can detect things like duplicate bar codes, and people seem to rather have giant lines and many staff rather than get such machines.
Can we do it better?
Well, for starters, it would be nice if tickets could be sent not as a printable bar code, but as a message to my cell phone. Perhaps a text message with coded string, which I could then display to a camera which does OCR of it. Same as a bar code, but I can actually get it while I am on the road and don’t have a printer. And I’m less likely to forget it.
Or let’s go a bit further and have a downloadable ticket application on the phone. The ticket application would use bluetooth and a deliberately short range reader. I would go up to the reader, and push a button on the cell phone, and it would talk over bluetooth with the ticket scanner and authenticate the use of my ticket. The scanner would then show a symbol or colour and my phone would show that symbol/colour to confirm to the gate staff that it was my phone that synced. (Otherwise it might have been the guy in line behind me.) The scanner would be just an ordinary laptop with bluetooth. You might be able to get away with just one (saving the need for networking) because it would be very fast. People would just walk by holding up their phones, and the gatekeeper would look at the screen of the laptop (hidden) and the screen of the phone, and as long as they matched wave through the number of people it shows on the laptop screen.
Alternately you could put the bluetooth antenna in a little faraday box to be sure it doesn’t talk to any other phone but the one in the box. Put phone in box, light goes on, take phone out and proceed.
One reason many will-calls are slow is they ask you to show ID, often your photo-ID or the credit card used to purchase the item. But here’s an interesting idea. When I purchase the ticket online, let me offer an image file with a photo. It could be my photo, or it could be the photo of the person I am buying the tickets for. It could be 3 photos if any one of those 3 people can pick up the ticket. You do not need to provide your real name, just the photo. The will call system would then inkjet print the photos on the outside of the envelope containing your tickets.
You do need some form of name or code, so the agent can find the envelope, or type the name in the computer to see the records. When the agent gets the envelope, identification will be easy. Look at the photo on the envelope, and see if it’s the person at the ticket window. If so, hand it over, and you’re done! No need to get out cards or hand them back and forth.
A great company to implement this would be paypal. I could pay with paypal, not revealing my name (just an E-mail address) and paypal could have a photo stored, and forward it on to the ticket seller if I check the box to do this. The ticket seller never knows my name, just my picture. You may think it’s scary for people to get your picture, but in fact it’s scarier to give them your name. They can collect and share data with you under your name. Your picture is not very useful for this, at least not yet, and if you like you can use one of many different pictures each time — you can’t keep using different names if you need to show ID.
This could still be done with credit cards. Many credit cards offer a “virtual credit card number” system which will generate one-time card numbers for online transactions. They could set these up so you don’t have to offer a real name or address, just the photo. When picking up the item, all you need is your face.
This doesn’t work if it’s an over-21 venue, alas. They still want photo ID, but they only need to look at it, they don’t have to record the name.
It would be more interesting if one could design a system so that people can find their own ticket envelopes. The guard would let you into the room with the ticket envelopes, and let you find yours, and then you can leave by showing your face is on the envelope. The problem is, what if you also palmed somebody else’s envelope and then claimed yours, or said you couldn’t find yours? That needs a pretty watchful guard which doesn’t really save on staff as we’re hoping. It might be possible to have the tickets in a series of closed boxes. You know your box number (it was given to you, or you selected it in advance) so you get your box and bring it to the gate person, who opens it and pulls out your ticket for you, confirming your face. Then the box is closed and returned. Make opening the boxes very noisy.
I also thought that for Burning Man, which apparently had a will-call problem this year, you could just require all people fetching their ticket be naked. For those not willing, they could do regular will-call where the ticket agent finds the envelope. :-)
I’ve noted before that, absent the need of the TSA to know all our names, this is how boarding passes should work. You buy a ticket, provide a photo of the person who is to fly, and the gate agent just looks to see if the face on the screen is the person flying, no need to get out ID, or tell the airline your name.
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2008-05-27 20:49.
Hard disks fail. If you prepared properly, you have a backup, or you swap out disks when they first start reporting problems. If you prepare really well you have offsite backup (which is getting easier and easier to do over the internet.)
One way to protect yourself from disk failures is RAID, especially RAID-5. With RAID, several disks act together as one. The simplest protecting RAID, RAID-1, just has 2 disks which work in parallel, known as mirroring. Everything you write is copied to both. If one fails, you still have the other, with all your data. It’s good, but twice as expensive.
RAID-5 is cleverer. It uses 3 or more disks, and uses error correction techniques so that you can store, for example, 2 disks worth of data on 3 disks. So it’s only 50% more expensive. RAID-5 can be done with many more disks — for example with 5 disks you get 4 disks worth of data, and it’s only 25% more expensive. However, having 5 disks is beyond most systems and has its own secret risk — if 2 of the 5 disks fail at once — and this does happen — you lose all 4 disks worth of data, not just 2 disks worth. (RAID-6 for really large arrays of disks, survives 2 failures but not 3.)
Now most people who put in RAID do it for more than data protection. After all, good sysadmins are doing regular backups. They do it because with RAID, the computer doesn’t even stop when a disk fails. You connect up a new disk live to the computer (which you can do with some systems) and it is recreated from the working disks, and you never miss a beat. This is pretty important with a major server.
But RAID has value to those who are not in the 99.99% uptime community. Those who are not good at doing manual backups, but who want to be protected from the inevitable disk failures. Today it is hard to set up, or expensive, or both. There are some external boxes like the “readynas” that make it reasonably easy for external disks, but they don’t have the bandwidth to be your full time disks.
RAID-5 on old IDE systems was hard, they usually could truly talk to only 2 disks at a time. The new SATA bus is much better, as many motherboards have 4 connectors, though soon one will be required by blu-ray drives. read more »
Submitted by brad on Thu, 2008-05-15 13:56.
Recently we at the EFF have been trying to fight new rulings about the power of U.S. customs. Right now, it’s been ruled they can search your laptop, taking a complete copy of your drive, even if they don’t have the normally required reasons to suspect you of a crime. The simple fact that you’re crossing the border gives them extraordinary power.
We would like to see that changed, but until then what can be done? You can use various software to encrypt your hard drive — there are free packages like truecrypt, and many laptops come with this as an option — but most people find having to enter a password every time you boot to be a pain. And customs can threaten to detain you until you give them the password.
There are some tricks you can pull, like having a special inner-drive with a second password that they don’t even know to ask about. You can put your most private data there. But again, people don’t use systems with complex UIs unless they feel really motivated.
What we need is a system that is effectively transparent most of the time. However, you could take special actions when going through customs or otherwise having your laptop be out of your control. read more »
Submitted by brad on Sat, 2008-05-10 18:46.
It seems that half the programs I try and install under Windows want to have a “daemon” process with them, which is to say a portion of the program that is always running and which gets a little task-tray icon from which it can be controlled. Usually they want to also be run at boot time. In Windows parlance this is called a service.
There are too many of them, and they don’t all need to be there. Microsoft noticed this, and started having Windows detect if task tray icons were too static. If they are it hides them. This doesn’t work very well — they even hide their own icon for removing hardware, which of course is going to be static most of the time. And of course some programs now play games to make their icons appear non-static so they will stay visible. A pointless arms race.
All these daemons eat up memory, and some of them eat up CPU. They tend to slow the boot of the machine too. And usually not to do very much — mostly to wait for some event, like being clicked, or hardware being plugged in, or an OS/internet event. And the worst of them on their menu don’t even have a way to shut them down.
I would like to see the creation of a master deaemon/service program. This program would be running all the time, and it would provide a basic scripting language to perform daemon functions. Programs that just need a simple daemon, with a menu or waiting for events, would be strongly encouraged to prepare it in this scripting language, and install it through the master daemon. That way they take up a few kilobytes, not megabytes, and don’t take long to load. The scripting language should be able to react at least in a basic way to all the OS hooks, events and callbacks. It need not do much with them — mainly it would run a real module of the program that would have had a daemon. If the events are fast and furious and don’t pause, this program could stay resident and become a real daemon.
But having a stand alone program would be discouraged, certainly for boring purposes like checking for updates, overseeing other programs and waiting for events. The master program itself could get regular updates, as features are added to it as needed by would-be daemons.
Unix started with this philosophy. Most internet servers are started up by inetd, which listens on all the server ports you tell it, and fires up a server if somebody tries to connect. Only programs with very frequent requests, like E-mail and web serving, are supposed to keep something constantly running.
The problem is, every software package is convinced it’s the most important program on the system, and that the user mostly runs nothing but that program. So they act like they own the place. We need a way to only let them do that if they truly need it.
Submitted by brad on Fri, 2008-05-09 00:14.
I’m scanning my documents on an ADF document scanner now, and it’s largely pretty impressive, but I’m surprised at some things the system won’t do.
Double page feeding is the bane of document scanning. To prevent it, many scanners offer methods of double feed detection, including ultrasonic detection of double thickness and detection when one page is suddenly longer than all the others (because it’s really two.)
There are a number of other tricks they could do, I think. I think a paper feeder that used air suction or gecko-foot van-der-waals force pluckers on both sides of a page to try to pull the sides in two different directions could help not just detect, but eliminate such feeds.
However, the most the double feed detectors do is signal an exception to stop the scan. Which means work re-feeding and a need to stand by.
However, many documents have page numbers. And we’re going to OCR them and the OCR engine is pretty good at detecting page numbers (mostly out of desire to remove them.) However, it seems to me a good approach would be to look for gaps in the page numbers, especially combined with the other results of a double feed. Then don’t stop the scan, just keep going, and report to the operator which pages need to be scanned again. Those would be scanned, their number extracted, and they would be inserted in the right place in the final document.
Of course, it’s not perfect. Sometimes page numbers are not put on blank pages, and some documents number only within chapters. So you might not catch everything, but you could catch a lot of stuff. Operators could quickly discern the page numbering scheme (though I think the OCR could do this too) to guide the effort.
I’m seeking a maximum convenience workflow. I think to do that the best plan is to have several scanners going, and the OCR after the fact in the background. That way there’s always something for the operator to do — fixing bad feeds, loading new documents, naming them — for maximum throughput. Though I also would hope the OCR software could do better at naming the documents for you, or at least suggesting names. Perhaps it can, the manual for Omnipage is pretty sparse.
While some higher end scanners do have the scanner figure out the size of the page (at least the length) I am not sure why it isn’t a trivial feature for all ADF scanners to do this. My $100 Strobe sheetfed scanner does it. That my $6,000 (retail) FI-5650 needs extra software seems odd to me.
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2008-05-06 16:25.
PCs can go into standby mode (just enough power to preserve the RAM and do wake-on-lan) and into hibernate mode (where they write out the RAM to disk, shut down entirely and restore from disk later) as well as fully shut down.
Standby mode comes back up very fast, and should be routinely used on desktops. In fact, non-server PCs should consider doing it as a sort of screen saver since the restart can be so quick. It’s also popular on laptops but does drain the battery in a few days keeping the RAM alive. Many laptops will wake up briefly to hibernate if left in standby so long that the battery gets low, which is good.
How about this option: Write the ram contents out to disk, but also keep the ram alive. When the user wants to restart, they can restart instantly, unless something happened to the ram. If there was a power flicker or other trouble, notice the ram is bad and restart from disk. Usually you don’t care too much about the extra time needed to write out to disk when suspending, other than for psychological reasons where you want to be really sure the computer is off before leaving it. It’s when you come back to the computer that you want instant-on.
In fact, since RAM doesn’t actually fail all that quickly, you might even find you can restore from RAM after a brief power flicker. In that case, you would want to store a checksum for all blocks of RAM, and restore any from disk that don’t match the checksum.
To go further, one could also hibernate to newer generations of fast flash memory. Flash memory is getting quite cheap, and while older generations aren’t that quick, they seek instantaneously. This allows you to reboot a machine with its memory “paged out” to flash, and swap in pages at random as they are needed. This would allow a special sort of hybrid restore:
- Predict in advance which pages are highly used, and which are enough to get the most basic functions of the OS up. Write them out to a special contiguous block of hibernation disk. Then write out the rest, to disk and flash.
- When turning on again, read this block of contiguous disk and go “live.” Any pages needed can then be paged in from the flash memory as needed, or if the flash wasn’t big enough, unlikely pages can come from disk.
- In the background, restore the rest of the pages from the faster disk. Eventually you are fully back to ram.
This would allow users to get a fairly fast restore, even from full-off hibernation. If they click on a rarely used program that was in ram, it might be slow as stuff pages in, but still not as bad as waiting for the whole restore.
Submitted by brad on Thu, 2008-02-21 12:44.
A big trend in systems operation these days is the use of virtual machines — software systems which emulate a standalone machine so you can run a guest operating system as a program on top of another (host) OS. This has become particularly popular for companies selling web hosting. They take one fast machine and run many VMs on it, so that each customer has the illusion of a standalone machine, on which they can do anything. It’s also used for security testing and honeypots.
The virtual hosting is great. Typical web activity is “bursty.” You would like to run at a low level most of the time, but occasionally burst to higher capacity. A good VM environment will do that well. A dedicated machine has you pay for full capacity all the time when you only need it rarely. Cloud computing goes beyond this.
However, the main limit to a virtual machine’s capacity is memory. Virtual host vendors price their machines mostly on how much RAM they get. And a virtual host with twice the RAM often costs twice as much. This is all based on the machine’s physical ram. A typical vendor might take a machine with 4gb, keep 256mb for the host and then sell 15 virtual machines with 256mb of ram. They will also let you “burst” your ram, either into spare capacity or into what the other customers are not using at the time, but if you do this for too long they will just randomly kill processes on your machine, so you don’t want to depend on this.
The problem is when they give you 256MB of ram, that’s what you get. A dedicated linux server with 256mb of ram will actually run fairly well, because it uses paging to disk. The server loads many programs, but a lot of the memory used for these programs (particularly the code) is used rarely, if ever, and swaps out to disk. So your 256mb holds the most important pages of ram. If you have more than 256mb of important, regularly used ram, you’ll thrash (but not die) and know you need to buy more.
The virtual machines, however, don’t give you swap space. Everything stays in ram. And the host doesn’t swap it either, because that would not be fair. If one VM were regularly swapping to disk, this would slow the whole system down for everybody. One could build a fair allocation for that but I have not heard of it.
In addition, another big memory saving is lost — shared memory. In a typical system, when two processes use the same shared library or same program, this is loaded into memory only once. It’s read-only so you don’t need to have two copies. But on a big virtual machine, we have 15 copies of all the standard stuff — 15 kernels, 15 MYSQL servers, 15 web servers, 15 of just about everything. It’s very wasteful.
So I wonder if it might be possible to do one of the following:
- Design the VM so that all binaries and shared libraries can be mounted from a special read-only filesystem which is actually on the host. This would be an overlay filesystem so that individual virtual machines could change it if need be. The guest kernel, however, would be able to load pages from these files, and they would be shared with any other virtual machine loading the same file.
- Write a daemon that regularly uses spare CPU to scan the pages of each virtual machine, hashing them. When two pages turn out to be identical, release one and have both VMs use the common copy. Mark it so that if one writes to it, a duplicate is created again. When new programs start it would take extra RAM, but within a few minutes the memory would be shared.
These techniques require either a very clever virtualizer or modified guests, but their savings are so worthwhile that everybody would want to do it this way on any highly loaded virtual machine. Of course, that goes against the concept of “run anything you like” and makes it “run what you like, but certain standard systems are much cheaper.”
This, and allowing some form of fair swapping, could cause a serious increase in the performance and cost of VMs.
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2008-02-19 21:11.
If you have read my articles on power you know I yearn for the days when we get smart power so we have have universal supplies that power everything. This hit home when we got a new Thinkpad Z61 model, which uses a new power adapter which provides 20 volts at 4.5 amps and uses a new, quite rare power tip which is 8mm in diameter. For almost a decade, thinkpads used 16.5 volts and used a fairly standard 5.5mm plug. It go so that some companies standardized on Thinkpads and put cheap 16 volt TP power supplies in all the conference rooms, allowing employees to just bring their laptops in with no hassle.
Lenovo pissed off their customers with this move. I have perhaps 5 older power supplies, including one each at two desks, one that stays in the laptop bag for travel, one downstairs and one running an older ThinkPad. They are no good to me on the new computer.
Lenovo says they knew this would annoy people, and did it because they needed more power in their laptops, but could not increase the current in the older plug. I’m not quite sure why they need more power — the newer processors are actually lower wattage — but they did.
Here’s something they could have done to make it better. read more »
Submitted by brad on Sat, 2008-01-12 16:33.
I’ve written before about both the desire for universal dc power and more simply universal laptop power at meeting room desks.
Today I want to report we’re getting a lot closer. A new generation of cheap “buck and boost” ICs which can handle more serious wattages with good efficiency has come to the market. This means cheap DC to DC conversion, both increasing and decreasing voltages. More and more equipment is now able to take a serious range of input voltages, and also to generate them. Being able to use any voltage is important for battery powered devices, since batteries start out with a high voltage (higher than the one they are rated for) and drop over their time to around 2/3s of that before they are viewed as depleted. (With some batteries, heavy depletion can really hurt their life. Some are more able to handle it.)
With a simple buck converter chip, at a cost of about 10-15% of the energy, you get a constant voltage out to matter what the battery is putting out. This means more reliable power and also the ability to use the full capacity of the battery, if you need it and it won’t cause too much damage. These same chips are in universal laptop supplies. Most of these supplies use special magic tips which fit the device they are powering and also tell the supply what voltage and current it needs. read more »
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2007-11-13 13:20.
Ok, I haven't had a new laptop in a while so perhaps this already happens, but I'm now carrying more devices that can charge off the USB power, including my cell phone. It's only 2.5 watts, but it's good enough for many purposes.
However, my laptops, and desktops, do not provide USB power when in standby or off. So how about a physical or soft switch to enable that? Or even a smart mode in the US that lets you list what devices you want to keep powered and which ones you don't? (This would probably keep all devices powered if any one such device is connected, unless you had individual power control for each plug.)
This would only be when on AC power of course, not on battery unless explicitly asked for as an emergency need.
To get really smart a protocol could be developed where the computer can ask the USB device if it needs power. A fully charged device that plans to sleep would say no. A device needing charge could say yes.
Of course, you only want to do this if the power supply can efficiently generate 5 volts. Some PC power supplies are not efficient at low loads and so may not be a good choice for this, and smaller power supplies should be used.
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2007-07-10 00:42.
For much of history, we’ve used removable media for backup. We’ve used tapes of various types, floppy disks, disk cartridges, and burnable optical disks. We take the removable media and keep a copy offsite if we’re good, but otherwise they sit for a few decades until they can’t be read, either because they degraded or we can’t find a reader for the medium any more.
But I now declare this era over. Disk drives are so cheap — 25 cents/gb and falling, that it no longer makes sense to do backups to anything but hard disks. We may use external USB drives that are removable, but at this point our backups are not offline, they are online. Thanks to the internet, I even do offsite backup to live storage. I sync up over the internet at night, and if I get too many changes (like after an OS install, or a new crop of photos) I write the changes to a removable hard disk and carry it over to the offsite hard disk.
Of course, these hard drives will fail, perhaps even faster than CD-roms or floppies. But the key factor is that the storage is online rather than offline, and each new disk is 2 to 3 times larger than the one it replaced. What this means is that as we change out our disks, we just copy our old online archives to our new online disk. By constantly moving the data to newer and newer media — and storing it redundantly with online, offsite backup, the data are protected from the death that removable media eventually suffer. So long as disks keep getting bigger and cheaper, we won’t lose anything, except by beng lazy. And soon, our systems will get more automated at this, so it’s hard to set up a computer that isn’t backed up online and remotely. We may still lose things because we lose encryption keys, but it won’t be for media.
Thus, oddly, the period of the latter part of the 20th century will be a sort of “dark ages” to future data archaeologists. Those disks will be lost. The media may be around, but you will have to do a lot of work to recover them — manual work. However, data from the early 21st onward will be there unless it was actively deleted or encrypted.
Of course this has good and bad consequences. Good for historians. Perhaps not so good for privacy.
Submitted by brad on Tue, 2007-07-03 15:15.
Hotels are now commonly sporting flat widescreen TVs, usually LCD HDTVs at the 720p resolution, which is 1280 x 720 or similar. Some of these TVs have VGA ports or HDMI (DVI) ports, or they have HDTV analog component video (which is found on some laptops but not too many.) While 720p resolution is not as good as the screens on many laptops, it makes a world of difference on a PDA. As our phone/PDA devices become more like the iPhone, it would be very interesting to see hotels guarantee that their room offers the combination of:
- A bluetooth keyboard (with USB and mini-USB as a backup)
- A similar optical mouse
- A means to get video into the HDTV
- Of course, wireless internet
- Our dreamed of universal DC power jack (or possibly inductive charging.)
Tiny devices like the iPhone won’t sport VGA or even component video out 7 pin connectors, though they might do HDMI. It’s also not out of the question to go a step further and do a remote screen protocol like VNC over the wireless ethernet or bluetooth.
This would engender a world where you carry a tiny device like the iPhone, which is all touchscreen for when you are using it in the mobile environment. However, when you sit down in your hotel room (or a few other places) you could use it like a full computer with a full screen and keyboard. (There are also quite compact real-key bluetooth keyboards and mice which travelers could also bring. Indeed, since the iPhone depends on a multitouch interface, an ordinary mouse might not be enough for it, but you could always use its screen for such pointing, effectively using the device as the touchpad.)
Such stations need not simply be in hotels. Smaller displays (which are now quite cheap) could also be present at workstations on conference tables or meeting rooms, or even for rent in public. Of course rental PCs in public are very common at internet cafes and airport kiosks, but using our own device is more tuned to our needs and more secure (though using a rented keyboard presents security risks.)
One could even imagine stations like these randomly scattered around cities behind walls. Many retailers today are putting HDTV flat panels in their windows instead of signs, and this will become a more popular trend. Imagine being able to borrow (for free or for a rental fee) such screens for a short time to do a serious round of web surfing on your portable device with high resolution, and local wifi bandwidth. Such a screen could not provide you with a keyboard or mouse easily, but the surfing experience would be much better than the typical mobile device surfing experience, even the iPhone model of seeing a blurry, full-size web page and using multitouch to zoom in on the relevant parts. Using a protocol like vnc could provide a good surfing experience for pedestrians.
Cars are also more commonly becoming equipped with screens, and they are another place we like to do mobile surfing. While the car’s computer should let you surf directly, there is merit in being able to use that screen as a temporary large screen for one’s mobile device.
Until we either get really good VR glasses or bright tiny projectors, screen size is going to be an issue in mobile devices. A world full of larger screens that can be grabbed for a few minutes use may be a good answer.
Submitted by brad on Fri, 2007-06-08 14:43.
For many of us, E-mail has become our most fundamental tool. It is not just the way we communicate with friends and colleagues, it is the way that a large chunk of the tasks on our “to do” lists and calendars arrive. Of course, many E-mail programs like Outlook come integrated with a calendar program and a to-do list, but the integration is marginal at best. (Integration with the contact manager/address book is usually the top priority.)
If you’re like me you have a nasty habit. You leave messages in your inbox that you need to deal with if you can’t resolve them with a quick reply when you read them. And then those messages often drift down in the box, off the first screen. As a result, they are dealt with much later or not at all. With luck the person mails you again to remind you of the pending task.
There are many time management systems and philosophies out there, of course. A common theme is to manage your to-do list and calendar well, and to understand what you will do and not do, and when you will do it if not right away.
I think it’s time to integrate our time management concepts with our E-mail. To realize that a large number of emails or threads are also a task, and should be bound together with the time manager’s concept of a task.
For example, one way to “file” an E-mail would be to the calendar or a day oriented to-do list. You might take an E-mail and say, “I need 20 minutes to do this by Friday” or “I’ll do this after my meeting with the boss tomorrow.” The task would be tied to the E-mail. Most often, the tasks would not be tied to a specific time the way calendar entries are, but would just be given a rough block of time within a rough window of hours or days.
It would be useful to add these “when to do it” attributes to E-mails, because now delegating a task to somebody else can be as simple as forwarding the E-mail-message-as-task to them.
In fact, because, as I have noted, I like calendars with free-form input (ie. saying “Lunch with Peter 1pm tomorrow” and having the calender understand exactly what to do with it) it makes sense to consider the E-mail window as a primary means of input to the calendar. For example, one might add calendar entries by emailing them to a special address that is processed by the calendar. (That’s a useful idea for any calendar, even one not tied at all to the E-mail program.)
One should also be able to assign tasks to places (a concept from the “Getting Things Done” book I have had recommended to me.) In this case, items that will be done when one is shopping, or going out to a specific meeting, could be synced or sent appropriately to one’s mobile device, but all with the E-mail metaphor.
Because there are different philosophies of time management, all with their fans, one monolithic e-mail/time/calendar/todo program may not be the perfect answer. A plug-in architecture that lets time managers integrate nicely with E-mail could be a better way to do it.
Some of these concepts apply to the shared calendar concepts I wrote about last month.
Submitted by brad on Mon, 2007-06-04 11:01.
Here’s a new approach to linux adoption. Create a linux distro which converts a Windows machine to linux, marketed as a way to solve many of your virus/malware/phishing woes.
Yes, for a long time linux distros have installed themselves on top of a windows machine dual-boot. And there are distros that can run in a VM on windows, or look windows like, but here’s a set of steps to go much further, thanks to how cheap disk space is today. read more »
- Yes, the distro keeps the Windows install around dual boot, but it also builds a virtual machine so it can be run under linux. Of course hardware drivers differ when running under a VM, so this is non-trivial, and Windows XP and later will claim they are stolen if they wake up in different hardware. You may have to call Microsoft, which they may eventually try to stop.
- Look through the Windows copy and see what apps are installed. For apps that migrate well to linux, either because they have equivalents or run at silver or gold level under Wine, move them into linux. Extract their settings and files and move those into the linux environment. Of course this is easiest to do when you have something like Firefox as the browser, but IE settings and bookmarks can also be imported.
- Examine the windows registry for other OS settings, desktop behaviours etc. Import them into a windows-like linux desktop. Ideally when it boots up, the user will see it looking and feeling a lot like their windows environment.
- Using remote window protocols, it’s possible to run windows programs in a virtual machine with their window on the X desktop. Try this for some apps, though understand some things like inter-program communication may not do as well.
- Next, offer programs directly in the virtual machine as another desktop. Put the windows programs on the windows-like “start” menu, but have them fire up the program in the virtual machine, or possibly even fire up the VM as needed. Again, memory is getting very cheap.
- Strongly encourage the Windows VM be operated in a checkpointing manner, where it is regularly reverted to a base state, if this is possible.
- The linux box, sitting outside the windows VM, can examine its TCP traffic to check for possible infections or strange traffic to unusual sites. A database like the siteadvisor one can help spot these unusual things, and encourage restoring the windows box back to a safe checkpoint.
Submitted by brad on Sun, 2007-04-15 16:45.
The use of virtual machines is getting very popular in the web hosting world. Particularly exciting to many people is Amazon.com’s EC2 — which means Elastic Compute Cloud. It’s a large pool of virtual machines that you can rent by the hour. I know people planning on basing whole companies on this system, because they can build an application that scales up by adding more virtual machines on demand. It’s decently priced and a lot cheaper than building it yourself in most cases.
In many ways, something like EC2 would be great for all those web sites which deal with the “slashdot” effect. I hope to see web hosters, servers and web applications just naturally allow scaling through the addition of extra machines. This typically means either some round-robin-DNS, or a master server that does redirects to a pool of servers, or a master cache that processes the data from a pool of servers, or a few other methods. Dealing with persistent state that can’t be kept in cookies requires a shared database among all the servers, which may make the database the limiting factor. Rumours suggest Amazon will release an SQL interface to their internal storage system which presumably is highly scalable, solving that problem.
As noted, this would be great for small to medium web sites. They can mostly run on a single server, but if they ever see a giant burst of traffic, for example by being linked to from a highly popular site, they can in minutes bring up extra servers to share the load. I’ve suggested this approach for the Battlestar Galactica Wiki I’ve been using — normally their load is modest, but while the show is on, each week, predictably, they get such a huge load of traffic when the show actually airs that they have to lock the wiki down. They have tried to solve this the old fashioned way — buying bigger servers — but that’s a waste when they really just need one day a week, 22 weeks a year, of high capacity.
However, I digress. What I really want to talk about is using such systems to get access to all sorts of platforms. As I’ve noted before, linux is a huge mishmash of platforms. There are many revisions of Ubuntu, Fedora, SuSE, Debian, Gentoo and many others out there. Not just the current release, but all the past releases, in both stable, testing and unstable branches. On top of that there are many versions of the BSD variants. read more »
Submitted by brad on Sun, 2007-03-04 19:50.
Most of us, when we travel, put appointments we will have while on the road into our calendars. And we usually enter them in local time. ie. if I have a 1pm appointment in New York, I set it for 1pm not 10am in my Pacific home time zone. While some calendar programs let you specify the time zone for an event, most people don't, and many people also don't change the time zone when they cross a border, at least not right away. (I presume that some cell phone PDAs pick up the new time from the cell network and import it into the PDA, if the network provides that.) Many PDAs don't really even let you set the time zone, just the time.
Here's an idea that's simple for the user. Most people put their flights into their calendars. In fact, most of the airline web sites now let you download your flight details right into your calendar. Those flight details include flight times and the airport codes.
So the calendar software should notice the flight, look up the destination airport code, and trigger a time zone change during the flight. This would also let the flight duration look correct in the calendar view window, though it would mean some "days" would be longer than others, and hours would repeat or be missing in the display.
You could also manually enter magic entries like "TZ to PST" or similar which the calendar could understand as a command to change the zone at that time.
Of course, I could go on many long rants about the things lacking from current calendar software, and perhaps at some point I will, but this one struck me as interesting because, in the downloaded case, the UI for the user is close to invisible, and I always like that.
It becomes important when we start importing our "presence" from our calendar, or get alerts from our devices about events, we don't want these things to trigger in the wrong time zone.

Major Section: BOOKS
A book, say
"arith", is said to have a ``certificate'' if there
is a file named
"arith.cert". Certificates are created by the
certify-book and inspected by
sums are used to help ensure that certificates are legitimate and
that the corresponding book has not been modified since
certification. But because the file system is insecure and check
sums are not perfect it is possible for the inclusion of a book to
cause inconsistency even though the book carries an impeccable
The certificate includes the version number of the certifying ACL2. A book is considered uncertified if it is included in an ACL2 with a different version number.
The presence of a ``valid'' certificate file for a book attests to
two things: all of the events of the book are admissible in a
certain extension of the initial ACL2 logic, and the non-
events of the book are independent of the
(see local-incompatibility). In addition, the certificate
contains the commands used to construct the world in which
certification occurred. Among those commands, of course, are the
defpkgs defining the packages used in the book. When a book is
included into a host world, that world is first extended
by the commands listed in the certificate for the book. Unless that
causes an error due to name conflicts, the extension ensures that
all the packages used by the book are identically defined in the
Because the host file system is insecure, there is no way ACL2 can guarantee that the contents of a book remain the same as when its certificate was written. That is, between the time a book is certified and the time it is used, it may be modified. Furthermore, certificates can be counterfeited. Check sums (see check-sum) are used to help detect such problems. But check sums provide imperfect security: two different files can have the same check sum.
Therefore, from the strictly logical point of view, one must consider even the inclusion of certified books as placing a burden on the user:
We say that a given execution of
The non-erroneous inclusion of a certified book is consistency preserving provided (a) the objects read by
include-bookfrom the certificate were the objects written there by a
certify-bookand (b) the forms read by
include-bookfrom the book itself are the forms read by the corresponding
include-bookis ``certified'' if a certificate file for the book is present and well-formed and the check sum information contained within it supports the conclusion that the events read by the
include-bookare the ones checked by
certify-book. When an uncertified
include-bookoccurs, warnings are printed or errors are caused. But even if no warning is printed, you must accept burdens (a) and (b) if you use books. These burdens are easier to live with if you protect your books so that other users cannot write to them, you abstain from running concurrent ACL2 jobs, and you abstain from counterfeiting certificates. But even on a single user uniprocessor, you can shoot yourself in the foot by using the ACL2 io primitives to fabricate an inconsistent book and the corresponding certificate.
Note that part (a) of the burden described above implies, in particular, that there are no guarantees when a certificate is copied. When books are renamed (as by copying them), it is recommended that their certificates be removed and the books be recertified. The expectation is that recertification will go through without a hitch if relative pathnames are used. See pathname, which is not on the guided tour.
Certificates essentially contain two parts, a portcullis and a
keep. There is a third part, an
expansion-alist, in order
to record expansions if
make-event has been used, but the user
need not be concerned with that level of detail.
See portcullis to continue the guided tour through books.

An Enjoyable Hobby, Pastime & Necessity!
Did You Know? -
Cooking is the act of preparing food for eating by the application of heat. It encompasses a vast range of methods, tools and combinations of ingredients to alter the flavor or digestibility of food. It is the process of selecting, measuring and combining of ingredients in an ordered procedure in an effort to achieve the desired result. Factors affecting the final outcome include the variability of ingredients, ambient conditions, tools, and the skill of the individual doing the actual cooking.
It Starts In The Garden
We go to the local nurseries to gather seeds and plants
We then prepare the garden and we do it in phases so we always have something going on
The broccoli is beautiful
Did You Know? -
Broccoli is a plant in the cabbage family, whose large flower head is used as a vegetable. The word broccoli, from the Italian plural of broccolo, refers to "the flowering top of a cabbage". Broccoli is usually boiled or steamed but may be eaten raw and has become popular as a raw vegetable in hors d'œuvre trays. The leaves may also be eaten.
The mulch is made of straw and we use about 5-6 bales a year mulching all the gardens around our home
"Home cooking is a catalyst that brings people together. We are losing the daily ritual of sitting down around the table (without the intrusion of television), of having the opportunity to interact, to share our experiences and concerns, to listen to others.
Home kitchens, despite the increase in designer appliances and cabinetry, are mostly quiet and empty today. Strangers are preparing much of our food.
And our supermarkets, which once considered restaurants and fast-food places the enemy, have joined the trend by enlarging their delis and offering ready-to-eat food they call "home-replacement meals."
But bringing ready-cooked meals home is not the same as cooking in your own kitchen, where you are in control of the ingredients you use, where you fill the house with good cooking smells, and where you all share in a single dish, taking a helping and passing the platter on to your neighbor. Nothing can replace that." — Marion Cunningham, from the introduction to Lost Recipes.
Around Our House
Sue has a great hobby and it is called cooking. Paul had a matching hobby, eating and gardening!
On this site we will share some of the receipts we use to create meals. See our favorites such as
home-made tomato sauce
We grow our own veggies, please
visit our little garden
Chop chop slice slice! Cooking classes circa 1903.
Chop chop slice slice! Progress is being made. Electric is being used in 1928!
Chop chop slice slice! Electric light bulbs and other modern
marvels being used in 1928!
Why This hobby?
Easy, it allows creativity. Taking the results from our garden, cleaning whatever we picked, and then saying to herself "What can I do with this?" It's better than a puzzle and a lot better tasting!
"Cooking is like love. It should be entered into with abandon or not at all." - Harriet Van Horne
"I feel a recipe is only a theme, which an intelligent cook can play each time with a variation." - Madam Benoit
“Nouvelle Cuisine, roughly translated, means: I can't believe I paid ninety-six dollars and I'm still hungry.” - Mike Cain
"The highway is replete with culinary land mines disguised as quaint local restaurants that carry such reassuring names as Millie's, Pop's and Capt'n Dick's". - Bryan Miller
"A good cook is like a sorceress who dispenses happiness." - Elsa Schiapirelli
"My mother's menu consisted of two choices: Take it or leave it." - Buddy Hackett
A good cook is the peculiar gift of the gods. He must be a perfect creature from the brain to the palate, from the palate to the finger's end. ~ Walter Savage Landor
Kissing don't last: cookery do. ~ George Meredith
Cooking is like love. It should be entered into with abandon or not at all. ~ Harriet Van Horne
Savory seasonings stimulate the appetite. ~ Latin Proverb
Fish, to taste right, must swim three times -- in water, in butter and in wine. ~ Polish Proverb
Man is what he eats. ~ German Proverb

Moon Light World Map
The map below shows where the Moon is visible from the Earth, depending on weather conditions and moon phases.
The white dot symbolizes the position of the Moon, and the yellow sun symbolizes the position of the sun.
View Day and Night Map
- The bright part of the map shows where the moon is over the horizon on Saturday, November 12, 2011 at 12:58:00 UTC.
- The Sun's position is marked with this symbol: . At this location, the Sun will be at its zenith (directly overhead) in relation to an observer.
- The Moon's position is marked with this symbol: . At this location, the Moon will be at its zenith in relation to an observer. Note that the symbol is not showing the current phase of the Moon.
Fraction of moon illuminated: 97%
Position of the Moon
On Saturday, November 12, 2011 at 12:58:00 UTC the Moon is at its zenith at these coordinates:
|Latitude: ||22° 14' ||North|
|Longitude: ||179° 29' ||West|
The ground speed of the movement is currently 415.09 meters/second, 1494.3 km/hour, 928.5 miles/hour or 806.9 knots.The table below shows the Moon position compared to the time and date above:
|Time||Longitude difference||Latitude difference||Total|
|1 minute||0° 14' 29.7"||15.48 mi||west||0° 00' 02.0"||0.04 mi||north||15.48 mi|
|1 hour||14° 29' 43.6"||928.22 mi||west||0° 01' 59.6"||2.29 mi||north||928.12 mi|
|24 hours||12° 13' 16.6"||782.68 mi||east||0° 17' 13.1"||19.75 mi||north||782.13 mi|
Locations with the moon near zenith
The following table shows 10 locations with moon near zenith position in the sky.
|Midway||Sat 1:58 AM||695 km||432 miles||375 nm|| NNE|
|Wake Island||Sun 12:58 AM||1480 km||920 miles||799 nm|| W|
|Majuro||Sun 12:58 AM||1946 km||1209 miles||1051 nm|| SSW|
|Honolulu||Sat 2:58 AM||2237 km||1390 miles||1208 nm|| E|
|Tarawa||Sun 12:58 AM||2443 km||1518 miles||1319 nm|| SSW|
|Baker Island||Sat 12:58 AM||2460 km||1529 miles||1329 nm|| S|
|Yaren||Sun 12:58 AM||2920 km||1814 miles||1577 nm|| SSW|
|Palikir||Sat 11:58 PM||2938 km||1825 miles||1586 nm|| WSW|
|Kiritimati||Sun 2:58 AM||3290 km||2044 miles||1776 nm|| SE|
|Adak||Sat 2:58 AM||3297 km||2049 miles||1780 nm|| N|
Related time zone tools

The Kalevala is a curious creature that evades easy categorisation. At its most basic level it is a united, flowing, epic poem assembled in its final form in 1849 by Elias Lönnrot. Only 3% of the work is thought to be of his own invention, however. Taking a step back it is built on a collection of Finnish folk poetry that was originally penned sometime in the 1600s over a vast area of Finland. The poetry was originally performed in song and is consequently fairly rigid in form and meter (for any music or literature geeks - specifically the trochaic tetrameter).
These 17th century songs are not nearly the beginning of the material. They reflect much older oral traditions, which are evident in many of the themes the Kalevala expresses. The oldest deal with the creation of the Earth and are notoriously difficult to date, although some speculate a figure of about 3000 years ago.
Of particular fascination to me, is the amount of lyrics in the saga dedicated to beer. An interesting and frequently quoted figure, albeit overstated, is that nearly 400 lines in the Kalevala deal with beer, while but 200 deal with creation.
In the 13th poem we have the retelling of the origin of beer. This poem has proved an important but hotly contested source in trying to nail down the elusive place or time when hops began to be used in the brewing process. Based largely on the premise that the lore in the Kalevala come from much earlier oral traditions, some have proposed that the Scandinavians were the first to grow hops specifically for beer. [For more on this debate see Ian S. Hornsey, A History of Beer and Brewing, London: Royal Society of Chemistry, 2004. Pps. 303-14]
“Takes the golden grains of barley,
Taking six of barley-kernels,
Taking seven tips of hop-fruit,
Filling seven cups with water,
On the fire she sets the caldron,
Boils the barley, hops, and water,
Lets them steep, and seethe, and bubble
Brewing thus the beer delicious,
In the hottest days of summer,
On the foggy promontory,
On the island forest-covered;
Poured it into birch-wood barrels,
Into hogsheads made of oak-wood.”
Thus far so good, but the beer does not ferment. So growing troubled she queries, “What will bring the effervescence, Who will add the needed factor, That the beer may foam and sparkle, May ferment and be delightful?” Enlisting the help of Kalevatar, the magical maiden, they conjure creatures to fetch ingredients to ferment the beer. The first is a snow-white squirrel which is sent into the forests of the mountains to retrieve cones from a fir tree. Sadly, when they “Laid them in the beer for ferment, But it brought no effervescence, And the beer was cold and lifeless.”
The second creature, a golden-breasted marten, was sent on the unenviable mission of fetching foam from the mouths of bears in battle (presumed to contain yeast). The marten returns successful and unscathed, yet the foam “brought no effervescence, Did not make the liquor sparkle.” Finally a honey-bee is summoned and is instructed to fly to an island in the ocean, and to collect the sweetened juices from the flowering grass beside a sleeping maid. Upon the bees return, the pollen is added to the birch-wood barrels, and the fermentation takes off in earnest, overflowing the barrels and runs in streams into Pahjola.
Osmata is distraught, believing she has failed and that the wedding feast will be a failure. But the birds in the trees assure her that the beer is good, and so she barrels some more and the feast is a great success.
Thus, the Finnish origin of beer:
“Great indeed the reputation
Of the ancient beer of Kalew,
Said to make the feeble hardy,
Famed to dry the tears of women,
Famed to cheer the broken-hearted,
Make the aged young and supple,
Make the timid brave and mighty,
Make the brave men ever braver,
Fill the heart with joy and gladness,
Fill the mind with wisdom-sayings,
Fill the tongue with ancient legends,
Only makes the fool more foolish."
And for Lord of the Rings fans - Tolkien stated that the Kalevala saga was one of his sources that inspired the Silmarillion. You’ll find that several characters and events in the book are readily identifiable in the epic.
* All quotes from the Kalevala are taken from John Martin Crawford’s 1888 English translation.

Teach Them to Land First
Jason Nunn MS, CSCS
Plyometrics have been a part of most athletic development programs for many years. It has become quite commonplace for coaches to implement these sort of hops, jumps, and triple jump variations during the speed and acceleration development periods of their programs. These sorts of drills have been proven time and again to improve both starting strength and elastic strength in athletes. In most of the beginning literature from the Soviets, the thought was that an athlete must be able to squat two and a half times their own bodyweight to be able to perform plyometrics. However, in most athletic programs, this simply will not work. Most athletes today will not have the time to develop this type of strength. Honestly, this would limit most athletes from being able to perform this type of exercise. For example, Hossein Rezzazadeh weighs three hundred and sixty pounds, can clean and jerk five hundred and eighty pounds and squat eight hundred and sixty pounds (raw I might add). Yet, by these rules, he cannot do plyometrics.
Sorry Mr. Rezzazadeh, I know you can clean and jerk a house, but you can’t do box Jumps.
Given this, I do not think an old way of measuring strength is applicable to today’s athlete. Rather than just looking at squatting strength, let’s look at their relative and functional strength. By relative strength, I mean the ratio of an athlete’s strength to their bodyweight, and by functional strength, I mean the ability of an athlete to “stick” a landing without a valgus of the knees (adduction of the knee relative to the hip and ankle) and collapsing the core (excessive forward lean).
Excessive Forward Lean
It is my opinion that many strength coaches tend to put the carriage before the horse. That is, they are in such a great hurry to get their athletes “stronger”, that they neglect any type of progression or injury prevention in their periodization scheme. Most of all athletic injuries occur during deceleration and in the transverse plane. That means that most of the athletes are trying to simultaneously stop and turn at the same time when they are injured. This is the most common in females, due to the natural angle of their hips. Let’s break this down a little bit and discuss the excessive forward lean and torso vertical stability and torso rotational stability first. Then, we’ll look at the valgus knee issue.
Excessive Forward Lean
In training the core (anything between the hips and the chest) it is important to remember that the primary responsibility of these muscle groups is lumbar spine stability, not mobility. This is key when addressing the excessive forward lean. Most times, the excessive forward lean is due to having a weak core. If the athlete’s core is not strong enough to absorb the force of the landing, the core will collapse causing them to buckle forward. To prevent this from happening, you must first focus on the isometric strengthening of the core musculature (pelvic floor, transverse abdominus, diaphragm, internal and external obliques, erector spinae, and rectus abdominus). Here are some exercises to incorporate into your program to do so:
Pull the naval in towards the spine and squeeze the gultes
Keep the hips even with the shoulders.
Side Bridge with Glute Activation
Press the knee firmly into the ground.
Bent Knee Bridge
Hold each of these 6 – 30 seconds depending on the athlete’s strength level.
Like stated earlier, valgus knees are the adduction of the knees in relation to the hip and ankle. This is a very dangerous position that can lead to many knee injuries, as well as, several other hip and low back problems throughout the kinetic chain. For most athletes, this is just a simple matter of re-learning the motor pattern. If this is the case, the easiest way to do this is doing a drill I call “Landing Mechanics”. (Very creative, I know) This is a drill that I incorporate at the end of my dynamic warm up.
Frontal Landing x 5
Starting Position Landing Position
Have the athlete start on a bench or plyo box that is about knee height and fall into a good landing position.
If you’ve done the following drills for a couple weeks and the athlete is still exhibiting the same valgus knees, this may be a sign that there are bigger problems that may need some extra attention. A little corrective exercise training may be order.
First off, let’s look at the problem. The knees are moving inward. Let’s take the Janda approach and look at which muscles are locked long (weak) and which opposing muscles are locked short (tight). I think that Gray Cook put it best when he said, “The knee is a slave to the hip and the ankle. For dysfunction in the knee, look either a foot north or a foot south, you will find your problem.”
Possible Tight Areas
IT – Band
Tensor Fasciae Latae
Outer Head of the Gastrocnemeus
Possible Weak Areas
Vastus Medialis (VMO)
Corrective Exercise Training for the Valgus Knees
Now that we’ve identified which muscles are tight and which ones are weak, let’s look at how to fix the situation. First, we will start with lengthening the short muscles by:
IT – Band
Start with the roller at the greater trochanter and work your way towards the lesser trochanter. Hold each tender spot thirty seconds.
Roll from the head of the fibula to the lateral malleolus. Hold each tender spot thirty seconds.
Be sure that the arch of the back foot does not collapse
Squeeze the glutes and keep the shoulders back.
Following the foam rolling and static stretching, you will implement a comprehensive dynamic warmup. Then, you will be able to incorporate the core above mentioned isometric core exercises, as well as, the following:
Lateral Tube Walks
Begin with a mini band just above the knees and the feet just a little wider than hip width. Then, while maintaining core stability, step out just wider than shoulder width. Then, step back to starting stance. Do this 10x to the right and 10x to the left.
Begin with one leg bent just past 90 degrees at the knee and the other pointed straight up. Press the heal of the foot into the ground, squeeze the glute, and press the hips up as high as possible. Repeat 10x each leg.
Athletes get injured for three reasons. They either aren’t strong enough, aren’t flexible enough, or by contact. If the athlete gets hit by a car, you can’t help that, but you may be able to fix the other two! By spending a little time working on preventative maintenance, the coach greatly reduces the risk of injury to their athletes.
Janda V. Muscles and cervicogenic pain syndromes. In: Grant R., editor.Physical therapy of the cervical and thoracic spine. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1988. p. 153-66.
Meyer, G.D., et. Al., Neuromuscular Training Improves Performance and Movement Biomechanics. J. Strength Cond. Res. 19:51 – 60. 2005
Rodger, Robb, Kids Jump Down. Sbcoachescollege.com
Jason Nunn is a Personal Trainer and Sports Performance Coach in Indianapolis, Indiana. He is the Owner of Nunn’s Performance Training, LLC. He works with clients of all levels from weekend warriors to division I athletes. Check out http://www.nunnstronger.com
for more info.

LETTER TO THE EDITOR: Remember American frontiers
To the Times:
Absorbing its Western frontier gave 19th century America a core task. In 1890 the Census Bureau, which tracked frontier settlement, declared the job done. Yet the American frontier persists, its needs largely invisible. Today’s task is to recognize its survival and ensure its people and places get fair treatment.
The 19th century census defined the frontier by population density. A place with under six people per square mile was frontier -- a figure New York State already exceeded (barely) in 1790, the census’ first year. Anywhere over that density was settled land. In its reporting, the census mapped a north-south line separating the two zones that steadily moved westward. The 1880 line mostly ran along the 98th meridian and bulged west in Nebraska halfway across the state. But the 1890 census found no clear edge: settlement mission accomplished. Contemporary understandings of progress meant the frontier would be sure to fill.
The great historian Frederick Jackson Turner used the census’ technical demographic decision about the frontier line’s disappearance to begin his hugely influential 1893 essay, “The Significance of the Frontier in American History.” His declaration that the frontier was closed or quickly closing soon became a vital part of the American creed.
Yet the American frontier stayed mostly intact after 1890. Most of the land from the country’s midsection to the Sierra-Cascades still has less than six people per square mile. Nearly all of Alaska and parts of the Appalachian Mountains and the North Woods from Maine to Minnesota also remain at frontier density.
This vast remnant frontier has never drawn the national attention the pre-1890 one got. The New Mexico-based National Center for Frontier Communities (on whose board we serve) estimates that the frontier has approximately 5.6 million people, about 1.8 percent of the population on 46.7 percent of the land area. The NCFC definition, which depends on both density and distance from metropolitan areas, shows that people living in small, remote places with poor transportation and communication links to the rest of the country are disproportionately poor and elderly.
Many Americans visit the frontier. It has the country’s best outdoor adventure and ecotourism — glorious national parks and inspiriting fly-fishing. All of us depend on its agriculture, energy, mining, and timber. But in important ways it remains invisible, not truly seen, its special needs overlooked.
In some moods Americans romanticize the frontier as the last bastion of community-minded neighborliness, with a rural can-do spirit once exemplified by barn-raising. But that model does not serve the surviving American frontier. Many essential services urban/suburban Americans take for granted are costly and hard to deliver in isolated Western desert, plains, mountain, or forest settings that may have five-month winters or 115 degree summers.
Frontier communities have trouble attracting or retaining doctors, nurses, teachers, and clergy. Their few professionals suffer from limited equipment, scant back-up, and meager pay. Frontier places need telemedicine, yet their broadband capacity and cell reception are frequently spotty.
Frontier places often lack the resources for adequate law enforcement and fire protection, which have to cover vast areas with bad, hard-to-navigate roads. The frontier is a prime spot for meth labs, supremacist groups, and militias. It has space for waste-disposal services, but few resources to ensure safe disposal. Continued...
Many frontier tourist and second-home areas experience big seasonal population swings that increase demands on their small public sectors. They must handle upticks in accidents or illnesses, rescue lost or overconfident hikers, and restrain hard-partying groups. They must satisfy visitors who put money into the local economy, but often less than they take from it. Longer-term population swings — say, for energy boomtowns -- also strain local resources and finances. Housing, health, library, school, water, road, electric, and waste services must suddenly accommodate transients and newcomers.
Frontier communities tend to have a small tax base, but many lack control of it because often they are tiny enclaves amid vast federal land holdings like national forests and parks. They must rely on a complex federal in-lieu of payment system with rates set in Washington.
Frontier communities have difficulty seeking public- or private-sector funds. They have small staffs, few grant-writing skills, and some lack the computer capacity to submit their applications as demanded.
Simple obstacles hold frontier communities back. The barriers are not deliberate. Americans mostly assume the frontier vanished. Therefore it cannot have distinctive issues or needs that demand unorthodox responses.
Frontier justice once meant gunslingers and local lawmen, vigilantes and posses. It was often rough, terrible. Today we need a new kind of frontier justice, fairer national treatment for a vital but overlooked American place.
DEBORAH E. POPPER
City University of New York’s College of Staten Island and Graduate Center
FRANK J. POPPER
Princeton University Continued...
Location, ST | website.com
- Boy struck and killed by pickup truck Chester; 2nd badly injured (4098)
- Upper Darby man charged with rape after ex found video on phone (3678)
- Drugs, weapons seized by cops in Upland after two traffic stops (2812)
- U.D. woman enters signed confession in Bonner track mischief (2226)
- A day later, Merion proves just as tough for visitors (With Video) (1868)
- Ryan Howard starts to heat up; Dom Brown wins it with single in 9th (1102)
- Editorial: No defense for a history of sexual abuse (771)
- Eagles' Jackson needs action to back talk (87)
- Upper Chichester eyeing cameras for Johnson Avenue trouble spot (8)
- Party on the 10th: Merion gives Golf View Road residents an easy excuse to have fun (7)
- Slain Prospect Park mom remembered as 'kind, loving person' (With Video Slideshow) (5)
- Bruce Johnston Jr., son of notorious Chesco crime lord, still running afoul of law (5)
- World War II veterans honored in Springfield (5)
- In the Community: Scott Spangler, Dave Brown making difference through soccer (5)
Recent Activity on Facebook
Phil Heron uses this site to turn back the curtain a bit on the great mystery involved in creating a newspaper and his other general thoughts on life and the news.
Your daily wake up call with updated traffic, weather and few fun things to get you through the morning.
Presenting Chester City's news and views to Delco Times web visitors who want to know more of what's going on in the City besides the stories they read in the paper.
Promotes family friendly events and activities held in and around Delco on a weekly basis.
Cliff Wilson served as chairman of the Delaware County Democratic Party for 16 years (1994-2010). He will write on politics and other issues he feels strongly about.
Offers timely health advice for pets, behavioral tricks of the trade, follow-up success stories, and more. Updated regularly by ACDC's all-volunteer staff that includes long-time foster parents and pet owners who have years of experience.
Kent Davidson covers local politics, events, and goings-on in the borough of Media, PA.

Photo by Mjmonty.
Often, our New Year’s resolutions are us promising ourselves we’ll form good habits this year: whether it’s something big like “I’m going to eat better” or “I’m going to keep my computer backed up” to “I’m going to actually start flossing every day”. So often, though, these habits end up dying off pretty quickly. Here are a few ways to make sure your resolutions become habits and don’t become another resolution in the garbage.
Make Sure Your Life Is In Order
Photo by Magic Madzik.
While there’s a certain charm to the “no better time than now” idea behind forming good habits, the fact of the matter is that your willpower is limited. Psychology Today recommends waiting until your life is in order (at least somewhat) before forming a new habit. If stressed, working on some other form of personal growth, or otherwise not in a normal daily routine, you’ll find it much harder to keep up with a good habit.
Focus On One Good Habit
We won’t sugarcoat it for you: forming good habits can be tough. Habits are something that are deeply ingrained in our behaviour, which is why quitting a bad habit is so hard. Similarly, starting up a good habit is going to take a lot of work and conditioning before it becomes something automatic. If you try to take on too much at once, you are probably setting yourself up for failure. So focus on just one good habit for now—even if it’s a small one—and move on to the others later.
Work Yourself Into It Gradually
While your goal may be to end up doing something every day (like, say, exercising), it’s unlikely that you’re going to be able to reach that goal right out of the gate. It’s going to take time and willpower to condition yourself, so don’t beat yourself up if you miss days at the beginning. Start ramping up that good habit gradually for more successful habit forming.
Part of this is setting goals for yourself. If you can set a different goal, say, each week, you can motivate yourself without getting overwhelmed. Try exercising just two or three days the first week, then set a slightly higher goal for the next week, and so on. As you get more used to the act of exercising during the day, it’ll become easier for you to work toward your end goal of working out every day.
Piggyback It With Other, Already-Formed Habits Or Routines
eHow notes that a really great way to help yourself remember to do certain things is to “piggyback” them with other habits or routines you already have. Say you want to start flossing daily. Flossing is one of those habits that we neglect more often because we forget, rather than us just being lazy. Put the floss in a conspicuous place by your toothbrush, and every time you brush your teeth, grab the floss and do a quick run-through. Similarly, if you want to start taking vitamins, stick the bottle in your coffee mug so every time you go to make your coffee in the morning, you can pop your multivitamin for the day.
Get An Accountability Buddy
Photo by Lululemon Athletica.
We’ve talked about this before, and it’s an oldie but a goodie: get a buddy to help you stay accountable. Motivating yourself to go to the gym every day or start eating better can be difficult when you’re on your own, but if you have someone else around with whom you can exercise or eat with often, you’re more likely to keep up with those activities.
Stick With It For 21 Days
When you decide on that final goal, it can seem a bit overwhelming (“I want to exercise every day…for the rest of my life“). Once you turn a resolution into a habit, though, things are going to get a lot easier, and research shows it shouldn’t take that long. It takes about 21 days for a habit to form, so as long as you keep up your motivation, set your gradual goals, and kept up that resolution for three or four weeks, the hard part’s probably over. That habit’s now ingrained in your brain to the point where remembering it and being motivated to do it has become automatic instead of something you need to force yourself to do. This doesn’t mean quit trying after 21 days, of course—it’ll still probably take a bit of work—but if you’re feeling discouraged at any point in the process, it’s a good thing to aim for, knowing that in just a few weeks it’ll be a bit less difficult.
We’ve all tried to form good habits in the past, and while these are some great tips for starting out, they certainly aren’t the only strategies in the habit-former’s arsenal. If you’ve successfully formed a good habit in the past, share with us what worked for you (and what didn’t) in the comments.

NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There are no clear signs that eating cured meats like ham, bacon or hot dogs could increase the odds of getting pancreatic cancer, according to a new study.
Some research has hinted that might be the case, because the preservatives used for curing, nitrate and nitrite, cause tumors in lab animals.
Because pancreatic cancer is highly lethal, scientists have been on a quest to identify factors that might trigger it. Every year, some 43,000 Americans are diagnosed with the disease, and 95 percent die within five years.
"Prevention is really the best way to save a life," said Dr. Daniel Chang, a cancer specialist at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, who was not involved in the new work.
To probe the role of curing chemicals, researchers from the National Cancer Institute used a 124-item food questionnaire to test how much nitrate and nitrite people got from their diet.
Of the more than 300,000 people who filled out the questionnaire, just over 1,000 -- about a third of one percent -- developed pancreatic cancer over the next 10 years.
Men who ate the most of the preservatives did appear to have a slightly higher chance of getting the disease, but that increase was so small it might as well have been due to chance, according to the study.
There was no hint of a higher risk among women.
The new work adds to a growing body of evidence that has failed to link pancreatic cancer to certain foods or nutrients, such as dietary fiber and vitamin D.
"We don't have a consistent trend of studies showing that eating more of this or less of that is clearly contributing to the risk of pancreatic cancer," said Dr. Andrew Ko, a cancer researcher at the University of California, San Francisco.
The authors, whose report is published in the American Journal of Epidemiology, could not be reached for comment.
Regardless of whether cured meats are linked to pancreatic cancer, experts say the study doesn't mean people shouldn't strive to eat a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables, and low in fatty foods such as cured meats.
"There are a number of good reasons to practice improved dietary habits -- not just for cancer prevention," said Dr. Al Benson, a cancer specialist at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago. "We routinely recommend people limit their intake of fatty foods, and many of these animal products also contain nitrite and nitrate salts."
Lighting up, eating lots of sugar, and being obese have all been tied to a higher risk of pancreatic cancer in earlier work.
"By and large, the best we can do to prevent pancreatic and other cancers," said Benson, "is to encourage people to avoid smoking, to avoid obesity, and to practice improved dietary habits."
SOURCE: http://bit.ly/ijofp8 American Journal of Epidemiology, online June 17, 2011.
The #1 daily resource for health and lifestyle news!
Your daily resource for losing weight and staying fit.
We could all use some encouragement now and then - we're human!
Explore your destiny as you discover what's written in your stars.
The latest news, tips and recipes for people with diabetes.
Healthy food that tastes delicious too? No kidding.
Latin Recipesfor Diabetes
5 Arthritis Workouts
A Fool's Errand
Lowered OvarianCancer Risk
What's YourSodium IQ?

"A List of the Names of Provincials..."
|Resource Bank Contents|
click image for close-up
Despite initial resistance to their participation, black soldiers fought for the patriot cause in every major battle of the Revolutionary War, including the military engagement that began it on April 19, 1775 -- the battles of Lexington and Concord.
Prince Easterbrooks (also referred to as Estabrook) served in nearly every major campaign of the war. An undated broadside identifying him as " a Negro Man" lists Easterbrooks among the wounded from Lexington "in the late Engagement with His Majesty's Troops at Concord, &c." Easterbrooks had enlisted in the company of Captain John Parker, the first to engage the British at Lexington.
Peter Salem, whose Framingham masters had freed him so that he could enlist, was also among the dozen or more black men, slave and free, who fought that day. Salem and Cuff Whitemore later gained fame and commendation for their parts in the Battle of Bunker Hill.
Lemuel Haynes, a free black man who would later become a renowned minister, did not join the battle against the British until late in April; nevertheless, he wrote a poem about the battle at Lexington.
Image Credit: Courtesy Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston
Free black Patriots
Part 2: Narrative | Resource Bank Contents | Teacher's Guide
Africans in America: Home | Resource Bank Index | Search | Shop
WGBH | PBS Online | ©

Morris Frank & Buddy made history in 1928 when they arrived in New York City as the first dog guide team in the United States. Frank stepped off the curb to cross West Street, astounding the throng of reporters when he and Buddy safely reached the other side.
This European drawing depicts a man being led by a dog guide in 1639. Other clues exist that suggest that the use of dogs to lead people who are blind began as early as 79 A.D
After reading an article by Dorothy Harrison Eustis, Morris Frank wrote Mrs. Eustis and asked that she train him with a dog guide. In return, he traveled across North America, spreading the word about these specially trained dogs. Eustis and Frank founded The Seeing Eye.
A Seeing Eye instructor follows behind two female students as their dogs lead them across a busy street. The streets of Morristown have served as The Seeing Eye's extended classroom since 1931.
Shepherd puppies await a ride in one of the school's earliest puppy vans. Today, about 800 volunteer families raise Seeing Eye puppies in conjunction with 4-H Clubs in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and parts of Delaware and New York.
The Seeing Eye's main campus is about 90 acres, situated just outside the Morristown, N.J., town limits. It overlooks the historic Washington Valley and includes an administrative building, student boarding and dining facilities, kennels, and a canine health center.
Instructor Georges Debetaz, one of the school's first instructors, was with The Seeing Eye for 43 years. His statue, on the front lawn of the main campus, also honors all those who trained thousands of dogs and their owners over the past eight decades.
A one-third mile walking path provides a relaxing place to unwind, for students, staff, and dogs.
The campus overlooks the bucolic Washington Valley, which replicates the rural settings of some students home towns. Just minutes away, downtown Morristown reproduces the busy streets, frequent construction projects, and tempting smells of city life.
Instructors spend four months training about 10 dogs at a time, then spend the fifth month instructing in-class students in the use of those dogs.
Dogs must learn intelligent disobedience, which means that they must disobey any command that would lead to danger. Here, an instructor follows behind a student as he and his Seeing Eye dog practice working around an obstacle on the sidewalk.
Seeing Eye dogs learn five basic commands: "forward," "left," "right," "hup-up" to quicken the pace, and "pfui" to correct a mistake. After introducing a dog to these commands and to the harness for a few days on campus, the instructor begins in "real-world" settings.
One day each year, every puppy-raising volunteer is invited to The Seeing Eye to watch training demonstrations, pictured here, and learn more about the school's programs. It's just a small way to say "thanks" for all our puppy raisers do!
With basic skills mastered, dogs are ready to learn more about traffic. Seeing Eye instructors drive cars in controlled situations to teach dogs the danger of traffic and the tools to respond to it, as well as to teach students how to interpret their dogs' reactions to nearby traffic.
The Breeding Station in Chester, N.J., houses about 60 adult dogs, especially selected for breeding based on factors such as family history, health, temperament, breed, and size. The kennel design is based on interconnected geometric pavilions so that the dogs can see each other and see people enter the room.
This litter of Labrador retrievers catches a snooze in between playtime. Once they're a little older, staff members and volunteers entertain and socialize the puppies in special playrooms equipped with toys designed to build confidence and knowledge.
This mom and her pup thrive in a sun-filled pavilion where all the dogs have access to private outdoor areas. Throughout the Breeding Station, special care is taken to guard against introduction of germs or contaminants.
Breeding Station employees enjoy a visit by television celebrity Betty White. About 640 puppies are born each year at the facility, which opened in 2002.
The Seeing Eye breeds and trains, from left, yellow Labs, German shepherds, black Labs, golden retrievers, and chocolate Labs. We also breed and train Lab/golden crosses and occasionally train boxers.
When puppies reach the age of about 7 weeks, like these three golden retriever pups, they leave the Breeding Station to spend the next 15 to 17 months of their lives with volunteer puppy raisers.
Before conception even occurs, throughout training, and until the end of its working career, a Seeing Eye dog has been directed to its special destiny with the benefit of science. The Seeing Eye continues to lead the way in its research in canine genetics, breeding, disease control, and behavior.
This playful German shepherd puppy might someday become the perfect half of a dog guide team. Variations in temperament, size, strength, stride, and energy are characteristics that must be closely matched to create a successful partnership.
Exposure to all types of settings and situations, as this puppy enjoying a professional baseball game can attest, ensures that dogs entering formal training have the best chance of success. Puppy-raising clubs plan frequent outings so that as adults the dogs are calm and confident under a variety of circumstances.
When puppies return to The Seeing Eye for formal training, the importance of playtime does not diminish. Play yards in the kennels are equipped with lots of toys and are staffed by people who spend their days in constant interaction with dogs.
A teenager gets his first experience traveling with a dog guide after first walking the same route with his cane. Several times a year, The Seeing Eye Seminar for Youth hosts teens who are beginning to investigate whether or not travel with a dog guide is right for them.
Global Positioning Systems open up the world to the blind. This graduate wears equipment that verbally tells him his exact location. Seeing Eye instructors work with graduates to help them maintain the safety of the team while learning to integrate GPS into their travels.
A sculpture of The Seeing Eye's co-founder Morris Frank and his dog Buddy now stands in downtown Morristown. In 2005, current President Jim Kutsch, left, unveiled the statue as sculptor J. Seward Johnson and former President Kenneth Rosenthal looked on.

Note: This website is no longer being updated and is being maintained for archive purposes by the Department of Botany, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution. Please see About the Project for further details.
The Juréia-Itatins Ecological Station (Estação Ecológica Juréia-Itatins) (EEJI) occupies portions of the municipalities Peruíbe, Itariri, Miracatu and Iguape in the valley of the Ribeira de Iguape River, 210 km south-west of the city São Paulo. The EEJI has roughly the shape of an inverted triangle 90 km wide and 45 km from north to south (Map 53). It is crossed by the Una do Prelado River, a black-water river that winds north-eastward more or less parallel to the Atlantic coast for 80 km, isolating the Serra da Juréia. To the north-east the region is delimited by the Paranapu massif, a buttress of the Serra dos Itatins.
The Serra da Juréia (which means prominent point in Tupi-Guaraní) is an inselberg connected to the rest of the mainland by a plain of alluvial sands, which formed during a post-glacial submersion by the sea. This is known as the Cananéia Transgression, which took place some 5100 years ago when the sea was c. 3 m above its present level (Por and Imperatriz-Fonseca 1984). For long periods the Una do Prelado River and its principal tributary the Cacunduva River were for much of their length turned into saltwater gulfs, which cut off the Serra da Juréia from the mainland. Evidence of this insular past includes the occurrence of "sambaquis" deposits of shells and other debris left by prehistoric indigenous populations c. 30 km inland from the estuary of the Una. The isolation brought about by the Cananéia Transgression and the fact that the forests on the flanks and top of this massif are even now separated from the body of the Atlantic forest by the alluvial plains, may be interpreted as conditions suitable for speciation.
The Serra da Juréia is a Precambrian horst. The Juréia massif covers an area of 58 km² and reaches elevations of 400-800 m. It is divided by a depression occupied by the Verde River, whose clear water and steep southern course are fed by the waterfalls of Juréia. The eastern face of the massif falls abruptly to the ocean, forming a steeply sloping coastline. The Una do Prelado River rises in the region of Banhado Grande south-west of the Serra da Juréia and is formed almost exclusively by rainwater; it is nutrient poor though rich in humic substances, with a pH of 3.7 (Por 1986; Por et al. 1984). The Una runs over a low plain (up to 4 m above sea-level) and is influenced by the tides over almost its entire course. In times of drought, seawater penetrates as far as 30 km into the estuary. The salinity of the waters of the Una and Cacunduva rivers is regulated entirely by rainfall and tides. Mangrove swamps extend as far as c. 5 km inland from the estuary.
The watercourses that arise on the Serra da Juréia contain clear nutrient-poor water with a pH of 5-6.5. There are springs in the natural campo, but most of the streams are intermittent and come from rainfall. During periods of intense rain, small waterfalls may turn into large cataracts. The hydrological wealth of the region results from two principal factors lithology and climate.
The Ribeira lowland (Baixada do Ribeira) is characterized by average annual temperatures of c. 21°-22°C and the higher elevations with c. 17°-18°C. Relative humidity is above 80% and the average annual rainfall is c. 2200 mm (Camargo, Pinto and Troppmair 1972). High rainfall is due to the influence of two air masses: the Tropical Atlantic Mass originates in the South Atlantic and is active throughout the year, directly influencing the distribution and quantity of rainfall; the Polar Atlantic Mass arises in Patagonia and is more limited in its effect but still of great importance, causing abrupt drops in temperature that may cause frost at the higher elevations (Tôha 1985).
On the tops of the mountains the climate has favoured the formation of soils, which have an average depth of 2-3 m. On the slopes, which may be as steep as 35°, the soils are shallower and in the absence of vegetation are soon eroded. In the lowlands between the mountains lie the alluvial soils that result from recent sedimentation. The nature of the mountain soils hinders the infiltration of water to deeper layers; thus the water table does not lie deep, and water surfaces as a large number of springs and watercourses.
The vegetation of the region varies according to altitude and soil. There are five main types: open campo, forest, scrub, herbaceous restinga vegetation, and mangrove (Eiten 1970).
The open "campo" vegetation, which covers the tops of the mountains at elevations over 300 m, is grass-herb-subshrub fields with scattered low to medium-tall xeromorphic shrubs.
The forest formation includes a series of evergreen tropical forest types covering the slopes and base of the mountains (Coutinho 1962). The three most important types are: (1) a moist tall forest on the seaward slope of the Serra do Mar; (2) littoral tall forest, a low-altitude forest on alluvial and lacustrine clays (and occasionally sands) of the inner part of the littoral plain; and (3) restinga forest, a low to medium-tall forest, with a composition very different from the slopes of the Serra do Mar.
The other formations that occur in the "restinga", a littoral sandy plain c. 40 km in extent (Silva and Leito-Filho 1982), are: (1) restinga closed scrub, a low to tall and very dense evergreen scrub forest; (2) restinga open scrub ("nhundu"), composed of evergreen shrubs and low twisted trees; and (3) herbaceous beach vegetation, closed to sparse evergreen grass-herb fields covering the low dunes and beaches (Hueck 1955).
The mangrove vegetation is an evergreen low forest, or low to tall and closed scrub, of Rhizophora mangle, Avicennia schaueriana, Laguncularia racemosa and Hibiscus pernambucensis, usually with distinct boundaries between it and the restinga forest.
The flora of Brazil's Atlantic Coast forest is incompletely known, with new species and even new genera being discovered. Random samples of the moist forest indicate significant endemism, which has been estimated as 53.5% among tree species (Mori et al. 1983) and 37.5% in non-arborescent families - or 74.4% including Bromeliaceae. Endemism of palms is a rather high 64%, with 49 species endemic to the Atlantic coastal forests; 11 are considered threatened. Endemism for bamboo genera has been estimated at 40.9%; the region has been a refuge for various primitive species of bambusoid grasses and some woody groups (Soderstrom and Calderón 1974). The isolation of the Atlantic forest from Amazonia took place in the late Tertiary, which explains why this region has many plant species in common with the Amazon, but also many endemics.
A Flora of the Serra da Juréia is in preparation. Preliminary results on the slope forest indicate the presence of 76 families of dicotyledons, 21 of monocotyledons and 14 of ferns and fern allies; c. 500-600 species are estimated for the region. The canopy varies in height from 20-30 m, with emergents reaching 35 m. The families most numerous in tree species are Myrtaceae (18 spp.), Leguminosae (16), Melastomataceae (10) and Annonaceae (9). The shrub layer varies in height from 2 m to 5 m, and is distinguished by many species of Rubiaceae (15), Acanthaceae (9), Piperaceae (5), Rutaceae (5) and Myrtaceae (5). The tree and shrub layers also contain a wide diversity of lianas, creepers and epiphytes. Among the epiphytes, most of the species are in Orchidaceae, Bromeliaceae, Araceae and Gesneriaceae or ferns, whereas most lianas and vines are in Compositae, Malpighiaceae and Bignoniaceae.
Results of a three-year inventory programme confirm the wealth of the flora and a number of facts point to the importance of its conservation: the occurrence of rare species (known from few specimens), such as Passiflora watsoniana and Piper bowei; the occurrence of species with disjunct distributions, such as Loreya spruceana (Melastomataceae), known from the Amazon region; a large number of saprophytes of the families Orchidaceae, Burmanniaceae, Gentianaceae, and Triuridaceae (so uncommon in herbarium collections); and the discovery of new species - Anthurium jureianum (Araceae) and others not yet described in Sinningia (Gesneriaceae), Merostachys (Poaceae - Bambusoideae), Sorocea (Moraceae) and Barbacenia (Velloziaceae).
The region includes important reserves of timber, such as Ocotea spp., Nectandra spp. ("canelas, niúva, sassafrás"), Macrosamanea pedicellaris ("timboúva"), Hymenaea courbaril ("jatobá"), Cariniana estrellensis ("jequitibá"), Cabralea canjerana ("canjerana"), Tabebuia cassinoides ("caxeta"); fibres, such as Eriotheca pentaphylla ("ouvira"), Bactris setosa ("tucum"), Hibiscus pernambucensis; and edible plants, such as Euterpe edulis (palm heart), Psidium cattleianum ("araçá"), Rheedia gardneriana ("bacupari"). These resources were traditionally used by local people, but this usage is now prohibited by environmental legislation.
Most of the inhabitants in the region ("caiçaras") have a rich pharmacopoeia based mostly on medicinal plants. Species used include Psidium guajava ("goiaba"), P. cattleianum and Solanum inaequale ("quina-branca") for diarrhoea; Renealmia petasites ("capitiu") for malaria; Rheedia pachiptera ("bálsamo") and Struthanthus spp. ("enxertinho") for external wounds; Aphelandra ornata ("erva-de-lagarto") for snake bite; and Casearia sylvestris ("erva-de-macaco") and Bactris sp. ("tucum-branco") for bruises (Born, Diniz and Rossi 1989). Studies begun during the last four years will certainly reveal more species with medicinal properties.
Social and environmental values
Despite its status as an Ecological Station, Juréia is inhabited by 365 families of caiçaras, the descendants of an old Amerindian-European mixture, who are grouped in 22 villages or live in widely isolated huts along the beaches and rivers (Por and Imperatriz-Fonseca 1984). There is just one small fishing community, at the mouth of the Una do Prelado River. The government of São Paulo State has a plan for management of the station, to make possible the maintenance of the communities with minimal disturbance to the environment, and intends to eradicate almost all banana plantations and insure forest regeneration.
Geographical isolation has helped to allow persistence of sites of historical interest, such as the Caminho do Imperador (Imperial Highway), which was opened in 1545 at the behest of the Governor General of the province to link the townships of Cananéia and Iguape with São Vicente. The road is still used by local people, mostly for religious pilgrimages.
The region has been used for ecological tourism on account of its scenic beauty and the presence of several threatened species of animals and plants. Routine tourism occurs at only a few sites such as Cachoeira do Paraíso, yet brings a considerable number of people to the region each year.
The Serra da Juréia is particularly useful for research on speciation because of its natural isolation from the rest of the Atlantic forest.
In the long run, the greatest economic value of the Juréia-Itatins Ecological Station may be the preservation of a good sample of Atlantic forest biodiversity, allowing for studies and sustainable exploitation of indigenous species in the future. Other uses include the academic training of scientists and environmental education through ecological tourism.
The forest has undergone relatively few disturbances, mainly from agriculture (banana plantations) developed in the lowlands more intensively in the past, before establishment of the Ecological Station. Despite its isolation, hunting and logging do occur. Nowadays the area is threatened mostly by palm-heart gatherers.
The natural conservation of the region can be explained by its isolation. The mountains of the Juréia-Itatins massif make access to c. 40 km of restinga impossible by road. The area has thus been preserved over the years.
On 8 April 1958, State Decree No. 31,650 created Serra dos Itatins Reserva Florestal Estadual (State Forest Reserve). On 28 January 1963, SD No. 41,538 turned the area of the Serra dos Itatins over to the Guaraní Amerindians. In 1979 the Secretaria Especial do Meio Ambiente (an agency of the federal government) was granted an area in the Juréia massif, where a Biological Reserve was created. In 1980 the president signed a decree whereby 236 km² of Juréia were disappropriated and could not be used for construction of two nuclear power plants (Iguape I and II); in 1985 the idea of constructing the power plants and the area were abandoned by the federal government. On 20 January 1986, the state government of São Paulo created the Juréia-Itatins Ecological Station by SD No. 24,646. On 28 April 1987, the government approved Law No. 5649, whereby the EEJI actual area of 792 km² was defined (indigenous and other lands were excluded).
The region is now an official ecological sanctuary. Juréia provides protection for example for timber species and palmito palm, and dozens of rare and threatened mammal and bird species, including spider monkey, jaguar, otter, capybara and tinamou.
Map 53. Juréia-Itatins Ecological Station, South-eastern Brazil (CPD Site SA17)
Born, G.C.C., Diniz, P.S.N.B. and Rossi, L. (1989). Levantamento etnofarmacológico e etnobotânico nas comunidades da Cachoeira do Guilherme e parte do Rio Comprido (sítio Ribeirão Branco sítio Morrote de Fora) da Estação Ecológica de Juréia-Itatins, Iguape, São Paulo. Secretaria do Meio Ambiente do Estado de São Paulo, São Paulo. 94 pp.
Camargo, J.C.G., Pinto, S.A.F. and Troppmair, H. (1972). Estudo fitogeográfico e ecológico da bacia hidrográfica paulista do Rio da Ribeira. Biogeografia, Inst. Geogr., Univ. So Paulo 5: 1-30.
Capobianco, J.P. (1988). Juréia. Horizonte Geográfico 1(2): 30-39.
Coutinho, L.M. (1962). Contribuiço ao conhecimento da mata pluvial tropical. Bol. Fac. Filos. Ciênc. Letr., Univ. So Paulo 257, Botânica 18: 12-19.
Eiten, G. (1970). A vegetação do estado de São Paulo. Bol. Inst. Bot. 7: 11-47.
Hueck, K. (1955). Plantas e formaço organogênica das dunas do litoral paulista. Parte 1. Instituto de Botânica, Secretaria da Agricultura do Estado de São Paulo. 130 pp.
Mori, S.A., Boom, B.M., Carvalho, A.M. de and Santos, T.S. dos (1983). Southern Bahian moist forests. Bot. Rev. 49: 155-232.
Por, F.D. (1986). Stream type diversity in the Atlantic lowland of the Juréia area (subtropical Brazil). Hydrobiologia 131: 39-45.
Por, F.D. and Imperatriz-Fonseca, V.L. (1984). The Juréia Ecological Reserve, São Paulo, Brazil facts and plans. Environm. Conserv. 11: 67-70.
Por, F.D., Shimizu, G.Y., Almeida-Por, M.S., Tôha, F.A.L. and Rocha Oliveira, I. (1984). The blackwater river estuary of Rio Una do Prelado (São Paulo, Brazil): preliminary hydrobiological data. Rev. Hydrobiol. Trop. 17: 245-258.
Silva, A.F. da and Leitão Filho, H.F. (1982). Composição florística e estrutura de um trecho da Mata Atlântica de encosta no município de Ubatuba (São Paulo, Brasil). Revista Brasil. Bot. 5: 43-52.
Soderstrom, T.R. and Calderón, C.E. (1974). Primitive forest grasses and evolution of the Bambusoideae. Biotropica 6: 141-153.
Tôha, F.A.L. (1985). Ecologia de zoopláncton do estuário do Rio Una do Prelado (São Paulo, Brasil). Ph.D. thesis, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo.
This Data Sheet was written by Dra. Maria
Candida H. Mamede, Dra. Inês Cordeiro and Lucia Rossi (Secretaria de Estado do Meio
Ambiente, Instituto de Botânica, Caixa Postal 4005, 01061-970 São Paulo, SP, Brazil).
North | Middle | South
Botany Home Page | Smithsonian Home Page

Many of you have probably heard about asteroid 2005 YU55, the massive rocky body that tomorrow night will
collide with Earth in a ball of flames pass the planet safely, albeit closer than any asteroid in the last 35 years.
And while astronomers are certain we'll be spared this time, the brush with such a massive rock raises important questions about so-called near-Earth objects like asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. So without further ado, here are ten things you probably didn't know about our solar system's more minor bodies.
10. The difference between asteroids, comets, meteoroids, meteors and meteorites
Let's just get this out of the way, shall we? According to NASA's Near Earth Object (NEO) Program, a large, rocky body in orbit around the Sun is referred to as either an asteroid or a minor planet. Asteroids are thought to have been created in the "warmer" solar system, i.e. within Jupiter's orbit. Comets, on the other hand, are believed to have formed in the cold, outer solar system — beyond the orbit of our solar system's outermost planets.
Comets and asteroids also differ in composition, the most notable difference being the comet's possession of an icy nucleus, which, when subjected to the relatively warmer temperatures of the inner solar system, begins to vaporize, creating a distinctive glow called a "coma," and a long, bright tail of dust and debris. There are other features that distinguish asteroids and comets, but recent findings continue to blur the lines between the two.
Smaller Sun-orbiting particles, thought to originate from comets and asteroids, are known as meteoroids. When a meteoroid enters Earth's atmosphere, it usually vaporizes, becoming a meteor in the process (aka a "shooting star"). If a meteoroid is large enough to make it through Earth's atmo and make landfall without vaporizing completely, it's no longer a meteor, but a meteorite. The same goes for asteroids. (For more info, see NASA's NEO FAQ page, which is also the source of the handy chart featured here.)
9. Meteoroids: there's a lot of them
Seeing as a meteoroid can be classified as pretty much anything bigger than a speck of dust and smaller than an asteroid, it makes sense that there would be quite a few of them orbiting the Sun and burning up in Earth's atmo at any given moment. The International Space Station, for example is the most heavily shielded spacecraft ever to occupy Earth's orbit. Why? To keep its astronauts and equipment safe from meteoroids. It's estimated that 100,000 of the buggers will make contact with the ISS over the course of its 20-year stint in space, and while the majority of these wont measure larger than a centimeter across, medium size particles (between 1cm and 10cm across) still pose a grave threat to the space station and its crew, and call for impressive sounding defensive measures like "multi-layered hypervelocity Whipple shields." (For more info on the safety measures employed on the International Space Station, see this informational sheet prepared by NASA's Micrometeoroid and Orbital Debris (MMOD) Protection program.)
8. Your odds of getting smacked by a meteorite
They're slim, even if Earth is constantly being bombarded by meteoroids. The fact is that most of them simply don't survive long enough once breaking atmo to attain meteorite status, and those that do have barely any chance of actually hitting anybody. Such an event is only confirmed to have happened once, when Annie Hodges of Sylacauga, Alabama (pictured here) was struck in the hip by an eight pound meteorite after it crashed through her roof and bounced off a radio. Several studies have attempted to calculate the likelihood of a meteorite actually hitting a human target, taking into consideration everything from the average time a person spends outside to the amount of Earth's surface that the average person takes up. One of the most commonly cited figures is from a paper published in Nature in 1985, that calculates the rate of impacts to humans as .005 per year, or once every 180 years.
7. Why you need a telescope to spot 2005 YU55
YU55 is what's known as a C-type — or "carbonaceous" — asteroid, meaning it is especially rich in carbon. The composition of C-type asteroids makes them extremely dark (think darker than charcoal), and therefore difficult to spot with anything weaker than a telescope with at least a 6" mirror. (For those of you with scopes with this much imaging power, be sure to check our instructional on how to spot 2005 YU55 tomorrow night.)
6. 2005 YU55 could help us learn more about Panspermia
Panspermia is the hypothesis that the building blocks for life are found throughout the universe, and are carried around on asteroids, comets and the like. If you've ever heard someone say that life on Earth may have come from space, they were probably talking about Panspermia (or the related astrobiological hypothesis of exogenesis).
According to Dan Yeomans, manager of NASA's Near-Earth Object Program, the 2005 YU55 flyby presents a unique opportunity to learn about C-type asteroids, without which, Yeoman speculates, humans probably wouldn't exist. Since we rarely get an opportunity to see an asteroid so close (the last time we saw an asteroid like this so close to home was over 30 years ago), astronomers and astrophysicists the world over will be observing the asteroid to learn as much as possible about its composition. Objects like 2005 YU55 play an important part in the Panspermia hypothesis for their role in bringing carbon-based materials to a young Earth. If astronomers were to observe evidence that 2005 YU55 also harbors other organic materials (or even frozen water — see the note above about blurring the lines between asteroids and comets), it would go a long way in supporting the Panspermia hypothesis.
5. Getting hit by 2005 YU55 would suck
Ok, so you almost definitely knew this, but just how much would it suck, exactly? After all, Yoemans says that the NASA's Near-Earth Object program is "extremely confident, 100 percent confident" that 2005 YU55 will not make contact with Earth, but that doesn't mean we can't speculate over how catastrophic it would be were the asteroid actually to hit us.
Well, according to Jay Melosh, professor of Earth and atmospheric sciences at Purdue University, if 2005 YU55 were to hit the planet, it would likely produce a crater about 4 miles wide and 1700 feet deep, generating 7+ magnitude earthquakes and, depending on where it struck, devastating tsunami waves (for more info see Impact: Earth! which is based on Melosh's calculations).
Again, will this actually happen? No. But observing the asteroid will help us be better prepared for when one does plot a course for Earth. As Yoeman says, "this [asteroid] is not a threat... But it is an opportunity."
4. Speaking of catastrophic Earth-asteroid impacts, aren't we about due for one of those?
Maybe, but it's not likely. Some of you may have heard about an asteroid named Apophis. Astronomers believe Apophis to be 885 feet across, and estimate that on April 13, 2029, the asteroid will fly within 20,000 miles of Earth's surface — that's closer than the orbit of many of the planet's satellites.
Astronomers are confident that Apophis will spare us on its 2029 flyby, but say that there is a 1/250,000 chance that it will pass through a "gravitational keyhole" that would set the asteroid on course for a future planetary impact exactly 7 years later. Could it happen? Yes. Is it likely? No.
...But it could totally happen.
3. But Michael Bay told me we could deflect an incoming asteroid with nuclear weapons... we can do that, right?
Actually, yes. Back in 2007, NASA issued a report claiming that the best way to deflect asteroids and other near Earth objects away from Earth was with the use of nuclear devices... in space. Except NASA wouldn't do it by planting it in the asteroid's core, ala Armageddon, they'd do it by triggering the explosion in the vicinity of the asteroid. The power of the explosion would amounts to a nuclear-bomb-sized "nudge" capable of throwing the Asteroid off-course and preventing a collision with Earth.
2. We can even "finesse" an asteroid off a collision course with Earth. That is to say, WITHOUT the use of nuclear explosions...
...because some people think the idea of "weaponizing" space isn't such a good idea, chief among them being the group of astronauts and scientists comprising The B612 Foundation (The Little Prince, anyone?).
One of the methods of deflection proposed by The B612 Foundation is to launch a probe of significant mass (weighing 1—2 tons, but depending upon the size of the asteroid) and "parking" it in space — not on the asteroid, but near it. The gravity of the asteroid would pull on the probe, but the mass of the probe would be just enough to pull ever so slightly on the asteroid, as well.
If we were to move the probe very slowly with jet propulsion, we could, in theory, gently tug on the asteroid, "finessing" it into a safe orbit. (For more details on this approach, check out this brilliant TED talk on asteroids and the technologies we can use to deflect them away from Earth, delivered earlier this year by Bad Astronomy's Phil Plait at TEDxBoulder.
1. We have found almost all of the asteroids that pose a threat to Earth. We think.
Recent findings from NASA's WISE satellite indicate that there are actually far fewer asteroids and near-Earth objects threatening life on Earth than we once thought. What's more, the so called "Near-Earth Asteroid Census" found that 90 percent of NEOs have now been mapped, which should allow us to keep an eye on them in the event one decides to make a bee-line for Earth.

Methyl bromide is an important part of ornamental
production. The combination of methyl bromide and chloropicrin has long been
used to control weeds, nematodes and plant pathogens like Pythium. The majority
of this fumigant is used for strawberries, fruit trees and vegetables in
Florida and California, but there is a substantial amount of the product used
in floriculture production. Some industries have found acceptable alternatives
over the past five years and no longer use methyl bromide. Floriculture has
been struggling to find an acceptable alternative.
The production of field-grown cut flowers, some in-ground
shade house flowers and caladiums rely on availability of methyl bromide (MBr)
for economically acceptable crops. I have even met a few greenhouse growers who
still use soil as a part of their potting medium and fumigate the resulting
blend with MBr before use.
The California Cut Flower Commission (CCFC) took the lead in
funding research on MBr alternatives in ornamental production in the early
1990s. Research has involved everything from alternative fumigants;
solarization; treatment of soil with steam, microwaves or UV rays; soil
fertility; and amendment with green manures and biological agents. Current
alternative fumigants are 1, 3-D (Telone), chloropicrin and metam sodium
(Vapam), which can be applied alone and in combination. In some cases,
application through drip irrigation systems has been developed with excellent
results. In addition, the use of granular Basamid has been researched
extensively, often in conjunction with Telone or chloropicrin.
Much of the new research sponsored by the California Cut
Flower industry has concentrated on weed control. Research on Fusarium wilt
fungi (on mini-carnations and bulbs such as Dutch iris) and nematodes is also
ongoing. Some of the key crops in these trials have been ranunculus, gladiolus,
callas lilies, delphiniums and stock. Although MBr is used in saran houses in
both California and Florida, the bulk of the product is used in field
production, and therefore, much of the research has been done in the field.
In the early 1990s, a group of scientists at the University
of California, led by Dr. Jim Sims (UC-Riverside) started extensive research
into the use of methyl iodide (MI) as a replacement for MBr. Their results were
very encouraging, but it was not until 1999 that Arvesta (formerly Tomen-Agro)
began to develop MI as a new product. Arvesta has continued research into MI
(trade name will be Midas), and a label was submitted to the EPA a little over
a year ago. The initial label will include bulbs and ornamentals, as well as
tomatoes, peppers and strawberries.
Midas is a liquid at room temperature, making it a little
safer to handle than MBr (gaseous at room temperature). It also has a much
shorter half-life than MBr and is unlikely to damage the ozone layer since it
falls apart before it can reach the ozone. Midas can be applied through a drip
irrigation system, making it more flexible in use patterns than MBr. It has
much the same spectrum of activity -- works on weeds, nematodes and fungal
pathogens and appears to remain in the soil longer than MBr, again because it
is a liquid at room temperature. When fields are planted too quickly after
pulling the plastic used in Midas application, some toxicity has been reported.
Many other alternatives are being researched at this time,
including sodium azide. This poison as been around for at least 50 years but
has no agricultural uses at this time. In fact, development of sodium azide was
probably curtailed when MBr became widely available in the 1970s. Under some
conditions, sodium azide explodes, which can obviously be a problem with its
usage. Presently, there are two companies developing a liquid sodium azide. The
first is American Pacific, which is working with Auburn University. The second
is Cal-Agri Products. Trials with these newer experimental formulations have
had mixed results in both California and Florida, but research continues.
An annual MBr alternatives meeting provides a forum for the many
USDA, university and private researchers to exchange ideas, report results and
learn the latest in the political arena. For 2003, the meeting will be held in
San Diego in November and will rotate to Orlando the following year.
Over the past two years, Chase Research Gardens has been
helping out with some MBr alternative trials for cut flower production. Many of
the trials we visited in 2001 and 2002 were conducted by Dr. Clyde Elmore, a
recently retired weed scientist from the University of California-Davis. Clyde
has been conducting trials at The Flower Fields (Carlsbad, Calif.) in
cooperation with Mellano and Company. One of the trials was designed to
evaluate Iodomethane (Midas) in a 50:50 combination with chloropicrin.
Treatments were shank applied and tarped. Two rates were compared to a
MBr/chloropicrin standard at 350 lbs per acre and an untreated control. We have
also rated the trials periodically, and some of the results from this year's
trials are presented in Figure 1, left.
Compared to the tarped-only control, plant vigor (rated on a
scale from 1 [dead] to 5 [excellent]) was better for all fumigated plots on
both the March 18 and the April 4 evaluations. The degree of flowering was also
evaluated and looked identical to vigor for the April 4 rating. All fumigant
treatments were very effective in killing last year's white flower seed,
compared to the tarped-only control. Those that did grow were on bed ends where
the fumigant concentration was apparently too low for 100-percent kill.
On April 22, 2003, the Pythium severity of each plot was
rated using the following scale: 1 = none, 2 = few plants with wilting or
stunting, 3 = up to 25 percent of plants dead and/or showing wilting and
stunting, 4 = 26-50 percent of plants showing wilting and stunting or dead and
missing, and 5 = more than 75 percent of plants in plots missing or showing
wilting and stunting. Disease was moderate in the control plot, but both
Midas/chloropicrin (300 lbs.) and MBr/chloropicrin (350 lbs.) had little if any
disease apparent. However, the higher rate of Midas/chloropicrin showed slight
disease or at least what appears to be disease. It is possible that the wilting
and yellowing typical of Pythium are due to some other factor in this
Dr. Elmore has been working with Glad-A-Way (one of the
world's largest producers of gladiolus) in Santa Maria, Calif., as well. Last
fall a trial was run using Midas and chloropicrin (33:67, 50:50 and 67:33)
applied at 300 lbs. per acre compared to MBr and chloropicrin in a 50:50 mix
applied at 350 lbs. per acre and an untreated control. Dr. Elmore's weed data
showed excellent results with Midas when it was used at 50 or 67 percent of the
fumigant mix but slightly reduced control when used at only 33 percent. The ability
of these mixtures to kill cormlets from previous crops was also shown. The
image above shows an untreated area with many cormlets (new gladiolus
propagules) growing between the rows. The other image above shows the ability
of Midas and chloropicrin to kill these weed cormlets when used at 50 or 67
percent of the fumigant mix.
A second gladiolus trial at the same site, compared Vapam
and Basamid combined with Inline (a mixture of 1, 3-D and chloropicrin) to an
untreated control and to an experimental formulation of sodium azide. Sodium
azide was very effective in killing many of the weeds that were present but not
as effective in killing the cormlets (40-percent kill). All three of the
commercial alternatives were very effective in weed control, as well as cormlet
eradication. Other similar trials showed the benefit of adding Inline
treatments to either Vapam or Basamid to reduce weeds.
One final set of trials has recently been completed by Dr.
Elmore working with Ano Nuevo Flowers (located just north of Santa Cruz,
Calif.). One of his trials at this site evaluated a 50:50 mixture of Midas and
chloropicrin used at 100, 200 or 300 lbs. per acre. These treatments were
compared to an untreated but tarped control. In addition, a virtually
impermeable film (VIF) was compared to the normal high density (HD) plastic.
Along with weed count data, Dr. Elmore calculated the costs of hand weeding
each treatment. Figure 3, page 45 shows that under the HD plastic 300 lbs. per
acre of Midas:chloropicrin was needed to achieve the same level of control as
200 lbs. per acre under the VIF. These data are critical to our success in
using Midas once it is legal.
Dr. Husein Ajwa (chemist, University of California-Davis)
has been instrumental in setting up several drip applied trials with Dr.
Elmore. This year's trial at The Flower Fields included the same treatments
described above and also accounted for occurrence of white flowers and weeds
(see Figure 2, page 45). Applications were made late fall 2002. We again rated
vigor on March 18 and April 4. All drip applied products significantly reduced
the severity of Pythium compared to the control. Chloropicrin (300 lbs.) and
both Inline treatments (at 150 and 300 lbs.) showed no signs of Pythium at this
rating. The 150-lb. chloropicrin rate and the Midas/chloropicrin treatments had
very few diseased plants. Sodium azide had an overall rating of about 2 (slight
disease) that was mainly affected by a single replicate with higher than
average disease expression (for that treatment). This may have been due to
differences in application efficiency, soil conditions or even distribution of
the naturally occurring Pythium inoculum. The Vapam treatment was less
effective than the others at this rating.
All drip-applied products reduced the number of white
flowers that grew from last year's crop. In many treatments, the white flowers
were on bed shoulders, indicating that the products had not reached the entire
bed as applied. Lowest counts of white flowers occurred in Metam, Midas/chloropicrin
and the 300-lb. rate of chloropicrin.
At this point, it appears that there will be a number of
alternatives for MBr for control of weeds and diseases on cut flowers. Products
such as Vapam, Basamid, Telone and Inline can each be valuable tools,
especially when used in conjunction with each other. Although Midas looks like
a very good product, we cannot use it yet, and learning the correct application
ratio (with chloropicrin) and rate per acre will be critical to insure a safe and
successful fumigation. I have not covered many of the truly experimental
products that are being researched at this time. They are in various stages of
development, and none look to be as promising yet as Midas. I want to thank the
California Cut Flower Commission and the Society of American Florists (on
behalf of the Florida growers) for the opportunity to work on this critical
topic with them.
As the deadline approaches for complete Methyl Bromide phase-out, more research is proving the efficacy of replacements.

To the Noongar traditional owners and custodians, Western Australia’s Swan River, the Derbal Yerrigan has remained at the heart of their culture and heritage for more than 40,000 years. Aboriginal people cared for the land and its waters as an integral part of their spirit and culture prior to the arrival of Europeans. They would have seen periods of climate change and sea level rises. They lived in harmony with their land and waters, firing the bush, crossing the River, camping along the River banks, getting water from springs, hunting and fishing.
Mythologically the River was created by the Waugals (giant serpents), who carved waterways and valleys as they made their way to the mouth of the river at Fremantle. Noongar people have a responsibility to protect and care for the land and its waters as an integral part of their spirit and culture.
Noel Nannup writes about Boorloo, the Nyungar name for Perth and the Derbal Yerrigan (the Swan River):
"Boorloo had a series of lakes and big mobs of kwulla, the mullet, would come up from the sea around March to lay their eggs in the shallows where they wouldn’t be disturbed. Also the Swan River, we call it the Derbal Yerrigan. Now the word derbal, to my knowledge, means mixing; because it is where you have the sweet water and the salt water coming together, especially near the islands at Burswood. That is where you have got your tidal movement. Water flows under there too…" 
The traditional owners of the land were deeply connected with the River. The Aboriginal people themselves came from the creation beings that created life and imparted knowledge and law. Len Collard describes the powerful Rainbow Serpent:
"The Waakal is the creator, the keeper of the freshwater sources. He gave us life and our trilogy of belief in the boodjar – the land – as our mother and nurturer of the Nyungar moort – family and relations – and our katitjin Law – knowledge so that we could weave the intricate tapestry known as the ‘web of life’." 
The Waugal has also been described as easing and coiling his way down the Swan River:
"Creating the bends in the river at Belmont and Maylands as he went. Before he reached the islands at the Causeway, he rattled his skin, shaking all the scales off in the mud as he wrestled to gain access to Perth Water. When he finally emerged through the Narrows, he made another big coil to create the open expanse of water downstream of the Narrows. Waugal then ascended Mount Eliza through a gap in the limestone cliffs, by way of the small valley or stormwater gully situated behind where the Swan Brewery Stables were built." 
Page last updated: Tuesday 23 November 2010

Radiologic technologists use radiation to create images used to diagnose patients. Working from doctors' orders, they use x-rays, fluoroscopes and other techniques to make these pictures. They position patients for each procedure and calculate the appropriate exposure for the x-ray including duration, distance from the patient and strength of the x-ray. They may also give injections of substances that help produce clearer images. During the x-ray process, they monitor patient condition and reactions. They then develop the x-ray film for the physician to view. Radiologic technologists also make sure that all equipment is ready and working correctly and that supplies are available.
Some radiologic technologists take additional training in diagnostic mammograms for breast cancer screening and become a certified mammography radiologic technologist. They operate specialized x-ray equipment used to detect breast tumors.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technologists, computerized tomographic (CT) technologists and ultrasound technologists are specialties within the radiologic technologist field that are described separately in this chapter.
A Radiologic Technologist requires a prerequisite of Chemistry, Math and a recommended minimum placement test in English or completion of ESL. A Radiologic Technologist must be licensed as a Certified Radiologic Technologist by the California Department of Health Services. To take the State examination, the applicant must have completed a radiologic technologist program offered by a community college, vocational school, hospital or university. Most programs in California are two-year programs leading to a certificate or associate degree and 77 units of college credit. Some programs offer a Bachelor's degree. Most employers also require certification given by the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists. Mammogram radiologic technologists must have additional training and be certified by the State. Some clinics and doctors' offices hire radiation technologists with a limited California license to x-ray specific parts of the body, such as head and neck or extremities.
Links to Additional Career Information
California Department of Public Health (916) 445-0931 www.dhs.ca.gov/rhb
Radiological Society of North America (630) 571-2670 http://www.rsna.org/
American Society of Radiologic Technologists (800) 444-2778 http://www.asrt.org/
American Registry of Radiologic Technologists (651) 687-0048 http://www.arrt.org/
Salary/Wage: Click Here

Forest and illegal logging
News (update April 2011)
- 15-17/03/2011 Fifth negotiation session with Liberia
- 15-17/02/2011 First negotiation session with DRC
- 19/01/11 Consents of the European Parliament to the conclusion of the FLEGT agreements with Congo and with Cameroon
- 12-14/01/11 FLEGT 6th Annual Coordination meeting (Final Report , Final Projects Handbook )
- 21/12/10 Initialing of the FLEGT agreement with the Central African Republic
- 24/09/10 1st round of negotiations with Gabon
Illegal logging – issues
A major problem for many timber-producing developing countries, illegal logging:
- causes environmental damage
- costs governments billions of dollars in lost revenue
- promotes corruption
- undermines the rule of law and good governance
- and in some places has financed armed conflict.
Consumer countries contribute to these problems by importing timber and wood products without ensuring they are legally sourced.
In recent years, however, producer and consumer countries alike have paid increasing attention to illegal logging.
EU response – FLEGT action plan
The FLEGT action plan – adopted in 2003 – combines measures in producer and consumer countries to facilitate trade in legal timber and eliminate illegal timber trading with the EU, through measures such as:
- support for timber–producing countries
- activities to promote trade in legal timber
- promoting ethical public procurement policies FLEGT licensed timber and EU Member State Procurement Policies
- support for private-sector initiatives to promote corporate social responsibility
- safeguards for financing and investment
- use of existing legislative instruments or adoption of new laws to support the plan
- addressing the problem of conflict timber.
Commission action: voluntary partnership agreements (VPAs)
A VPA is a WTO-compatible trade agreement between a producer country and the EU to work together to stop illegal logging.
Although voluntary, VPAs are legally-binding on the 2 parties, once agreed.
Goals of VPAs
- policy and legal reform
- governance and transparency
- capacity building
- improve control, track & verify legal compliance
- better capture revenues and rents
- secure & improve market share
VPAs incorporate a national legality assurance system that:
- defines what constitutes legal timber
- verifies compliance with this definition
- traces products from forest to export
- licenses exports, to provide assurance to markets
- independently checks all elements of the system
In each country, the VPA will need to take account of the inherent national differences in forest governance issues, forest-related legislation, the nature of forest and land rights, the nature of timber trade, current forest sector initiatives and the capacity to implement agreements.
In some developing countries, meeting these commitments will require considerable institutional strengthening and capacity building. VPAs will identify areas where there is a need for technical and financial assistance.
Series of briefing notes explain the EU's expectations for Voluntary Partnership Agreements (VPAs):
- What is a Voluntary Partnership Agreement ? The European Union approach - briefing nr 3 (2009)
- Forest Law, Enforcement and Trade : the European Union approach – briefing nr 2 (2008)
- What is FLEGT?
- What is legal timber?
- A timber legality assurance system
- Control of the supply chain
- Legality assurance systems: requirements for verification
- Voluntary Partnership Agreements
- Guidelines for independent monitoring
Countries with VPAs
- Ghana ( latest press release, September 2008 / Ghana VPA, November 2009 / VPA July 2011)
- Republic of Congo ( latest press release, May 2009 )
- Cameroon ( Conclusions of negotiations - 6 May 2010 , Information note )
- Central African Republic ( Information Note )
The agreements are being ratified and the legality assurance systems developed.
First FLEGT licence expected by 2011.
Countries currently negotiating
- Liberia: The 5th negotiation session, March 2011
- Republic Democratic of Congo ( Signed joint declaration / First negotiation session 15-17/02/2011 , Negotiation roadmap )
- Gabon: Summary of the 1st negotiation session / Common declaration for FLEGT negotiations opening
Lessons learnt from negotiations
- Negotiations provide a platform to address difficult forest governance issues, clarify legal framework and improve technical systems
- Time-bound, output-oriented stakeholder engagement helps foster understanding between stakeholders and make major, practical changes to VPAs
- Bilateral negotiation dynamic can help build country ownership of results
- EU regulation 2173/2005 for FLEGT licensing scheme (OJ L347 of 30 December 2005 )
- Implementation rules - FLEGT licensing of timber imports to EU (2008)
Due diligence for timber products
Action is needed to tackle timber trade with countries that have not signed VPAs, since the FLEGT licensing scheme doesn’t deal directly with this.
To further support FLEGT, the Commission and EU governments have examined other options.
A public consultation canvassed views on how to combat illegal logging and especially prevent the EU being a market for such timber.
A new regulation (2010)
The European Parliament and the Council have adopted a new regulation: Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 October 2010 laying down the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market. (OJ L295/23 of 12 November 2010 )
This regulation introduces 3 obligations:
- Prohibition of placing illegal timber on the EU market
- Use of Due Diligence systems to ascertain that products are legal
- Apply traceability systems
Timber from VPA countries will be considered legal, and traders will not have to implement specific due diligence measures. This provides an incentive for timber-producing countries to sign VPAs.
Regional forest law enforcement
Regional initiatives have led to ministerial declarations in:
There are also regional processes in:
- Central Africa (COMIFAC) and (OFAC)
- Caribbean and Latin America (Puembo initiative)
- East Africa (2005 - EAC protocol on Environment and natural resources management article 11 )
Those processes have created political support for forest governance reform initiatives linking producer and consumer countries, and in some cases have led to voluntary partnership agreements.
Regional timber studies
- Central Africa - cross-border timber flows in COMIFAC (2008) ( Summary , full report annexes )
- West Africa - timber flows between Guinea and Nigeria (2008) ( final report
Commission action: support to FLEGT projects
Activities to implement the FLEGT action plan are financed through:
European Development Fund
- FLEGT-related projects or support programmes under national indicative programmes (in Ghana, Cameroon, Congo, Indonesia...)
- FLEGT support project for ACP countries (managed by FAO)
EU environment and natural resources programme (development aid)
- EFI FLEGT facility (European Forest Institute)
- Numerous forest governance pilot projects with NGOs and private associations
(covering advocacy and capacity building, support for private sector, support for FLEGT processes, research and analytical forest governance projects) 6th annual coordination meeting 12-14/01/2011
- European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
FLEGT & climate change (REDD)
Tropical deforestation and forest degradation are responsible for almost 20% of global carbon emissions. In the framework of the Climate negotiations, REDD stands for "reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation". Some REDD actions support necessary policy and governance reforms.
Sources of additional information on external websites:

Introduction | Diagnostic Indications and Contraindications | Evidence for Acute-Phase Efficacy | Evidence for Continuation- and Maintenance-Phase Efficacy | Side Effects and Serious Adverse Events | Clinical Applications of Combined Treatment | Conclusion | References
Both drugs and psychotherapy have a role to play in the treatment of the mood disorders. Pharmacotherapy has been shown to be effective in literally hundreds of placebo-controlled trials and represents the current standard of treatment for both depression and mania (American Psychiatric Association 2000). Psychotherapy is widely practiced but has been less intensively studied. It has fared well in direct comparisons with pharmacotherapy, particularly the newer approaches tailored specifically for depressed populations (Hollon et al. 2002). Given the apparent efficacy of both monotherapies, it is not surprising that the two are sometimes combined. Both biological and psychosocial factors have been implicated in the etiology of the mood disorders, and it is often assumed that both medications and psychotherapy work through different mechanisms for different types of patients. Concerns among advocates that combined treatment might undercut the efficacy of their preferred modality have proved to be largely unfounded, and many patients are now treated with a combination of medication and psychotherapy (Thase and Jindal 2004).

Maryland Public Lands Managed by the Wildlife and Heritage Service
The Wildlife & Heritage Service (WHS) oversees the management of 47 Wildlife Management Areas (WMAs), ranging in size from under 20 acres to over 29,000 acres. The WMA system encompasses a total of 111,000 acres, with WMAs located in 18 of Maryland's 23 counties.
Mission of the WMA System
To conserve and enhance diverse wildlife populations and associated habitats while providing for public enjoyment of the State’s wildlife resources through hunting and other wildlife-dependent recreation.
Goals of the WMA System
The Wildlife and Heritage Service manages the WMAs for diverse wildlife populations and their habitats in a number of ways, such as applying prescribed burns, planting food plots, establishing native grasses, managing wetlands and performing timber stand work. Some habitats, such as forested areas, provide for wildlife without any direct management. Providing for wildlife-dependent recreation involves the installation and maintenance of parking lots, roads, trails, boat access facilities, and user areas for the disabled. Property boundaries, signs, and maps are also up-dated, as needed.
WMAs are primarily managed for hunting, trapping and other wildlife-dependent recreational uses. On the more popular areas, a system of lotteries and reservations is in place to avoid over use and conflicts among users. Information about hunting and trapping on public lands in Maryland is updated annually and published in the Guide to Hunting & Trapping in Maryland. Our staff also manages wildlife populations on other DNR properties, including certain State Parks, State Forests and Natural Resource Management Areas, as well as some private lands and local government properties (called Cooperative WMAs).
Expanding Public Use of WMA's
The Wildlife & Heritage Service, working in concert with DNR's Nature Tourism Program, is expanding the public use of WMA properties. For example, the Fishing Bay WMA Water Trail is specially designed for kayak and canoe users with an interest in birding and wildlife photography. This water trail offers an outstanding opportunity for paddlers to observe a variety wetland wildlife species in their native habitats.
For More Information on the Following:
- Wildlife Management Areas
- Public Hunting Lands
- WMA Maps & Information
- WMA Acres by Region
- Public Lands Managed by Region
- Public Dove Fields
- Guide to Marylandís Natural Areas
- Maryland State Parks
- Guide to Hunting and Trapping
- Hunting Seasons Calendar
- Disabled Hunter Access
- About Wildlife & Heritage Service

"Report: Climate Change Could Devastate Agriculture"
"A comprehensive USDA study concludes rising temperatures could cost farmers millions as they battle new pests, faster weed growth and get smaller yields as climate change continues."
"Climate change could have a drastic and harmful effect on U.S. agriculture, forcing farmers and ranchers to alter where they grow crops and costing them millions of dollars in additional costs to tackle weeds, pests and diseases that threaten their operations, a sweeping government report said Tuesday.
An analysis released by the Agriculture Department said that although U.S. crops and livestock have been able to adapt to changes in their surroundings for close to 150 years, the accelerating pace and intensity of global warming during the next few decades may soon be too much for the once-resilient sector to overcome.
'We're going to end up in a situation where we have a multitude of things happening that are going to negatively impact crop production,' said Jerry Hatfield, a laboratory director and plant physiologist with USDA's Agricultural Research Service and lead author of the study. 'In fact, we saw this in 2012 with the drought.'"
SEE ALSO:Source: USA TODAY, 02/07/2013

(Photo by Mario Tama/Getty Images
UNDATED (CNN) -- "F as in Fat", that's the name of a new report on the future of America's waistline.
The study conducted by the Trust for America's Health and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation uses government data on obesity to make predictions about our weight in coming years.
This year Mississippi topped the Centers for Disease Control list of chunkiest states, with a nearly 35-percent adult obesity rate.
But according to the new report, by 2030, 13 states could have obesity rates over 60-percent.
Some experts question the accuracy of this weighty research saying it is difficult to predict future weight trends accurately.
The report proposes to put America on a weight-loss challenge saying if all adults reduced their body mass index by 5-percent, states could save billions of dollars on health care.

From Sustainable Development To Green Economy – What Does This Mean For Women?
FRIDAY FILE: Twenty years after the first United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) that took place in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 it is clear that governments have failed to implement development models that are socially just and environmentally sustainable. It is in the context of revision of the of sustainable development framework that Rio+20 will take place.
This article is part of a series of Friday Files to explore some of the issues and debates related to the AWID 2012 Forum theme and draw the connections between women’s rights issues and economic power. For more information related to the planet and ecological health click here.
By Diana Aguiar
In 1983 in response to the growing evidence of an ecological crisis, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly created the World Commission on Environment and Development to analyze the environmental situation and its relationship with development. In 1987 it presented recommendations for action in a report called “Our Common Future”, better known as the Brundtland Report. This report later became the basis for the negotiations of the UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) that took place in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. Also known as the Earth Summit, UNCSD was a landmark UN conference of the 1990s, and a key process in shaping the international order in the post-Cold War era. Agenda 21, the resulting document of the Earth Summit, became the reference to the debate on sustainable development.
From Sustainable Development to Green Economy
Arguably one of the most important issues at stake now (as was the case then) is the question of the (in) compatibility of a development model based on growth with the goal of environmental sustainability. With over 50 years of international cooperation for development, the idea of development, together with human rights, has become one of the defining values of our times. It is the basis of policies and political agendas and has been used to justify revolutions and market conservatism alike.
However, with the increasing prevalence of ecological disasters, such as those related to climate change, and growing scarcity of resources, the limits of the planet to sustain a development model based on growth were apparent then and continue to be so now.
The Brundtland Report established “sustainable development” as one of the key concepts in terms of reenergizing the idea of development. Sustainable development was defined as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs" and was based on "interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars" of economic development, social development, and environmental protection.
However, critics argued that the report failed to acknowledge the need to rethink the logic of capital accumulation inherent in a model of development that has growth as the key objective. This model of development is based on the assumption that growth will naturally trickle down, ultimately reducing poverty. But accumulated experience has shown that – left only to the market – growth will not result in increased social, gender or race equality. In addition economic growth has often been based on the overconsumption of a few and the underconsumption of the majority. Instead of thinking of redistribution, this mainstream development model places the level of consumption by the elite as the goal for all, when we know this is unsustainable given the limited resources of our planet.
In this framework, economic growth remains the goal, even though overproduction failed to lessen inequalities, has not led to redistribution, has further depleted natural resources and increased pollution, waste, etc. and global warming; leading our planet to a deadlock.
Twenty years later, with clear shortcomings in the “sustainable” nature of the model, the Rio+20 process is again failing to recognize the limits of unrestricted faith in economic growth as the means for development. In fact, a new concept is being put forward as an answer to the environment/development-as-growth dilemma: Green Economy.
What is Green Economy?
The concept of green economy has created a lot of buzz, although many argue the concept is still “under construction”. According to its defenders, such as the EU, the US and UN agencies, it does not replace sustainable development, but is rather a means to achieve it.
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) has put a lot of effort in defining green economy in its 600 page report titled “Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication”. It defines “green economy [a]s one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities. In its simplest expression, a green economy can be thought of as one which is low carbon, resource efficient and socially inclusive."
An analysis by the Transnational Institute states, that “according to the UNEP, through a transition to the green economy it will be possible to re-launch the global economy with rates of growth far higher than the current model. It will be possible to create more and better employment, reduce poverty, reach greater levels of equality, meet the millennium objectives, and all in a sustainable way, recognizing the value of nature and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This would reduce pressure on the natural environment, allowing it to recover, while, at the same time, creating new and profitable areas of investment that will enable global capital to escape from the crisis and increase its profits.” If it sounds too good to be true that’s because it is.
UNEP’s report on the green economy is based on the rejection of what it calls a myth of the dilemma between economic progress and environmental sustainability. It says that current multiples crises (financial, food, water, energy, environment and economic recession) were caused by “misallocation of capital” towards economic activities that are carbon intensive as opposed to “renewable energy, energy efficiency, public transportation, sustainable agriculture, ecosystem and biodiversity protection, and land and water conservation”. This misallocation of capital is seen as a “market failure” due to “faulty information” and inadequate public policies to incorporate the environmental costs of economic activities. The answer, they propose is “adequate” policies to increase access to information to markets to raise incentives to redirect allocation of capital from “brown investments” to “green investments and green innovations”.
The report insists on the idea that a green economy will actually allow for higher growth rates, as long as markets perceive “green investments” as financially profitable, thus placing environmental sustainability under the neoliberal value of profit maximization. This is the logic behind one of the main (and much critiqued) instruments of the new “green deal”: carbon markets and the market-based Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+). But these arguments fail to recognize that decisions made by transnational corporations are often based on short-term profit maximization, not on lack of information regarding “green investments”.
As Rio+20 draws closer, and the green economy framework is defined in those terms, it is likely that we will see an outcome document that only reinforces the contradictions of current mainstream model of development based on unrestricted faith on growth as the means to reach social and gender equality and environmental sustainability.
Women’s and social movements engagement in Rio+20
Given what is at stake, Rio+20 has become the key process for social movements in 2012. The Women’s Major Group (WMG) has been the formal women’s platform following the official negotiations processes. In the most recent Rio+20 Intersessional, Anita Nayar from DAWN delivered the address from the WMG, raising the lack of reference to women in the current inter-governmental process, in contrast to 1992 UNCSD’s Agenda 21, which noted that gender must be cross-cutting.
The WMG’s submission also argues for the need to “realize that limitless economic growth does not equate with wellbeing or sustainability” and therefore, there is the need for indicators that would lead to the recognition of “the unequal and unfair burden that women carry in sustaining collective well-being”, as well as recovering the consensus that “the major cause of the continued deterioration of the global environment is the unsustainable patterns of consumption and production, particularly in industrialized countries, which are a matter of grave concern and aggravate poverty and imbalances”. Furthermore, the WMG called for a “universal social protection floor” and the monitoring, regulating and holding accountable of corporations for “their ecologically and socially unsustainable practices”.
The local committee organizing the Rio+20 People’s Summit is leading broad-based mobilizations by social movements. The Thematic Social Forum that took place in Porto Alegre from 24-29 January 2012 was a key moment for linking the various struggles of resistance to the neoliberal market-based model of development occurring throughout the world - from the Arab Spring, Indignados movements, Occupy Wall Street, mobilizations against Free Trade Agreements, against G20 agreements, and broadly the resistances to false market solutions (from REDD+ to biofuels and GMOs, etc.) to ecological crises.
In January 2012, the zero draft of the negotiating text came out. It reflects the fears of social movements in terms of how little it provides for overcoming the failed development model. The negotiations are on course until the actual Conference in June and civil society has to move forward to do advocacy on the possible outcome document.
- Let’s reinvent the world Group of Reflection and Support to the WSF Process (GRAPFSM).
- Thematic Social Forum: Capitalist Crisis, Social and Environmental Justice.
- Women’s major group position paper in preparation of the “Rio+20” United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development 2012. A Gender Perspective on the "Green Economy": Equitable, healthy and decent jobs and livelihoods.
UNEP, 2011, Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication, p16
 Edgardo Lander, “The Green Economy: the Wolf in Sheep’s clothing”. Transnational Institute (TNI), 2011, p4
 Ibid p5

Brown Algae needs light (your tank lights are perfect) and food (nitrates and silicates) to survive. The cure for Brown Algae is the same as the prevention: Starve it into oblivion.
Nitrates can be introduced into an aquarium not only as the end product of the Nitrogen Cycling Process (ammonia/nitrite/nitrate), but also via some brands of commercial sea salts and tap water. You can scroll down to see methods for reducing nitrates.
The silicates the Brown Algae requires can enter your tank through several avenues: Commercial sea salts, tap water used for top offs and make up and the substrate you may have on the bottom of your tank.
If you did absolutely nothing to your tank, the Brown Algae would eventually consume the silicates present and die of starvation. Since you can't do absolutely nothing to your tank, the source of the silicates must be identified and eliminated, in order to get rid of the present brown
algae bloom and prevent future outbreaks.
- Check the source of any builders sand, play sand or other substrate materials in your tank which did not come from the ocean. There is a possibility that they may contain silicates which are leaching into your tank water.
- Use only RO or RO/DI water whether you purchase an RO/DI unit or purchase RO/DI water from a commercial source.
- Check to see if your commercial sea salts contain high levels of nitrates. If the salt mixture contains unacceptable nitrates, consider changing mixtures.
Nitrates will always be something to contend with in your tank. For fast, immediate reduction, you can do a water change, using the Instant Nitrate Reduction Method. This will reduce your nitrates at the fastest rate, using the least amount of time and water. This will also get your nitrates down to a workable (10 mg/L area) level but it is only a Bandaid and does nothing to remove the source of the nitrates. Siphon out as much of the Brown Algae as possible. You will probably find that you will have to use several other methods (many of which are part of a good Aquarium
Maintenance Routine) to keep your nitrates in check. If you have a protein skimmer in your aquarium system, you might find that using the "Vodka Method" of Nitrate Reduction works quite well.
- Use only RO or RO/DI water whether you purchase an RO/DI unit or purchase RO/DI water from a commercial source. (Recommended)
- Purchase and use Mangrove Plants in your tank or sump. (Recommended)
- Check to see if your commercial sea salts contain high levels of ammonia/nitrogen.
- Purchase and use a good "nitrate sponge".
- Do not overfeed your tank.
- Siphon uneaten food and other loose material (detritus) from the substrate.
- Perform periodic water changes.

Here’s this week’s Therapy Tip of the Week:
Farm Animal Ideas
This week’s segment provides ideas for using farm animals during play with toddlers to target language.
Animals are universally appealing to young children, even for kids who live in metropolitan areas!
Use this natural interest to keep a child engaged while teaching new words. Focus on teaching words beyond the nouns/names for animals and animal sounds. Introduce verbs/action words and prepositions/location words and even higher level language concepts like size words, plurals, and following two-step directions.
Farm play is also great for helping a child learn to use two objects together in play which is a critical cognitive skill a child must master.
For more ideas about using farm animals in play with toddlers with expressive and receptive language delays, check out these resources from teachmetotalk.com:
For a more structured way to teach a child to understand and use more words, I highly recommend Teach Me To Talk: The Therapy Manual. While this book was written for therapists, many moms who are committed to providing the bulk of their child’s therapy at home have told me that this is their favorite resource for knowing what to work on and how to do it!

Yellowing of Alkyd Paints
The yellowing of alkyd paints, a common problem, is a natural part of a coating's drying and aging process.
The lower VOCs in today's alkyd paints allow for higher vehicle solids in paint. Because solids contribute to yellowing, higher-vehicle solid paints have an increased tendency to yellow with age.
Where Yellowing Shows
The durability and water resistance of alkyd paints makes them ideal for use in kitchens and bathrooms, for aesthetic reasons.
Yellowing is most visible when white or light-colored surfaces are next to similarly-colored surfaces of a different material- a white wall next to white tile, for example.
Tile, countertops and lacquered cabinets are typically made from colorfast and non-yellowing materials, however. So even slight changes in an alkyd paint appear more pronounced next to these kinds of surfaces.
To avoid yellowing, we recommend Benjamin Moore Waterborne Satin Impervo acrylic latex satin enamel 314 or K&B (Kitchen & Bath) 100% latex premium paint, designed especially for areas with high humidity.
Its mildew resistance and wet adhesion make it an excellent choice for kitchens and bathrooms, and as a non-yellowing alternative to alkyds.
Why Yellowing Occurs
The yellowing process is accelerated in dark rooms or those lacking natural sunlight. Alkyd products used in rooms with no windows or natural sunlight will yellow quickly and to a deep degree. Consider using a latex product instead.
Ammonia- from floor waxes, cleaners, and other household products- can contribute to yellowing and should be avoided, particularly when paint film is drying.
Because some latex paints contain ammonia, they can cause yellowing if used in combination with alkyd or oil-based paints.
To prevent this, paint with your latex product first and allow 24 hours of drying time before you apply an alkyd product. Remember to never apply alkyd and latex paints at the same time in an enclosed room.
Most latex enamels are non-yellowing, which makes them an ideal choice for white or light colors. We offer a wide variety of latex coatings suitable for every project, including our Benjamin Moore Regal AquaGlo, Regal AquaPearl, Aura Satin, Regal Pearl Finish, and Regal Semi Gloss coatings.

How much nitrogen is too much for corn?
Growers could cut back on fertilizer and reap economic and environmental benefits by using a rapid test recently discovered by scientists to accurately predict nitrogen levels
MADISON, WI, APRIL 23, 2007 -- North Carolina State researchers recently discovered a test that quickly predicts nitrogen levels in the humid soil conditions of the southeastern United States. These scientists report that the Illinois Soil Nitrogen Test (ISNT) can assess the nitrogen levels in soil with more accuracy than current soil-based tests. This test will allow growers to cut back on the amount of nitrogen-based fertilizer added to soil, leading to economic and environmental benefits.
The proper management of nitrogen is critical to the success of many crop systems. Based on an assessment of the natural amount of nitrogen in soil, growers calculate their optimum nitrogen rates, the concentration of nitrogen that must be present in fertilizer in order to achieve expected crop yields. Under- and over-applying nitrogen fertilizer to corn crops often leads to adverse economic consequences for corn producers. Excess levels of nitrogen in nature also pose serious threats to environment. Agricultural application of nitrogen has been linked to rising nitrate levels and subsequent death of fish in the Gulf of Mexico and North Carolina’s Neuse River.
"Although offsite nitrogen contamination of ground and surface waters could be reduced if nitrogen rates were adjusted based on actual field conditions, there is currently no effective soil nitrogen test for the humid southeastern U.S.," said Jared Williams, lead author of the North Carolina State study that was published in the March-April 2007 issue of the Soil Science Society of America Journal. This research was supported in part by USDA Initiative for Future Agricultural and Food Systems (IFAFS) grant.
From 2001 to 2004, scientists collected and tested the soil from 35 different sites in North Carolina. According to the North Carolina scientists, the collected soil samples were representative of millions of hectares in agricultural production in the southeastern USA. Corn was planted at each site with a range of nitrogen fertilizer rates, and the optimum nitrogen rates and the soil assay results were compared among the sites.
From the collected samples, researchers discovered that the Illinois Soil Nitrogen Test (ISNT) could be used to accurately measure the economic optimum nitrogen rates (EONR) of southeastern soils, despite moderate weather variation over the collection period. While the test can be used to predict the optimum nitrogen rates, the relationship between ISNT and EONR varied by soil drainage class. Researchers believe that these differences represent differences in organic matter that lead to less mineralization and/or more denitrification on poorly drained soils. The results indicate that the Illinois Soil Nitrogen Test can serve as a model for predicting economic optimum nitrogen rates on well- and poorly drained soils and show promise as a tool for nitrogen management.
"Additional research is needed to calibrate and validate the EONR versus ISNT relationships under a wider variety of conditions," says Williams. "Because the Illinois Soil Nitrogen Test predicted EONR robustly to different cost/price ratios, ISNT has the potential to modify or replace current nitrogen recommendation methods for corn."
American Society of Agronomy. April 2007.
rating: 0.00 from 0 votes | updated on: 20 Jul 2008 | views: 470 |

The words “wall lamps” and “sconces” are sometimes used interchangeably to describe lighting that is attached to a wall. Strictly speaking, though, the “lamp” is the thing that provides the illumination while the “sconce” is the piece that physically attaches to the wall.
To make things a bit more confusing, the word “bracket” is frequently used to describe the brass or cast-iron armatures that held kerosene lamps far enough away from walls to keep 19th-century homes from burning to the ground. Some of these brass wall brackets had arms that were designed to swing so the lamp could be moved in a 180-degree horizontal arc. Cast iron kerosene lamp wall brackets from the period often had double joints, and many of either type had reflectors behind the lamp’s glass chimney, to aim light in different directions.
Other types of brackets were known as doubles, which allowed two kerosene lamps to be mounted to the same fitting. At the opposite end of the spectrum was the kerosene nightlight...
Early gas lamps from the late 19th century were also mounted to walls. Some of these gas lamps, which were called gasoliers, had three arms, each bearing a fixture. The brass work on these sconces was often ornate and detailed—floral patterns and curlicues were common motifs. The tubes that delivered gas to the various lights on a fixture were frequently designed to look like slender vines or branches, while the keys that regulated gas flow were cast to look like leaves or tassels.
Shades for gasoliers tended to be simple, ranging from a single glass bowl to a candle-shaped chimney to an upturned flower such as a lily. One especially interesting class of vintage gasolier was equipped with a nickel-plated brass oculist bracket, which swiveled vertically as well as horizontally and took its name from its use by opticians, as well as doctors and dentists.
When electricity started to become more common at the end of the 19th century, electrical wall lamps followed. In particular, the invention of the tungsten light bulb in 1907 spurred the demand for lamps of all sorts, including those attached to walls (tungsten used half the electricity of earlier incandescent models). Lamps from this era were designed in the Arts and Crafts style, as well as Mission and Art Nouveau.
One of the great things about electricity was that wall lamps could now have shade instead of just a chimney, which by definition had to point up. Shades could now point down, illuminating rooms in completely different ways than kerosene and gas had permitted, although some shades still opened to the ceiling as style and interior-decorating schemes dictated. Shades could also be made out of materials other than glass; parchment and silk shades, for example, were quite typical and popular. Other shades harkened back the age of fire illumination, with bulbs shaped like flickering flames.
One of the most visually arresting periods for vintage wall lamps and sconces was Art Deco. During this era, some lamps were all shade, with the fixture hidden from view behind it. White glass sconces with painted black decorations were typical. In other cases, such as for bathrooms, frosted glass shades were paired with rust-resistant, chrome-over-cast-brass fixtures.
Interviews & Articles
My grandparents were antique collectors all their lives, their whole house was furnished in antiques. They had a lot of oil lamps … [more]

The Landsat program is the longest running enterprise for acquisition of imagery of Earth from space. The first Landsat satellite was launched in 1972; the most recent, Landsat 7, was launched on April 15, 1999. The instruments on the Landsat satellites have acquired millions of images. The images, archived in the United States and at Landsat receiving stations around the world, are a unique resource for global change research and applications in agriculture, cartography, geology, forestry, regional planning, surveillance, education and national security. Landsat 7 data has eight spectral bands with spatial resolutions ranging from 15 to 60 meters.
The initial centerline for the primary layout of the MSS was drawn by Jim Kodak, the opto-mechanical design engineer who designed the Pioneer spacecraft optical camera, the first instrument to leave the solar system.
The program was called the Earth Resources Observation Satellites Program when it was initiated in 1966, but the name was changed to Landsat in 1975. In 1979, Presidential Directive 54 under President of the United States Jimmy Carter transferred Landsat operations from NASA to NOAA, recommended development of long term operational system with four additional satellites beyond Landsat 3, and recommended transition to private sector operation of Landsat. This occurred in 1985 when the Earth Observation Satellite Company (EOSAT), a partnership of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, was selected by NOAA to operate the Landsat system under a ten year contract. EOSAT operated Landsats 4 and 5, had exclusive rights to market Landsat data, and was to build Landsats 6 and 7.
In 1989, this transition had not been fully completed when NOAA's funding for the Landsat program ran out and NOAA directed that Landsats 4 and 5 be shut down, but an act of the United States Congress provided emergency funding for the rest of the year. Funding ran out again in 1990 and once again Congress provided emergency funding to NOAA for six more months of operations, requesting that agencies that used Landsat data provide the funding for the other six months of the upcoming year. The same funding problem and solution was repeated in 1991. In 1992, various efforts were made to finally procure funding for follow on Landsats and continued operations, but by the end of the year EOSAT ceased processing Landsat data. Landsat 6 was finally launched on October 5 1993, but was lost in a launch failure. Processing of Landsat 4 and 5 data was resumed by EOSAT in 1994. NASA finally launched Landsat 7 on April 15, 1999.
The value of the Landsat program was recognized by Congress in October 1992 when it passed the Land Remote Sensing Policy Act (Public Law 102-555) authorizing the procurement of Landsat 7 and assuring the continued availability of Landsat digital data and images, at the lowest possible cost, to traditional and new users of the data.
The Multi-Spectral-Scanner had a 9" fused silica dinner-plate mirror epoxy bonded to three invar tangent bars mounted to base of a Ni/ Au brazed Invar frame in a serreuire truss that was arranged with four "Hobbs-Links" (conceived by Dr. Gregg Hobbs) crossing at mid truss. This construct ensured the secondary mirror would simply oscillate about the primary optic axis to maintain focus despite vibration inherent from the Be scan mirror. This engineering solution allowed the US to develop LANDSAT at least five years ahead of French SPOT which first used CCD arrays to stare without need for a scanner.
The MSS FPA, or Focal Plane Array consisted of 24 square optical fibers extruded down to .0002"square fiber tips in a 4x6 array to be scanned across the Nimbus spacecraft path in a +/-6 degree scan as the satellite was in a 10:30 polar orbit, hence it had to be launched from Vandenburg AFB. The fiber optic bundle was embedded in a fiber optic plate to be terminated at a relay optic device that transmitted fiber end signal on into six photodiodes and 18 photomultiplier tubes that were arrayed across a thick aluminum tool plate, with sensor weight balanced vs the telescope on opposite side. This main plate was assembled on a frame, then attached to the silver-loaded magnesium housing with helicoil fasteners.
Key to MSS success was the scan monitor mounted on the underbelly of the Mg housing. It consisted of a diode source & sensor mounted at ends of four flat mirrors that were tilted so that it took 14 bounces for a beam to reflect length of the three mirrors from source to sender striking Be scan mirror seven times as it reflected seven times off the flat mirrors. It only sensed three positions, both ends of scan & the mid scan, but that was all that was required to determine where MSS was pointed and electronics scanning could be calibrated to display a map.
NOAA, EOSAT ink remote sensing accord. (Earth Observation Satellite Company, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
Feb 11, 1991; *SATELLITE SPOTLIGHT: NOAA, eosat INK REMOTE SENSING ACCORD* The Earth Observation Satellite Co. (eosat) and the...

Tongueless Frogs, AglossaDavid Cannatella
This tree diagram shows the relationships between several groups of organisms.
The root of the current tree connects the organisms featured in this tree to their containing group and the rest of the Tree of Life. The basal branching point in the tree represents the ancestor of the other groups in the tree. This ancestor diversified over time into several descendent subgroups, which are represented as internal nodes and terminal taxa to the right.
You can click on the root to travel down the Tree of Life all the way to the root of all Life, and you can click on the names of descendent subgroups to travel up the Tree of Life all the way to individual species.close box
Pipids are highly aquatic frogs that rarely if ever venture out of water. They have several adaptations to aquatic life, including the loss of the tongue (tongues are not generally useful for feeding in water), and the presence of lateral line organs, which are used to detect wave motion in water (these are present in most groups of fishes). The group is sometimes called the Aglossa.
Pipid frogs are found in Africa, South America, and just get into Panama. Some species in South America, such as the Surinam Toad (Pipa pipa) are extremely flattened and look like roadkills. Females of the genus Pipa have an elaborate mating behavior, in which eggs are deposited on the back of the female, and the skin swells up around the eggs to encase them in pockets in which the embryos develop. In some species the eggs hatch out as tadpoles, but in others fully formed froglets emerge from the mother's back.
Tadpoles (when present) lack beaks and denticles, and have paired spiracles (if spiracles are present). This is the Orton type 1 tadpole, also found in Rhinophrynidae. There is much diversity in larval morphology and ecology in pipids. Tadpoles of Xenopus and Silurana are extremely efficient filter feeders. Tadpoles of Hymenochirus are carnivorous, eating larger prey items. In some species of Pipa the eggs (embedded in the mother's back) hatch out as tadpoles, but other species have direct development, in which froglets emerge.
The genus Xenopus (African Clawed frogs) has undergone drastic evolution in chromosome number, producing tetraploid (4n), and octoploid (8n), and even dodecaploid (12n) species. These higher levels of ploidy may have resulted from hybridization of between species. One species, Xenopus laevis, is widely used as a lab animal in molecular and developmental biology. The Dwarf Clawed Frogs (Hymenochirus) are very small, about 20-30 mm, and are widely sold in aquarium stores. The call of many pipid frogs is a clicking sound, which in Xenopus borealis is produced by forcefully pulling apart the large arytenoid cartilages of the larynx (voice-box), thus producing a "pop" by implosion.
The definition of the name Pipidae is problematic because of the relationships of Mesozoic and Tertiary taxa to living pipids (Báez, 1981). Báez' cladogram placed †Thoraciliacus, †Cordicephalus, †Saltenia, and †Eoxenopoides outside of the living Pipidae. She used two synapomorphies for Pipidae (including the aforementioned taxa): the absence of a quadratojugal and the absence of mentomeckelian bones. The first of these is also present in the closely related †Palaeobatrachidae, and may be diagnostic of a larger clade. Although mentomeckelians are reported in palaeobatrachids, the examination of †Palaeobatrachus fossils and figures in Spinar (1972) has not convinced Cannatella of their presence.
Cannatella and Trueb (1988a) diagnosed the living Pipidae by a large number of synapomorphies including presence of an epipubis cartilage, an unpaired epipubic muscle, absence of a quadratojugal, free ribs in the larvae, a fused articulation between the coccyx and sacrum, a short, stocky scapula, elongate septomaxillary bones, ossified pubis, a single, median palatal opening of the eustachian tube, lateral line organs in the adults, and absence of a tongue. Several of these characters are present in fossil taxa, and thus may be diagnostic of larger clades. Several others cannot be assessed in fossils. By ignoring the fossils, Cannatella and Trueb (1988a) produced a diagnosis for the family that was misleading. Relationships within the living Pipidae were discussed by Báez (1981), Cannatella and de Sá (1993), Cannatella and Trueb (1988a,b), and de Sá and Hillis (1990).
To ensure stability, Ford and Cannatella (1993) defined the node-based name Pipidae to be the most recent common ancestor of living pipids (Xenopus, Silurana, Hymenochirus, Pseudhymenochirus, and Pipa) and all of its descendants. Taxa considered to be fossil "pipids" (†Thoraciliacus, †Cordicephalus, †Saltenia, †Shomronella, and †Eoxenopoides) are assigned only to the level of Pipimorpha.
Báez, A. M. 1981. Redescription and relationships of Saltenia ibanezi, a Late Cretaceous pipid frog from northwestern Argentina. Ameghiniana 18(3-4):127-154.
Cannatella, D. C., and R. O. de Sa. 1993. Xenopus laevis as a model organism. Syst. Biol. 42(4):476-507.
Cannatella, D. C., and L. Trueb. 1988a. Evolution of pipoid frogs: Intergeneric relationships of the aquatic frog family Pipidae (Anura). Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 94:1-38.
Cannatella, D. C., and L. Trueb. 1988b. Evolution of pipoid frogs: morphology and phylogenetic relationships of Pseudhymenochirus. J. Herpetol. 22:439-456.
de Sá, R. O., and D. M. Hillis. 1990. Phylogenetic relationships of the pipid frogs Xenopus and Silurana: an integration of ribosomal DNA and morphology. Mol. Biol. Evol. 7(4):365-376.
Ford, L. S., and D. C. Cannatella. 1993. The major clades of frogs. Herp. Monogr. 7:94-117.
Spinar, Z. V. 1972. Tertiary frogs from central Europe. W. Junk, The Hague.
University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA
Correspondence regarding this page should be directed to David Cannatella at
Page copyright © 1995 David Cannatella
Page: Tree of Life Pipidae. Tongueless Frogs, Aglossa. Authored by David Cannatella. The TEXT of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License - Version 3.0. Note that images and other media featured on this page are each governed by their own license, and they may or may not be available for reuse. Click on an image or a media link to access the media data window, which provides the relevant licensing information. For the general terms and conditions of ToL material reuse and redistribution, please see the Tree of Life Copyright Policies.
Citing this page:
Cannatella, David. 1995. Pipidae. Tongueless Frogs, Aglossa. Version 01 January 1995 (under construction). http://tolweb.org/Pipidae/16986/1995.01.01 in The Tree of Life Web Project, http://tolweb.org/

Herihor was an official during the 20th Dynasty and usurped the throne of Egypt. He served as high priest of Amon during the reign of Ramesses XI. He came to Egypt as part of a group sent to stop a rebellion that had been started by a former high priest of Amon. Panhesy, who was in charge of the group to stop the rebellion, put Herihor in charge of the city. He quickly had himself named high priest and became the vizier of both Upper and Lower Egypt. The king was easily manipulated and did nothing to stop Herihor. Ramesses XI died and ended the 20th Dynasty and the New Kingdom. Herihor and a confederate, Smendes, divided up Egypt between them.
Back to Who's Who of Ancient Egypt
Last Updated: June 21st, 2011
Who are we?
Tour Egypt aims to offer the ultimate Egyptian adventure and intimate knowledge about the country. We offer this unique experience in two ways, the first one is by organizing a tour and coming to Egypt for a visit, whether alone or in a group, and living it firsthand. The second way to experience Egypt is from the comfort of your own home: online.

Number, Minimum, Maximum, Means and Standard Deviations of All Phoneme Awareness Measures,
Age, Language Background and Reading Stage Values
Note. LANG = language background rating; MANNE
= English Mann Phoneme Segmentation Test; MANNS = Spanish adaptation of Mann Phoneme
Segmentation Test; PPVTE = English Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; PPVTS = Spanish
adaptation of Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; RESTAGE = reading stage rating; WORDATTK =
Woodcock Word Attack nonsense word decoding subtest in English; WORDID = Woodcock Word
Identification subtest in English; YSENG = English Yopp-Singer Phoneme Segmentation Test;
YSSPAN = Spanish Yopp-Singer Phoneme Segmentation Test.
The Analysis of variance showed a
significant effect for reading group, F (3,39) = 9.182, p < .0001. Figure 1
shows mean performance on the phoneme awareness tests as a function of reading
stage. Overall, the children who differed in the reading ability did differ in level
of performance on the phoneme awareness tasks. There was a significant difference
for reading group and the Mann English test, F (3,48) = 6.932, p < .001 as well as for
the Spanish version, F (3,48) = 5.147, p < .004. Significant differences were also
found for the Yopp-Singer tests, English, F (3,48) = 9.267, p < .0001, and Spanish, F
(3,48) = 7.913, p < .0001. This replicates previous studies' results that showed
that phoneme awareness is highly related to reading ability. No other significant
differences were found for reading stage and any other variable.
Mean scores on phoneme awareness tests as a function of reading ability.
There were no significant differences for English and Spanish versions of the phoneme
awareness tests. On the average, language of presentation did not affect the
students' overall level of performance, p>.01. Additionally, no overall
differences were found for language background of the children such that children who
differ in language control of Spanish and English differed in overall performance.
Thus, monolinguals did not perform better than bilinguals or vice versa, in general.

Credit: Pedro Rodriguez and ESA
How active does a galaxy have to be before it's an active galaxy? Messier 82, sometimes called the Cigar Galaxy, is one of the most active star forming galaxies known. The enormous rate of star formation (about 10 times higher than the Milky Way's birthrate of about 7 stars per year) is driven by the gravitational interaction with its neighbor, M81. The tug of gravity as the two galaxies rub elbows causes clouds of gas near the center of M82 to collapse and form stars, in a process that's still not fully understood. The image above is a beautiful montage of images from the XMM-Newton Observatory in the optical through the UV to the X-ray regime, created in celebration of this, the International Year of Astronomy, and as part of the 100 Hours of Astronomy cornerstone project. The disk of the galaxy is defined by the starlight in the optical and UV, while hot gas produced by the birth and death of stars is seen coming off the plane of the galaxy in the X-ray images.
Published: April 20, 2009
HEA Dictionary * Archive
* Search HEAPOW
* Other Languages
* HEAPOW on Facebook
* Download all Images
Each week the HEASARC
brings you new, exciting and beautiful images from X-ray and Gamma ray
astronomy. Check back each week and be sure to check out the HEAPOW archive!
Page Author: Dr. Michael F. Corcoran
Last modified Friday, 20-Apr-2012 15:25:29 EDT

A method for generating biofuel by breaking down plastics using a low-cost catalyst will be developed further in the United Kingdom next month (16 July).
Faiad won the European Fusion Development Agreement award at the 23rd European Union Contest for Young Scientists — involving 130 competitors from 37 countries — held in Finland last year (23–28 September).
Her prize is a week-long placement at the Joint European Torus (JET) facility — the focal point of the European fusion research programme — at the UK-based Culham Centre for Fusion Energy, UK, where Faiad will present her project and receive help with its development.
Faiad proposes exploiting Egypt’s high plastic consumption, which is estimated to be around one million tonnes per year.
“Plastic waste is a real problem in Egypt — and in most developing countries — and this project is simply converting the problem into a solution”, said Nourwanda Sorour, a student at Alexandria University, Egypt, and one of Faiad’s mentors.
Faiad has succeeded in converting plastic into fuel feedstocks — the bulk raw material for producing biofuel — by identifying a catalyst, calcium bentonite, for breaking down the plastic waste that is low in cost. When the waste is broken down, it produces gaseous products including methane, propane and ethane, which are then converted into ethanol for use as biofuel.
Breaking down plastic and polymers by heating them to higher temperatures is not a new idea, but the type of catalyst used is what gives the idea its strength, Faiad said.
“The project can be safely implemented, as it doesn’t emit any toxic gases, as long as its implementation abides by the safety measures applied for similar projects,” Sorour said.
Mamdouh Elmelawy, from the Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute, said that the project is greatly needed in most countries to help substitute fossil fuels.
“[The project] is a practical one that can be implemented on a larger scale either by the government in Egypt or by the private sector,” he said.
Faiad said: “I will pursue my efforts to get my project patented this year through the Egyptian Patent Office and also to see the idea become a tangible project on the ground”.

MySQL is an open source relational database management system that is a popular database option for web applications. MySQL is written using C and C++ and makes use of the SQL database language to access and manipulate data stored in the database.
Although MySQL is primarily used with Linux operating systems it also offers support for Windows, BSD and UNIX based operating systems. MySQL is available as the database component with the LAMP stack.
MySQL is simple and easy to use, yet at the same time powerful enough to handle large volumes of data. Icreon offers to use MySQL as the database layer in developing web applications.

Point wand at target
Summons an object from a distance
- "And then he heard it, speeding through the air behind him; he turned and saw his Firebolt hurtling towards him around the edge of the woods, soaring into the enclosure, and stopping dead in mid-air beside him, waiting for him to mount."
- —The Firebolt, under influence of this spell.[src]
Casting and effects
The Summoning Charm could not be used on buildings. In addition, it did not work on most living things, and those few on which it did were generally not considered worth Summoning, such as flobberworms.
The farther the desired object was from the caster, the harder it was to Summon. However, there was apparently some controversy over this claim, as Hermione Granger stated that it did not matter how far away the object was — so long as the caster had it clearly in mind, they should be able to Summon it with ease.
There were counterspells that could be placed on objects to keep them from being Summoned. Most wizarding goods sold as of the 20th century and early 21st century came pre-enchanted with anti-theft spells to keep them from being Summoned by anyone but their rightful owners.
|Molly Weasley||1994||Molly Weasley used several Summoning Charms to find many different magical sweets Fred and George Weasley were trying to sneak out of the house to the Quidditch World Cup in 1994.|
|1994||Hermione Granger taught the charm to Harry Potter, who later used it in the First Task of the Triwizard Tournament to Summon his broom to him to outmaneuver the Hungarian Horntail.|
|Barty Crouch Jr.|
(disguised as Alastor Moody)
|1995||Barty Crouch Jr. used the Summoning Charm to take the Marauders Map away from Severus Snape before he could read it.|
|Harry Potter||24 June, 1995||Harry Potter used this charm to Summon the Triwizard Cup, which had been made a Portkey, in order to escape Lord Voldemort and his Death Eaters in 1995.|
|1996||During the Battle of the Department of Mysteries Hermione Granger used it to retrieve wands, and Ron Weasley Summoned a brain in a tank to himself while under the effects of a disorienting curse.|
|Death Eaters||1996||During the Battle of the Department of Mysteries, Death Eaters attempting to pull the prophecy sphere from Harry's hands.|
|Harry Potter||1997||Harry Potter Summoned Madam Rosmerta's brooms to himself and Albus Dumbledore to get back to Hogwarts in 1997.|
|Hermione Granger||1997||Hermione Granger Summoned books about Horcruxes from the Headmaster's office in 1997.|
|Harry Potter||31 July, 1997|
|Fred Weasley||August 1997||Fred Summoned hairs from a Muggle boy in Ottery St. Catchpole in order to help Harry disguise himself for the wedding using Polyjuice Potion.|
|Harry Potter||1997||Harry Potter attempts to Summon his wand back after his wand was knocked off by Nagini.|
|Harry Potter||1994||Harry Potter tried to cast the charm while Hermione Granger was teaching him how to use it in preparation for the first task of the Triwizard Tournament.|
|Harry Potter||Summer of 1995||Harry Potter tried to cast the charm wandlessly to retrieve his wand after Dudley hit him when they were attacked in 1995 by two Dementors sent by Dolores Umbridge.|
|Death Eaters||1996||The Death Eaters tried to cast the charm on the prophecy during the Battle of the Department of Mysteries, but Harry managed to hold on to it.|
|Harry Potter||1996||Harry Potter tried to cast the charm nonverbally and wandlessly to retrieve his wand after Draco Malfoy hit him with a Full Body-Bind Curse in 1996.|
|Harry Potter||1997||Harry Potter tried the Charm to Summon Salazar Slytherin's fake locket in the Horcrux cave in 1997.|
|Harry Potter||27 July, 1997||He tried it to Summon Hedwig and Rubeus Hagrid during the Battle of the Seven Potters.|
|1997||Hermione Granger tried the Summoning Charm to Summon Salazar Slytherin's Locket in Regulus Black's bedroom at 12 Grimmauld Place. Harry also tried Summoning the locket while he was in Dolores Umbridge's office while they were infiltrating the Ministry of Magic.|
|Harry Potter||24 December, 1997||Harry tried to Summon his wand after it had been knocked out of his hand during his fight with Nagini at Godric's Hollow.|
|Harry Potter||1 May, 1998||Harry tried to Summon Helga Hufflepuff's Cup when he was in the Lestrange Vault at Gringotts Wizarding Bank during the break-in, but he was unsuccessful because the vault was bewitched.|
|Hermione Granger||1998||Hermione Granger tried to use a Summoning Charm to Summon Rowena Ravenclaw's Diadem in the Room of Requirement and Helga Hufflepuff's Cup in the Lestrange Vault, but the protections on the Horcruxes made this impossible.|
|A Death Eater||1998||A Death Eater tried the charm to Summon Harry's Cloak of Invisibility.|
The Latin word accio means "I call" or "I summon". In the Hungarian translation, the spell is called "Invito", possibly from the word "to invite".
Behind the scenes
- In the 2006 short film The Queen's Handbag, Harry Potter and Ron Weasley both use the charm in an attempt to retrieve Queen Elizabeth II's handbag, which has been lost. They are unsuccessful and Hermione suggests they're too far away from it, suggesting the charm may have a maximum range. However, in Goblet of Fire, Hermione stated that distance didn't matter, as long as the caster was concentrating hard enough. Also, the short film's canonicity is uncertain, so it is unlikely this applies to mainstream continuity.
- In the console and PC versions of LEGO Harry Potter: Years 1-4, it can be bought at Wiseacre's Wizarding Equipment in Diagon Alley.
- In the handheld versions of LEGO Harry Potter: Years 1-4, Accio can move an object in any direction, not just towards the caster. In some cases, it moves an object directly away from the caster, working more like its opposite.
- When Hermione Summoned Secrets of the Darkest Art from Dumbledore's office, she simply said "Accio Horcrux books", instead of the specific book name, meaning that this spell can function even when the item's description is not detailed.
- According to Wonderbook, the hand motion is thus:
- Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (First appearance)
- Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (film)
- Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (video game)
- Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
- Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (video game)
- Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
- Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (video game)
- Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
- Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1
- The Queen's Handbag
- LEGO Harry Potter: Years 1-4
- Harry Potter Trading Card Game
- Wonderbook: Book of Spells
Notes and references
- ↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 See this video.
- ↑ 2.0 2.1 2.2 Wonderbook: Book of Spells
- ↑ Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Chapter 20
- ↑ Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Chapter 10
- ↑ Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Chapter 26
- ↑ 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
- ↑ 7.0 7.1 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
- ↑ 8.0 8.1 8.2 Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
- ↑ 9.0 9.1 9.2 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
|Professors: Filius Flitwick|
|Textbooks: The Standard Book of Spells · Achievements in Charming · Quintessence: A Quest|
|Charmbook writers and charm developers: Miranda Goshawk · Scarpin · Felix Summerbee · Randolph Keitch · Basil Horton · Mnemone Radford · Elliot Smethwyck · Jarleth Hobart · Delfina Crimp · Orabella Nuttley · Levina Monkstanley · Fred Weasley · George Weasley|
|Charms studied at Hogwarts: Levitation Charm · Fire-Making Charm · Softening Charm · Skurge · Aresto Momentum · Cheering Charm · Freezing Spell · Seize and Pull Charm · Summoning Charm · Banishing Charm · Silencing Charm · Mending Charm · Reductor Curse · Colour Change Charm · Growth Charm · Water-Making Spell · Locomotion Charm · Vinegar into Wine · Bird-Conjuring Charm|

AN EDUCATOR'S GUIDE:
MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE EHLERS-DANLOS CHILD
A PARENT'S GUIDE:
HELPING YOUR CHILD SUCCEED AT SCHOOL
The material in this guide has been prepared to help educators better understand and provide for the needs of the Ehlers-Danlos student. Each person with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome is affected differently; therefore, the needs will be different for every student. The information has been compiled from a variety of resources including parents,administrators, teachers, guidance counselors and special education teachers. My sincere thanks to those who helped in this effort by sharing and providing personal and professional information.
|Peggy Rocha Snuggs |
|Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation |
|November, 2003 |
Before leaving the Board at the end of 2004, Peggy Rocha Snuggs was Director at Large for Children's Projects & Education, Board of Directors, Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation. She is an educator in the public school system in Tampa, Florida, and the mother of an EDS child.
Many teachers and schools have contacted the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation with questions about EDS, ranging from basic concerns for the safety of the student, to questions about accommodations to meet the needs of the EDS child. This booklet was prepared to answer some of the questions asked most commonly by school personnel. Additional information on medical aspects of this syndrome is available from the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation, or at www.ednf.org
Introduction to EDS
What is Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS)
The Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders affecting approximately 1 in 5,000 to 10,000 men and women of all ethnic backgrounds. EDS is named for two physicians (Ehlers and Danlos) who described the forms of the condition in the early 1900s. At least six forms of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome have been described, which are not graduations in severity, but represent distinct disorders which "run-true" in a family. EDS is characterized by hyperextenisve skin, hypermobile joints, easy bruisability of the skin, and a bleeding diathesis. There are six major types of EDS, which are classified according to their different manifestation of signs and symptoms. Individuals with EDS have a defect in their connective tissue, the tissue which provides support to many parts of the body such as the skin, muscles and ligaments. The fragile skin and unstable joints found in EDS are the result of faulty collagen, the protein which acts as a "glue" in the body, adding strength and elasticity to connective tissue.
What medical problems are associated with EDS?
Due to the different types of EDS, and the varying degree of severity between individuals with EDS, it is difficult to generalize. However, most often, the manifestations are skin and joint related and may include:
Soft velvet-like skin; variable hyperextensibility (stretchiness); fragile skin that tears or bruises easily (bruising may be severe); severe scarring; slow and poor wound healing; and fleshy lesions (molluscoid pseudotumors) associated with scars over pressure areas.
Joint hypermobility; loose/unstable joints which are prone to frequent dislocations and/or subluxions; joint pain; hyperextensive joints (they move beyond the joint's normal range); early onset of osteoarthritis.
Chronic, early onset, debilitating musculoskeletal pain; arterial/intestinal/uterine fragility or rupture (usually associated with Vascular Type of EDS); scoliosis; poor muscle tone; mitral valve prolapse; gum disease and vision problems.
Medical Emergencies at School
What medical emergencies may arise?
It is wise to make all school staff, including lunchroom supervisors, nurses, and office, aware that a medical emergency may occur and to outline a basic plan of action. It is important to have a prepared, parent approved plan ahead on file. Current and updated parent contact information should be available at all times.
These often occur due to the loose ligaments and commonly affect the knees, shoulders and hips, but may affect the fingers and wrists or other joints as well. Activity may cause the joint to lock or overextend.
A physician may prescribe bracing to stabilize joints, or surgical repair of joints. Ice packs should be kept on hand. Occupational therapists and or physical therapists can help students learn how to strengthen their muscles and teach them how to properly use and preserve their joints.
Cuts/lacerations may occur and may vary from minor to major wounds. Gaping wounds should be handled with care. Scarring is not uncommon. Proper repair of these wounds by a physician may be necessary. Excessive bleeding may occur with any cut. Severe bruising is also common.
Excessive sun exposure should be avoided and sunscreen is recommended for outdoor activities.
Vascular Type of EDS:
The EDNF has prepared a CD-ROM and 20 page handbook to educate emergency room physicians and other health care professionals about the vascular type of EDS. This CD-Rom contains suggestions on life-saving surgical and postoperative techniques. In a trauma situation, time is of the essence. It would be beneficial for a school to retain a copy to accompany the child to the emergency room if it should become necessary. The CD-ROM is available from the EDNF shopping cart. To acquire a copy, please go to Shop at EDNF.
Some children with EDS may complain of severe gastro pain and frequent stomach aches. A family plan, as well as a school plan for dealing with chronic stomach pain should be addressed with the parent and the teachers.
STEPS FOR ACADEMIC SUCCESS
Step 1: Providing a Safe Classroom/Physical Environment
Although each person is affected differently by Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, the need for a safe environment at school is important to avoid injury.
When possible, carpeted areas are preferable to slippery floors, and avoiding the use of stairs in favor of elevators. An evaluation of appropriate seating by a school based occupational therapist should be considered.
Step 2: Providing Appropriate Physical Education - Sports, and Elective Classes
It is important, for emotional well-being that students with EDS try to lead as normal a life as possible. This includes playing with other children and participating as much as possible in physical activity. Students with EDS will have different needs or restrictions concerning physical education and sports. Where there is only mild hypermobility and the skin is not fragile, physical education and sports may be allowed with an adapted program. When guiding students to his/her choices of electives and activities, it is helpful to consider whether the activity could cause stress to joints or possible injury. Common sense should prevail when designing sport programs. Contact sports or activities that require vigorous exertion, heavy lifting, blows to the head or chest or excessive strain on joints and ligaments may not be the best choice. Sports such as swimming & golf may be a more logical alternative if done at an easy pace with opportunity for resting.
Certain musical instruments may stress some joints, where others may be more acceptable. Each activity should be accessed based on individual student abilities and restrictions.
Most students with EDS do not want to appear different. A student may experience all or some if the following which would affect their success in physical activities: impaired mobility, weak hand control, and/or poor coordination. Being forced to participate in physical education classes may cause the EDS child to become disheartened and embarrassed. Asking the child to sit on the sidelines and watch may cause the child to feel isolated and different. Ideally, alternative classes should be available if physical education classes are not recommended. Some schools allow health/related classes to be substituted for physical education credits, and some waiver the credit altogether in favor of a more suitable elective.
Step 3: Cognitive Profiles and Providing Testing Accommodations
There is no evidence to indicate that EDS in itself, causes learning difficulties. Premature birth is a complication associated with EDS and these children may experience the delays often associated with it. There are some speech and hearing and visual problems associated with EDS that medical specialist in the field can diagnose.
Formal IQ and performance testing can provide useful information. However, careful interpretation of formal evaluations should be made to assure that any occurrence of verbal-performance discrepancy, with performance scores being lower than verbal scores, is not due to motor problems instead of learning disability.
Teachers should be aware of potential difficulties due to hand-wrist hypermobility which are associated with reduced scores on performance tests. Students may need extra time or may require alternate forms of assess-ing performance that requires less motor input. Wrist or finger splints, large or padded pens or pencils or pencil grips may be helpful. Some students may need additional testing accommodations such as oral evaluations.
Step 4: Consideration for Chronic Absences
Due to frequent absences, the EDS child may need additional time, additional tutorials, and other child-specific accommodations. In some cases, at-home instructions may need to be provided for long term recoveries.
Allowing special pupil assignment to a school closer to parent's home or work is a viable consideration.
Some schools post homework and class work assignments on a website for students who are absent. If the school has such a site, parents should be made aware of it.
Some schools offer incentive grade points or exam exemptions based on attendance. The EDS child should not be penalized for EDS related absences.
Step 5: Providing Teacher Support in the Classroom
The inability to participate in some peer activities, the need for special accommodations, and the sense of "feeling different" may lead to frustration and isolation. Helping the EDS child feel accepted is something a teacher can help with. Addressing these issues by frequent discussions with the child about his or her feelings, identifying and encouraging development of other talents, and inclusion in activities that are not restricted are positive ways to help. Many EDS children feel comfortable talking about EDS, and may be willing to discuss or report on EDS in class. Some however are embarrassed and choose not to discuss their condition.
Step 6: Meeting the Needs of the EDS Child
In making plans to meet the needs of the EDS child, a 504 Plan or ESE program should be addressed. A physical therapist and occupational therapist would be beneficial in evaluating and planning for accessibility and adaptation needs in the school.
Below is a list of some accommodation that other EDS students have found to be beneficial.
Physical education/sports needs:
- Modified physical education
- Alternative health related credit in lieu of PE.
- Restrict contact sports
- Restrict weight bearing activities on arms, wrists (such as handstands, cartwheels) etc.
- Limit exposure to the sun.
- Allow storage of ice packs/gel packs
- Allow doctor note permitting use of nonprescription pain medications
- Rest periods in the middle of the day for fatigue
- Two sets of text books: one for home, one for school
- Priority seating
- Allow use of a chair instead of floor for circle time
- Adjusted chair /table height
- Use of elevators
- Allow passes for frequent bathroom breaks
- Book bag on wheels
- Help with note taking
- Extra time to get to and from class (leave before the bell)
- Stretching or walking to relieve stress
- Extended time for tests and assignments
- Extra time on timed/standardized tests
- Eliminate handwriting grade in favor of grades for content and effort
- Lockers: assign locker at eye level, allow digital lock instead of combination locks or alternative to standard locker such as a "safe" place to store belongings.
- Copies of worksheets that allow fill in blanks or underlining in lieu of rewriting existing questions/sentences.
- Chair with arms for upper body support
- Height adjustments on chairs/desks
- Pad for chair seat or back
- Pencil grips
- Pad for sitting on the floor
- Use of computers with ergonomic keyboards or Alpha Smart
Many parents and teachers have contacted the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation with questions about EDS, ranging from basic concerns for the safety of the student, to questions about accommodations to meet the needs of the EDS child. This booklet was prepared to answer some of the questions asked most commonly by both parents and teachers. Additional information on medical aspects of this syndrome is available from the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation, or at www.ednf.org.
Meeting the Needs of the EDS Child
It is wise to make all school staff, including lunchroom supervisors, nurses, and office, aware that a medical emergency may occur and to outline the basic plan of action. Although most children are accustomed to dealing with the problem and may give valuable advice at the time of the accident or injury, it is best to have a prepared/parent approved plan ahead of time. Always provide current updated parent contact information.
In making plans to meet the needs of the EDS child, a 504 Plan or ESE program should be addressed. A physical and occupational therapist would be beneficial in evaluating and planning for accessibility and adaptation needs in the school.
Below is a list of some accommodation that other EDS students have found to be beneficial.
Physical education/sports needs:
Modified physical education
Alternative health related credit in lieu of PE.
Restrict contact sports
Restrict weight bearing activities on arms, wrists (such as hand-stands, cartwheels) etc.
Limit exposure to the sun.
Allow storage of ice packs/gel packs
Allow doctor note permitting use of non-prescription pain medications
Rest periods in the middle of the day for fatigue
Two sets of text books: one for home, one for school
Allow use of a chair instead of floor for circle time
Adjusted chair /table height
Use of elevators
Allow passes for frequent bathroom breaks
Book bag on wheels
Help with note taking
Extra time to get to and from class (leave before the bell)
Stretching or walking to relieve stress
Extended time for tests and assignments
Extra time on timed/standardized tests
Eliminate handwriting grade in favor of grades for content and effort
Lockers: assign locker at eye level, allow digital lock instead of combination locks or alternative to standard locker such as a "safe" place to store belongings.
Copies of worksheets that allow fill in blanks or underlining in lieu of rewriting existing questions/sentences.
Chair with arms for upper body support
Height adjustments on chairs/desks
Pad for chair seat or back
Pad for sitting on the floor
Use of computers with ergonomic keyboards or Alpha Smart
School Site Interventions
You and your child have certain rights under the Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. (See document Appendix # 2).
All students who are considered exceptional under the Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA) are also considered disabled under section 504. However, all 504 disabled students are not considered exceptional under IDEA. (See Appendices #3 for explanation of differences)
In most districts, those children considered disabled under the IDEA, will have goals and objectives written in an Individual Education Plan (IEP). These often are written to include accommodations. A 504 plan is different than an IEP, as it addresses the accommodations needed instead of long and short term goals.
Each school district handles these plans a little differently as far as referral method or request for services. Generally, it is the Guidance department who manages these cases.
Knowing your rights is important, but having a good working relationship with school personnel and teachers is often more important. Go into all meeting with an attitude of cooperation. Being combative, intimidating, or demanding is not productive. Litigation takes a long time and your child's needs are immediate. The ideal situation is one where parents/teachers/schools are working together, not pulling apart. Solving your child's individual problems may require a new or unique approach. If the plan, as written, does not meet your child's needs, or if the needs change over time, be aware that you may request additional meetings to change the 504 plan or the IEP.
You are your child's advocate, which means you are their voice. Ask you child what he/she needs most. Include the child in the plans. During meetings and discussions about your child's needs, keep your child as the center of discussion. When or if the topic sways to other focuses, draw the conversation back to the child and meeting his/her needs. Stick to the facts as you discuss EDS. Discuss options, and be open to new ideas for meeting your child's needs. When discussion is finished, ask for action.
Below are helpful suggestions from parents who have already been where you are going. Be aware that asking the school for special considerations does not mean they must provide all the items you are requesting. For example, if the school allows your child to use a rolling backpack or to store therapeutic ice packs in the refrigerator, you will most likely be providing the items.
Â· Check with your school system to see what programs are already in place at your school or in your system.
Â· Ask your doctor to provide a letter of diagnosis and suggestions for the school.
Â· Ask about 504 plans at your school, as well as occupational and physical therapy and evaluations.
Â· Make appointments with the school guidance counselor, school nurse and the individual teachers BEFORE problems arise. Make a plan for emergencies to be posted with the nurse/teacher.
Â· Try to educate the school ahead of time about EDS. Provide information on EDS for inclusion in the Cumulative Record. Provide an EDNF CD-ROM.
Â· Do not assume that teachers know about your child's needs. You should be sure they are aware of the information each year.
Â· If you or your child are comfortable presenting information, ask to do so for the teachers/faculty or students.
Â· Make a list of the problems your child is having. What are some of the solutions you believe might help?
Â· Be clear about the things your child should not do. Things he/she should do.
Â· Be a creative problem solver. Think of ways to "make it happen".
Â· Bring a list of possible suggestions with you to your meetings. Prioritize those that are important "all of the time", and those that "may" be needed some of the time. This list and plan can be revised at your request anytime during the year or as needs change.
Â· Be prepared to discuss:
- Accident/emergency plan
- Physical Therapy needs
- Assistive devises / braces/ wheelchair needs
- Assistive technology needs
- Occupational Therapy needs
- Speech/Language needs
- Class modifications and interventions/accommodations needs
- Physical needs in room/hallways
- Assignments/class work needs
- Organization needs
- Special considerations
Appendix # 1. Definitions and Terms
The following are definitions or words often used by people who work with exceptional children. The definitions are meant to help or guide you and are simplified for easier understanding and use. Different school districts and educators may use these words in somewhat different ways. You should feel free to ask for definitions of words and abbreviations being used when discussing or describing your child. Different states have specific Boards of Education rules and requirements for eligibility for services and programs.
Academic - Having to do with subjects such as reading, writing, math, social studies, and science.
Accommodation - Learning to do things differently from other students because of a handicap, impairment, or disability.
Assessment - A way of collecting information about a student's special learning needs, strengths, and interests. This could include observing the student, looking at records, or evaluations and tests.
Disability - A problem or condition which makes it hard for a student to learn or do things in the same ways as most other students. A disability may be short-term or permanent.
Exceptional Student - A student who has special learning needs as described in state and local school board rules. This includes students with handicaps, a disability, or impairment, as well as those who are gifted.
Exceptionality - A special learning need. Exceptionalities include handicaps, disabilities, or impairments. Gifted is also included as an exceptionality.
Free appropriate Public Education - The words used in the federal law, the Education of the Handicapped Act, to describe an exceptional student's right to a special education which will meet his individual special learning needs, at no cost to his parents.
Handicap - A problem or condition which makes it hard for a student to learn or do things in the same ways as most of the students. A handicap may be short-term or permanent.
Homebound or Hospitalized - A kind of exceptional student education program for a student who must stay at home or in a hospital for a period of time because of a severe illness, injury, or health problem. In order to be eligible for such a program in most districts, a child must meet certain listed requirements to quality.
Impairment - A problem or condition which makes it hard for a student to learn or do things in the same ways as most other students. An impairment may be short-term or permanent.
Individual Education Plan ( IEP) - A written plan which describes an exceptional student's special individual learning needs and the exceptional education programs and services which will be given the student under IDEAS.
Least Restrictive Environment - Part of the federal law and state laws that deals with determining a handicapped child's placement. This includes that, to the maximum extent appropriate, handicapped children are educated with children who are not handicapped, an that the removal of the child from the regular school environment occurs only when the handicap is such that the child cannot be satisfactorily educated in regular classes with the use of aids and services. In choosing a child's placement in the least restrictive environment, possible harmful effects of the child and the quality of services he needs are considered.
Motor - Use of large and small muscles to move different parts of the body. Examples of motor skills are walking, holding and moving a pencil, or opening a door.
Occupational Therapy (OT) - Treatment for an exceptional student which helps him to develop mental or physical well-being in areas of daily living such as self-care and prevocational skills, etc. This treatment is given by a licensed occupational therapist. In order to be eligible for "occupational therapy" programs and services, a student usually must meet requirements.
Physically Impaired - A kind of disability or exceptionality. The physically impaired student is one who has a severe illness, condition, or disability which makes it hard for him to learn in the same ways as other students his age. In order to be eligible for "physically impaired" programs and services, a student must meet requirements.
Physical Therapy (PT) - Treatment for an exceptional student which helps to maintain or improve his use of bones, joints, muscles, and nerves. This treatment is given by a licensed physical therapist. In order to be eligible for "physical therapy" programs and services, a student usually must meet requirements.
Sensory - Having to do with the use of the senses of hearing, seeing, touching (feeling) smelling or tasting as a part of learning. An example of a sensory skill is being able to see the differences between letters of the alphabet.
Speech-Language - Having to do with a student's ability to speak (talk), write, listen, or read. This includes understanding others and making himself understood. An example of a speech-language skill is being able to put words together into a good sentence.
Speech-Language Impaired - A kind of handicap or exceptionality. The speech or language impaired student is one who has problems talking so that he can be understood, sharing ideas, expressing needs, or understanding what others are saying. IN order to be eligible for "speech language" programs and services, a student usually must meet requirements.
Appendix #2. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 is civil rights legislation that protects the civil and constitutional rights of persons with disabilities. The law states that "No otherwise qualified disabled individual in the United Statesâ€¦ shall, solely by reason of his disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance." Students determined qualified under Section 504 cannot be discriminated against based on their disability.
Students are considered disabled under Section 504 if they: (1) have a physical or mental impairment tat substantially limits one or more major life activities (learning or schooling is considered a major life activity), (2) have a record of such an impairment, or (3) are regarded as having such an impairment. All students who are considered exceptional under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) are also considered disabled under Section 504. However, all 504 disabled students are not considered exceptional under IDEA.
Some examples of types of discrimination that 504 prohibits are:
1. Denial of opportunity to participate in or benefit from a service, educational program, or activity which is afforded to students who are not disabled.
2. Provisions of opportunity to participate in or to benefit from service, educational program, or activity which is not equal to that afforded to others.
3. Provision of aids, benefits or services that are not as effective as those provided to others.
4. Provision of different or separate benefits or services unless such action is necessary to be effective.
5. Selecting a site or location which effectively excludes persons with disabilities or subjects them to discrimination.
Appendix #3. Differences Between IDEA Disabilities and 504 Handicaps
Most students are educated in regular or General Education. This is where students achieve through a general education program in the regular classroom.
504 Handicaps allow for education and achievement through a general education instructional program with modifications recorded in a 504 plan. IDEA Disabilities allow for education and achievement through Exceptional Student Education (ESE) instructional programs as documented in an Individual Education Plan (IEP). Below are some of the differences:
What is it?
IDEA - Individuals with Disabilities Act previously called Education for Handicapped Children Act or 94-142
504 - Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
IDEA - Disabilities (eligible)
504 - Handicaps (qualifies)
Who is protected?
IDEA - Students who meet qualifying conditions for 13 categories.
504 - Students who meet the definition of a physical, mental impairment which substantially limit a major life activity (including learning).
IDEA - Disabling condition results in a need for Exceptional Student Education.
504 - Handicapping condition requires an education as effective as that provided other non handicapped students.
Duty to Provide A Free Appropriate Education.
Both require the provision of a free appropriate education to students covered under them.
IDEA - Requires the district to develop IEPs. "Appropriate education" means a program designed to provide "educational benefit".
504 - Requires a district to develop a 504 Plan. "Appropriate" means an education comparable to the education provided to non handicapped students, requiring that reasonable modifications be made.
IDEA - If a student is eligible under IDEA; the district receives additional funding (FTE) to provide special services.
504 - If a student qualifies under 504, the district receives no additional funds.
504 provides protection from discrimination, not special education services.
The regulations are very similar for IDEA and 504.
IDEA - Consent is required before an initial evaluation is conducted.
Provides for independent evaluations.
Reevaluation must be conducted every so many years (usually 3).
504 - Only notice, not consent, is required.
Independent evaluations are not required.
Requires periodic reevaluations.
Both require notice to the parent or guardian with respect to identification, evaluation, and/or placement.
IDEA - Compliance is monitored by the State's Bureau of Education for Exceptional Students Division for Public School in that particular State Department of Education.
Complaints resolved by that same Bureau.
504 - Enforced by the US Office of Civil Rights
Complaints resolved by that same office.
Types of Disabilities and Handicaps
Listed below are examples of some usual types of eligible IDEA disabilities and 504 qualified handicaps:
IDEA - mental retardation, hearing impairments including deafness, speech or language impairments, visual impairments including blindness, serious emotional disturbances, orthopedic impairments, autism, traumatic brain injury, other health impairments, specific learning disabilities
504 - asthma, allergies, Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD/ADHD), behavioral difficulties, cancer, diabetes, drug addiction, epilepsy, heart disease, hemophilia, HIV, Sickle-Cell Anemia, Tuberculosis, other diseases/disorders and physical handicaps.
Appendix # 4. RIGHTS OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (IDEA & 504 PLAN) TO ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY
The following is taken form the Advocacy Center for Persons with Disabilities fact sheet 11/97. This fact sheet is not intended as a substitute for legal advice.
The 1997 Amendments to the IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) require that the need for assistive technology be considered at the IEP meeting. By becoming familiar with the right to assistive technology, parents and student will be better prepared to advocate for needed assistive technology in the IEP, and also in the 504 Plan (equal access to all school programs), thereby promoting enhanced learning and functioning in inclusive environments.
What is Assistive Technology?
Assistive technology (AT) includes devices and services as well as training that help an individual to select and utilize a device or aid. AT devices are items, pieces of equipment or system (both off -the-shelf and customized) used to increase, maintain or improve the functional capabilities of students with disabilities.
Assistive technology services include evaluation, maintenance or repair and training for students, professionals or families. AT devices or aids include, but are not
limited to the following:
Â· Augmentative communication devices, including talking computers
Â· Assistive listening devices, including hearing aids, personal hearing aids, personal FM units, closed-caption TVs and teletype machines(TDDs)
Â· Specially adapted learning games, toys and recreation equipment
Â· Computer-assisted instruction, drawing software
Â· Electronic tools (scanners with speech synthesizers, tape recorders, word processors)
Â· Curriculum and textbook adaptations (e.g. audio format, large print format, Braille)
Â· Copies of overheads, transparencies and notes
Â· Adaptation of the learning environment, such a special desks, modified learning stations, computer touch screens or different computer keyboards
Â· Adaptive mobility devices for driver's education
Â· Orthotics such as hand braces to facilitate writing skills

By NIKKI YOUNK
FLORENCE, Wis. - Out of the five state-designated "wild rivers" in Wisconsin, two run through Florence County.
LaSalle Falls is one of the seven waterfalls located on the wild Pine and Popple Rivers in Florence County.
According to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the 1965 Wisconsin state legislature established the wild rivers system in order to allow residents and visitors the opportunity to enjoy natural rivers in a free-flowing condition and to protect the rivers from development.
Wisconsin wild rivers include:
- the Pine River, which runs through Florence and Forest counties.
- the Popple River, which runs through Florence and Forest counties.
- the Pike River, which runs through Marinette County.
- the Totagatic River, which runs through Bayfield, Sawyer, Washburn, and Burnett counties.
- the Martin Hanson Wild River, which is a portion of the Brunsweiler River that runs through Ashland County.
Both the 89-mile-long Pine River and the 62-mile-long Popple River start in the Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest in Forest County. The Pine River enters Florence County in the town of Long Lake, while the Popple River enters the county further south in the town of Fence.
The Popple River feeds into the Pine River in the town of Fern, just south of State Highway 101. Combined, the rivers flow through the middle of the county in the towns of Fern and Commonwealth before emptying into the Menominee River along the town of Aurora/town of Florence border.
Lori Moore, director of education and promotions at the Wild Rivers Interpretive Center in Florence, explained that management on land along the rivers is designed to show as few traces of human intervention as possible.
"Stewardship of the wild rivers is shared by all land owners along the river," she said. "The Pine and Popple rivers shorelines are also protected from development impacts by Florence County's Wild River ordinance, which regulates activities on lands within 400 feet of a wild river or the visual horizon, whichever is greater."
As a result, outdoors enthusiasts are free to enjoy a "true wild experience" on the rivers.
Moore pointed out that for canoers and kayakers, different areas of the rivers will offer distinct experiences.
"The upper Pine River, above LaSalle Falls, alternates between deep, slow meanders and rapids or waterfalls," she said. "The lower river, the last 10 miles downstream of the Pine River Flowage, offers relaxed paddling with a steady current and only a few gentle ripples."
As for the Popple River, Moore said that the upper river, upstream of Morgan Lake Road, features easy but shallow rapids. More complex rapids await downstream of Morgan Lake Road, she added.
"It is the most difficult white-water on the watershed, and it is recommended for only experts with suitable equipment and skills," said Moore.
However, since the rivers are in their natural states, their water levels are highly variable.
"The best season for river running, particularly on the white-water sections, is April through May when the snow melts and rains swell the river flow," Moore explained. "Typically, the Popple is not canoe-able after mid-May unless there is a lot of rain."
Moore added that the lower Pine River is the exception, as it tends to offer good paddling conditions well into the summer.
Anyone interested in checking the rivers' conditions can check the staff water level gauge near the State Highway 101 bridge over the Pine River.
Of course, the rivers can also be enjoyed by those without canoes or kayaks.
Moore said that most of the waterfalls on the two rivers are accessible by foot trails from either town or county forest roads. These trails are hilly and rugged, with the LaSalle Falls trail being the only maintained trail.
There are seven named waterfalls on the Pine and Popple. At 22-feet high, LaSalle Falls on the Pine River is the largest. Others are Meyers Falls and Bull Falls on the Pine River, and Washburn Falls, Little Bull Falls, Big Bull Falls, and Jennings Falls on the Popple River.
For more information on canoe and kayak put-in locations and trails to the waterfalls, contact the Wild Rivers Interpretive Center at (715) 528-5377.
Nikki Younk's e-mail address is email@example.com.

Once state-of-the-art mental healthcare facilities, Kirkbride buildings have long been relics of an obsolete therapeutic method known as Moral Treatment. In the latter half of the 19th century, these massive structures were conceived as ideal sanctuaries for the mentally ill and as an active participent in their recovery. Careful attention was given to every detail of their design to promote a healthy environment and convey a sense of respectable decorum. Placed in secluded areas within expansive grounds, many of these insane asylums seemed almost palace-like from the outside. But growing populations and insufficient funding led to unfortunate conditions, spoiling their idealistic promise.
Within decades of their first conception, new treatment methods and hospital design concepts emerged and the Kirkbride plan was eventually discarded. Many existing Kirkbride buildings maintained a central place in the institutions which began within their walls, but by the end of the 20th century most had been completely abandoned or demolished. A few have managed to survive into the 21st century intact and still in use, but many that survive sit abandoned and decaying—their mysterious grandeur intensified by their derelict condition. More...
Dr. Thomas Story Kirkbride was a founding member of the Association of Medical Superintendents of American Institutions for the Insane (AMSAII)—forerunner of the American Psychiatric Association—serving first as secretary, then later as president. Through this association and in his writings, Kirkbride promoted a standardized method of asylum construction and mental health treatment, popularly known as the Kirkbride Plan, which significantly influenced the entire American asylum community during his lifetime. More...
Latest Blog Entries
10 Mar 2013 -- Christian VanAntwerpen had an idea recently to photograph “every inch” of the Fergus Falls, Minnesota, Kirkbride for posterity, and is now working to make his idea a reality. Christian has gathered a group of about forty photographers and cinematographers who plan to photograph the entire building together this year... read more
Abandoned Asylums of New England
28 Feb 2013 -- John Gray is publishing a new edition of his Abandoned Asylums of New England photography book. The original version was self-published and came out a little over ten years ago... read more
Help Save the Athens Kirkbride
13 Feb 2013 -- Please help the Athens County Historical Society and Museum save the Athens Kirkbride by signing this online petition. Ohio University (current owner of the former Athens State Hospital site now known as The Ridges) is set to tear down an historic building at the site next month... read more
Hudson River Cameo in New Soundgarden Video
21 Jan 2013 -- A friend of mine recently posted photos from a Soundgarden show on Instagram. She was excited to see photos of the Hudson River State Hospital Kirkbride appear on the screen behind the band while they played their new song Been Away Too Long... read more
Colliers International’s Fergus Falls Website
02 Oct 2012 -- Colliers International has launched a website as part of their campaign to find a developer for the Fergus Falls Kirkbride: Historic Campus Opportunity. It’ll be interesting to see if Colliers is successful... read more
The Danvers Room
17 Aug 2012 -- The New York Times published an article Tuesday about John Archer’s eclectic house in Danvers, Massachusetts: Scrap Mansion. For those who don’t know, John Archer probably did more than anyone to try keeping the Danvers State Hospital Kirkbride intact... read more
Prints of Kirkbride buildings are now available.
Added a Saint Elizabeths Hospital page.
Added an Harrisburg State Hospital page.
Added chapters 51-60 to Kirkbride's book.
Added a Cherokee State Hospital page.
Expanded the Weston State Hospital gallery.
- Athens State Hospital
Architect: Levi T. Scofield
Location: Athens, Ohio
- Buffalo State Hospital
Architect: Henry Hobson Richardson
Location: Buffalo, New York
- Cherokee State Hospital
Architect: Henry F. Liebbe
Location: Cherokee, Iowa
- Clarinda State Hospital
Architect: Foster & Liebbe
Location: Clarinda, Iowa
- Danvers State Hospital
Architect: Nathaniel J. Bradlee
Location: Danvers, Massachusetts
- Dixmont State Hospital
Architect: J.R. Kerr
Location: Dixmont Township, Pennsylvania
- Fergus Falls State Hospital
Architect: Warren Dunnell
Location: Fergus Falls, Minnesota
- Greystone Park State Hospital
Architect: Samuel Sloan
Location: Morristown, New Jersey
- Hudson River State Hospital
Architect: Frederick Clarke Withers
Location: Poughkeepsie, New York
- Independence State Hospital
Architect: Stephen Vaughn Shipman
Location: Independence, Iowa
- Northampton State Hospital
Architect: Jonathan Preston
Location: Northampton, Massachusetts
- Saint Elizabeths Hospital
Architect: Thomas U. Walters
Location: Washington, DC
- Taunton State Hospital
Architect: Elbridge Boyden
Location: Taunton, Massachusetts
- Traverse City State Hospital
Architect: Gordon W. Lloyd
Location: Traverse City, Michigan
- Weston State Hospital
Architect: R. Snowden Andrews
Location: Weston, West Virginia
- Worcester State Hospital
Architect: George Dutton Rand
Location: Worcester, Massachusetts
- Photo Prints
Prints of selected Kirkbride photographs on this site are available for purchase in 8x10 and 11x14 formats.
Please note that in some instances these buildings are off-limits to the general public and permission must be obtained if you wish to access the property and/or take photographs.

HIRING A GARDENER
Know what you are paying for and what impact it has on the environment. Gardeners frequently state that they would adopt environmentally preferable lawn care practices if their customers didn’t insist on "business as usual". Language barriers can create challenges communicating with your gardener. Read over the checklist and mark those practices that you would like your gardener to follow. Keeping your yard healthy will not only save you money, but will protect your family’s health and the environment.
Make sure that you and your gardener understand that when debris enters the storm drains, it flows to the creeks where it decomposes, dropping oxygen levels in the water too low for fish to survive. Sediment from our yards usually accompanies the debris, which cause the creeks to be over silted, greatly impacting the environmental health of our waterways.
Inquire if the gardener is a licensed landscape contractor. Often, when gardeners are licensed, their license no. is displayed on their business card and on their vehicle. When serious pest infestations do occur, call a licensed pest control operator and inquire if their practices are less-toxic. Ensure that your gardener is knowledgeable in pest identification and disease diagnosis as well as Integrated Pest Management. Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is a decision-making process that encourages people to use environmentally compatible techniques and products. IPM recognizes that pests are part of our eco-system, but seeks to prevent damage from pest populations reaching unacceptable levels. Regular monitoring and record-keeping of pest populations becomes a valuable reference to establish your own personal tolerance level. Once a pest infestation reaches beyond that threshold, a decision can be made as to which means of control will be used: cultural (modification of plant care activities, i.e., water, plant placement and pruning), physical (picking the pests off the plants by hand), mechanical (use of a weed-block or sticky traps), biological (use of beneficial insects to prey on harmful insects) or chemical (use of least toxic pesticides where serious damage would be done).
When applying pesticides, please know that ‘the label is the law’, which means it is unlawful and environmentally unsound to use the pesticide in any manner other than how it is stated on the label. Pesticides are labeled either Caution, Warning or Danger. Even with Caution-labeled pesticides, there are safety practices users should follow.
Quick Tips for Designing your lawn and garden:
- If you have a yard that is being re-designed or hasn’t been landscape yet, you have an opportunity to be well-informed about the best foundation for your garden.
- Select plants that grow well in our local environment while considering growth patterns and maintenance requirements to help your garden achieve and retain its optimal health... in other words, use the right plant in its right place.
- Healthy plants have the most resistance to pest infestation. Looking at the plants and noting any changes in their condition will provide an opportunity to address any problems before the situation is serious.
- Minimize annual flowers, which require as much water as a lawn and must be replaced 3-4 times each year.
- Choose California native and Mediterranean-climate plants first. They are drought tolerant and hardy in this area.
Quick Tips for Lawn Choice and Care:
- Consider lawn alternatives that can handle some foot traffic: Caraway-Scented Thyme, (which doesn’t require any mowing), Woolly Yarrow, Mother of Thyme, O’Connor’s Legume or Garden Chamomile.
- Plant Tall Fescue, Dwarf Tall Fescue, Red Fescue and Perennial Ryegrass. These are preferred grasses in the Bay Area that require fewer inputs of water, fertilizer, mowing, pesticide and maintenance time and are referred to as ‘cool season’ grasses.
- Where you have an existing lawn, familiarize yourself with what soil and grass type you have. Know the potential problems and pests of your grass. Learn what time of year to monitor for those pests. When treatment is called for, select the least-toxic method as a preventive measure, rather than waiting until the problem requires a more aggressive treatment.
- Consider some of the following and give your gardener clear instructions on how to maintain your lawn. These will help build fertile soil and vigorous, deep-rooted lawns. A healthy lawn can resist disease and drought damage, and out-compete most weeds without reliance on chemicals. It is when a lawn (or any tree or plant) becomes unhealthy, that it is prone to attacks by pests.
- Use a mulching mower that leaves grass clippings on the lawn which provides free fertilizer, keeps refuse charges down and helps lawn grow greener and denser.
- In fall and spring, aeration of the lawn by hand or with a power aerator eliminates thatch build up and allows water to penetrate to the root zone.
Another option when there is an advanced pest infestation or disease on an annual or perennial, is to remove and replace the plant. It may be that the environmental cost of applying chemicals in this situation is greater than a removal and replacement. Analyze if the plant was in its preferred location, with proper soil, moisture and sun.
Checklist for your gardener, if your landscaper or gardener also designs and chooses your plants:
- Analyze and prepare soil for planting using appropriate amendments, tillage and grading.
- Design and plan the garden based on how it will be used, water efficiency, ease of maintenance and low waste.
- Design and install the irrigation system to efficiently water desired plants, minimizing weeds, waste, and costs.
- Use the right plant in the right place. Plants will be their healthiest when placed in their preferred environment. Consider the sun exposure and shade received, amount of irrigation needed, and pruning practices.
- Plant insectary plants - those that attract beneficial insects to your yard to prey on the harmful insects.
- Maintain the perennial lawn without seeding with annual grass, retaining the drought tolerant, lower-maintenance perennial grass lawn.
- Set mower height up to 2 - 2.5" on perennial tall fescues (1.5" on annual or bentgrass lawns) to increase drought tolerance and discourage invasive weedy grasses.
- Aerate the soil by simply inserting a 6" garden fork every 4" and levering to loosen the soil. To eliminate thatch accumulation, avoid over-watering or over-fertilizing.
- Avoid pesticides or weed killers on the lawn. Studies have shown that commonly used chemicals - quick-release fertilizers, pesticides and weed-&-feed products - can kill beneficial soil organisms and contribute to soil compaction, thatch build up and lawn disease. These same chemicals harm human health, pets, wildlife and the creeks, rivers and Bay.
- Do not apply fertilizer on perennial lawns (no more than 2x/year for annual lawns, and slow-release fertilizers only). Over-fertilized lawns, blue green in color, are unhealthy and prone to thatch build-up, pest infestation and drought damage.
- Use a rake or industrial-duty broom to clean up yard debris, pathways and sidewalks. Leaf blowers cause air and noise pollution, offer less control over the debris and require the same amount of time to do the same job by broom. Definitely don’t allow any area to be cleaned by hosing down method. Make it clear to your gardener to avoid any debris entering storm drains!
- Control weeds with layers of mulch, biodegradable fabric, cultivation and water management to prevent nutrient loss and waste generation.
- Water lawn deeply and evenly at a rate appropriate for the grass variety, climate and season.
- Utilize a water-conserving irrigation schedule, delivering water to the root zones and not exceeding the amount needed by the plants. Watering in the morning avoids (when the sun and wind are low) the high-evaporation rates between 10am-4pm. For detailed information about irrigation schedules for your landscape, call the City of Santa Rosa Water Conservation Information Line @ 543.3985.
- Store fertilizers, fungicides, pesticides and oils out of the way of rain or irrigation, as even the residues on the containers can be washed off and into storm drain system and flow to nearby creeks.
- Place yard clippings in a compost pile and monitor it so that it effectively breaks down and can be used again in your yard. Or, place it in yard debris bins for pick up or ask your gardener to haul it away as part of their service. Composting provides high quality soil and helps keep refuse fees down.

An interesting article about ancient Greek homosexuality. Its interesting- I can't vouch for its accuracy as this is a subject on which I'm woefully ignorant but have always been partly intrigued by given the many references in Plato to the practise. It turns out as you would expect that homosexuality in Greece evolved over the years- particularly by the end of the Athenian democracy you had people who were as the author suggests what we would recognise as homosexuals. Homosexuality for some men was a stage in development between asexual youth and the marriage bed- but others seemed to delight more in the company of men than of women. Its an interesting subject and if anyone knows more please enlighten me as to whether the assessment in the article is right or not.
November 10, 2007
November 09, 2007
The first Emperor of China is a historical character and his legacy defines in many ways what China is today. He originally was not Emperor of China, but the Prince of a powerful western Kingdom Qin. During his reign as King of Qin, he conquered the other kingdoms which constituted ancient China. The King of Qin became an emperor in 221BC over a vast landmass, stretching perhaps over a third of what is modern China today. His power was extensive- Chinese histories credit him with an almost totalitarian ideology, an aim of unification which stretched to the elimination of any possible rival, including the massacre of 460 scholars and the destruction of older feudal patterns of service and government. He brought in a single currency and connected together the walls that previous Chinese governments had constructed to the north, to build the first defensive Great Wall. The Emperor's dynasty lasted a very short time- within years of his death in 210BC, his son the second Emperor was killed and chaos descended before the rise of the Han Emperors beggining in 202BC.
The Emperor though left much behind him. The Han reigned to some extent in conformity with his principles especially of unity- and the shape of the currency that he had originally drafted remained the same right up until the early 20th Century. Much of our account of his acheivement comes from the Han historian, Sima Qian, who was born in 145BC and whose histories cover the whole of Chinese history from its mythical origins to his own lifetime. Sima Qian was hostile to the Qin Emperor partly because his dynasty replaced that of the Qin, and his history is not a history as we would recognise it in modern terms. Sima Qian writes fables and chronicles and treatises on subjects, the past for him is a set of exempla and a set of dates. He doesn't dwell as we might like him to on subjects relevant to us, but rather has the preoccupations of a Han civil servant: so his book tells us of stories about assassins, stories about how to govern and how not to govern, chronicles of dates and all from a perspective that denegrates the Qin. Despite that Sima Qian is one of the great historians of the ancient world- his name deserves to be up there with the great classical historians.
However we are incredibly lucky when it comes to the Qin Emperor, for in the mid-1970s a peasant in China came across a stupendous find. In the soil his spade hit a terracotta head, and archaeologists coming across to work on the site found not one but thousands of terracotta bodies and artefacts scattered in the soil. Having reconstructed what the site must have been, they worked out that these terracotta bodies constituted a seperate state that the Qin Emperor hoped to rule in his afterlife. At the British Museum in London at the moment, some of those finds are being exhibited. You see all sorts of people that the Emperor required in his afterlife: he has strong men, acrobats, musicians, civil servants, soldiers of all types and even a royal charioteer. Some of these artefacts bring to life stories from Sima Qian's accounts. For example on the Emperor's death, his senior civil servant Li Si kept the Imperial demise secret. He did so by maintaining the illusion that the Emperor was still alive giving orders from his Imperial chariot- and to some extent when one sees the chariot, one can imagine how that worked. The Emperor closeted and secretive and Li Si and a couple of others conspicuously running in and out to receive orders.
The terracotta army itself is shown in all its glory. It is incredible what the craftsmen (probably conscripted) could do. The skill with which the faces in particular are rendered is stunning- the visual impressiveness of what you see makes you reel back, considering that these are faces looking straight at you from thousands of years ago. The picture in particular of a fiery Turkish looking light infantryman stayed in my mind all of last night. The Museum have organised the exhibition in a very proffessional way- first they show you some Qin artefacts and describe the role of the Qin Emperor in Chinese history, avoiding much of the detail but trying to give a non-sinologist a good understanding of what this man was and what he represents. Then you proceed to see the terracotta army and court itself- which is a stunning experience and having it put in context before you see it, it becomes more impressive. The Emperor constructed this army to protect him in his afterlife- it appears they were stationed on the only open access route to his tomb in order to guard it. His tomb itself has never been opened and apart from Sima Qian's fantastic descriptions and some scientific work above the site on concentrations of metals found underneath, noone knows what is there. What we have though is these soldiers- we know they were painted and so their rather mundane colours today aren't as impressive as the gaudy way they were decorated- we know that irises for instance were painted in the eyes and we can tell all this thanks to chemical analysis of the surface of the statues. They are beautifully vibrant and vital. Each has its own character and facial expression, beard and overall look.
China is one of the hardest societies I have ever tried to understand. I have only been there once- but that's once more than most Westerners. Reading its literature and looking at its art is a very foreign experience in the way that reading Islamic literature or even Indian literature is not. Through accidents of history, China seems like another region of the earth from Europe. But its an increasingly powerful and important place- from films by great directors like Zhang Yimou to its economic importance, China is not merely an object of curious interest for the West, it is a place we have to understand. This exhibition therefore is a wonderful opportunity to learn something about China and the way that it was created and its history. The terracotta warriors are so impressive that they are a reminder of the grandeur of Chinese civilisation. They are also an incentive because of their beauty to try and understand more about the culture from which they sprang, seeing their beauty inspired me to buy translated fragments from Sima Qian's history. An exhibition like this is precisely the thing that the world's museums should increasingly engage in- if there is to be dialogue between our cultures then this is a wonderful way of expressing it and I hope some British treasures make their way temporarily to Beijing.
The Museum's exhibition reminds one of the importance of Chinese civilisation and the importance of cultivating an understanding of it. It also reminded me very visibly of the difficulties of historical research. There is so much that we do not know and will never know about the first Emperor. The history that we have is fragmented and written long after the Emperor's death. We have these artefacts but with many of them we are not sure of their use- and we have not yet seen inside the tomb of the Emperor to see what clues lie there.
One thing I do regret about the museum's exhibition is that there was not more outside or inside from historians of the era, Chinese and Western, discussing the Emperor. There wasn't even a good academic biography for sale- an unpardonable lapse! Another gap was that the First Emperor's attitude to religion was left untouched. We were invited to see the army as a simplistic guard for the afterlife or as a manifestation of the Emperor's meglamania: but I would have liked to see something more about what Chinese people of that time beleived about the afterlife and how that connected to what the Emperor did. One interesting question that wasn't touched upon was why none of his successors made this kind of tomb- it could be that they did and the tombs are lost waiting a farmer to discover them, it could be that his example discredited the practice, it could be that beliefs had shifted, it could be that this is one of many such tombs, leaving the exhibition I was none the wiser. One felt like screaming for more information. But having said that, that is possibly the churlish attitude to take. The exhibition is wonderful- the fact that these statues have left China must have been a great diplomatic acheivement and the museum has arranged them suitably well.
The First Emperor is one of those figures whose actions had momentous consequences spreading out through time, doubling and redoubling until his creation, a unified China, became one of the great powers of a globalised world in the 20th Century. Seeing the terracotta warriors, seeing the artefacts he collected around himself in his afterlife, one gets a sense of the immense power that he wielded, the creative wills that bent to his commanding will and the strength of his shortlived imperium.
November 08, 2007
to race cars. Lord Drayson has fallen on his sword in order to join the Le Mans race. I have to say that I have no idea about Drayson's record as a minister but as soon as I saw this, I rejoiced, long live the politicians for whom the hinterland matters more than the greasy pole!
November 07, 2007
Mark Steyn has a way of shocking me by producing some really good articles at times- I think he does this out of spite, he knows that I don't like some of his work and he wants me to be spinning in confusion unsure whether to like or dislike him. Sorry my sense of humour got the better of me tonight!
Anyway today Steyn has produced I think an excellent article about popular music and the need for a canon. It is really a wonderful defence of learning for the sake of appreciation. Basically Steyn's point is that you can't understand why the Beatles are great unless you understand why Bach is great. The two go together- to understand the one is to understand the other. He makes a point about the way that in order to understand something's greatness, you have to be able to see it in its context, to see what developed around it, why that move was important. Its crucial that Picasso could paint landscapes and had been trained because then his other paintings developed a meaning, its vital that Duke Ellington could play the classic solos because then he could use them in his own work. I agree completely with him: one of the wonders of artistic knowledge is the way that it supports itself. Every time I watch a new film, or read a new book (those being the two art forms I know) they tell me something about all those previous artworks I've seen and watched. And there is a strict heirarchy of knowledge in art- I would listen to Martin Scorsese for hours on film if I could because he has watched everything, and has interesting ideas about all of what he has seen.
Music is something sadly on which I'm not able to comment. One of the most illuminating moments of my life was sitting with a friend who understood music in a jazz bar in Prague. He described to me the way that what I saw as a cool sound, was actually the product of a complex interweaving of notes, a lattice of harmonies. Suddenly I saw music for a moment as this beautiful structure, which people played with, understood and manipulated- suddenly it became more than a simple nice tune, it became art, something I cared for and might grow to love. I think that appreciation is to be valued. It isn't easy to get to- appreciation of the arts is a real cost. Its something that takes time and effort, its something that you have to struggle to get to and it is something that relies on context. To take writing, its because I understand the history of English poetry that I can appreciate the opening line of the Wasteland, that April is the cruellest month- in that opening line Elliot tells us that everything that has gone before resting on Chaucer is wrong. That April is not the month of gentle showers but the month of cruelty. Poetry and novels are echoing always with previous works- the anxiety of influence was a disease that Harold Bloom diagnosed flowing through each and every author.
The great writers though manage to combine that with accessibility. I learnt to read novels- and I have to say watch films (the great twentieth century entertainment) because I began through enjoying them, I ended appreciating the same books. Most of the early readers started the same way, Jonathan Rose writes illuminatingly about the way that the first Labour MPs for example read Dickens, Carlyle, Ruskin and others and thought about them in their own way. There is a wonderful novel which really describes this process which unfortunately I can't lay my hands on right now- as soon as I find my copy I'll review it- but what shines through that book is the importance of embibing cultural classics to discovering the world of culture. The route to Austen is the route through Austen, the same goes for all the great writers and indeed for filmmakers from Orson Welles and Michael Curtiz to David Cronenberg. Its when you are bitten with the bug that you know that you have fallen in love and through falling in love you learn to appreciate and to link everything together and understand this lattice of things which all have been created partly for your pleasure.
Steyn is entirely right- you can enjoy the arts (I enjoy Music in this sense) without knowing much, but you enjoy them a hell of a lot more when you have exposed yourself to even more. Part of life is a continual adventure in self improvement- I definitely think that there are 'miles to go before I sleep' and probably will be when I'm dead- and I think that goes for art as well as anything else. There is always something 'further up and further in' to look at, there is always something which can prompt you to understand more or to reevaluate what was once familiar and now is strange. Sometimes I think in modern life we are too comfortable, the truth is that life is an adventure of understanding. For us who lag, it is worth looking up to those who are scaling the heights, but if they are worth looking up to then they are looking in admiration at the next climber. Nobody arrives at the summit, but the effort is what makes everything worth while- because by mastering that interesting novel you suddenly have another angle on human experience. Sitting down and saying no further is surrendering that knowledge and beauty that you might acquire by going up another notch- the world is limitless and its beauties are vast.
Steyn is right. To step back is folly, to stop is folly, and in this quest the canon (the works judged before by others as good) is a useful if not flawless guide. Relaxing in a comfort zone of the works written in your own culture or your own time is a waste- there is more to see and life is too short not to read that Egyptian novelist, see that Iranian film, find out about that twelfth century monk's poetry and listen to some Beethoven before going to watch Belle and Sebastien.
November 06, 2007
At the end of the First World War, the great empires of Eastern Europe, the Russian, Austrian, Prussian and Ottoman all collapsed and were replaced with a variety of successor states. Some of those states were carved out by the treaties like Lausanne and Versailles after the war, others were essentially created by military facts on the ground- and in most cases the treaty recognised what had already happened. Its worth remembering that most of the territorial changes in Europe occurred far away from the areas in which the dominant powers at Versailles- the US, UK and France- had their troops- ie the North East corner of France. Look at a map of Western Europe in 1914 and the frontiers haven't changed really that much up to today, look at a map of Eastern Europe and the world is completely different.
What happened in 1918 in order to accomplish that, and happened in 1945 as well, was the massive transfer of populations across frontiers. We often think of that as a fairly harmless process- it wasn't. To take one example, for centuries, for millennia, numerous Greeks had lived in Asia Minor. Thales one of the first philosophers, if not the first, lived for example in Miletus on the coast of modern day Turkey. By the time of the Ottoman Empire, those people calling themselves Greeks still lived there- still constituted a large minority in cities like Istanbul, Smyrna and other places. In the period after World War One the Greeks and Turks battled over the frontier between their states, in 1922 the Greeks finally lost and withdrew from Asia Minor and as they did, the Greeks living there were forced out as well. I thought of this when I first heard of it, doing my history GCSE, as a fact of history, a bloodless fact- in fact of course it wasn't- there was great brutality.
Just to appreciate how horrible that process of ethnic movement was, its worth looking at some of the accounts from Greeks at the time. Thalia Pandiri has collected some and published translations in the International Literary Quarterly- I suggest you go and have a read, but what she describes is truly horrifying. Women with sticks driven through their bodies till they emerge coming out of their mouths. Some of the stories are equally horrifying for the poverty they display- women feeding children flour in water for example or walking for miles with a bag gripped between their teeth and a child in each hand. When they arrived in Greece, many of them found a less than hospitable reception awaiting them as well. Many of them afterall looked not to the new Greece but to the Russian Tsar, traditional protector of orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire, as their prince.
Bringing up old atrocities has more purpose to just wallowing in misfortune. The experience of Greeks moving from Asia Minor to European Greece was horrific, but it is relatively unknown. It highlights something though of worth to consider- that moving populations is always difficult. You encounter the fact that people don't want to leave their homes, you encounter the fact that newcomers aren't always welcome when they arrive. That is even true, when unlike say in Palestine, the moving population are in the end absorbed by another population- as in the Greek case where most of the immigrants report that they did eventually become successful Greeks. Ultimately though the experience of the Greeks moving across from Asia to Europe reminds us of two things: firstly that we should not be blase about moving populations around the globe- should for example climate change result in the destruction of Bangladesh we would see the events of Asia Minor on an even greater scale even if we found somewhere for those people to go. Secondly and perhaps more importantly, it reminds us of our own powerlessness. By the end of World War One, there was barely an army around apart from those of the Western Allies and even then in Eastern Europe, it was the facts on the ground that mattered, not the pious declarations from Paris, London and Washington. International politics requires modesty as well as ambition.
November 05, 2007
An interesting piece in the Guardian reports comments from the MI5 head, Jonathan Evans, that increasingly Al Qaeda is targetting its recruitment efforts at younger and younger Muslims. In particular the organisation is looking to young British Muslims in their teens. Obviously the teenage years are amongst the prime years for people to form adult identities. One of the issues surrounding that is that people in their teenage years are often uncomfortable or unsure about where they are and what they are. They are thus prime for recruitment by groups like Al Qaeda which offer a strong identity and a purpose to life at a time when most people are going through confused emotional tempests.
Part of the problem of course is what we do about this- ultimately it comes down in part to a working education system which isn't segregated (segregation is a wonderful way to manufacture resentment from afar). No doubt, youth workers, youth organisations, parents and mosques (as well as a host of others that I've forgotten) can help as well but the spectacle of the teenage suicide bomber may grow depressingly familiar as we go into the future.
Well the Liberal Left Conspiracy came to the internet today- obviously as a group it has existed for a long time- liberals and lefties, the gay mafia, the illuminati and the free masons not to mention commies and various others have been conspiring for years which is why they have been quite so successful on both sides of the Atlantic in maintaining their control over the world. I am one of the conspirators as anyone looking at the roster will know- and I have to say I'm proud to be. The right has organised brilliantly on the internet- and Conservative Home is a really good clearing house for rightwing ideas- I know some of the best rightwing bloggers like say Matt Sinclair have written there. There isn't really any equivalent place to meet leftwing people and discuss politics on the net- Labour home is not as good as Conservative Home, its often too insular and focused in on Labour party internal affairs, other places are dominated by different sectional interests- its time the left came together in the UK on the net- and this is one option, lets hope it succeeds for doing that.
Ok lets turn to the whole idea of the liberal left- what does it mean to be on the liberal left and why do those words fit together. Lets define them first: broadly speaking I think that to be on the left is to be concerned about equality, and that to be liberal is to be concerned about freedom. The point about equality is that it produces freedom. Wealth is power- money would be nothing unless it had a value and that value is the goods and services it commands. The more wealth that someone has and the more independent that wealth from the interference of others, the freer they are to gain what they want in life. Rightwingers believe that the only obstacle to a free will is a state: they are right that the state can be a significant obstacle to the exercise of a free will, noone with any knowledge of this century could deny that and many on the left stood against the state as it limited the freedom of will (Orwell is a great example) but rightwingers are wrong to say that it is only the state which obstructs freedom. Corporations do too- and even the wealthy can obstruct liberty- both can use the state as well in their own interests- you could argue that that is what the British libel laws do.
Equality is married to freedom thus at a fundamental level- because without equality I cannot be free. Its encapsulated in that old piece of wisdom that beggars can't be choosers- something that the right tend to forget. This isn't an argument for state socialism, it could be but it isn't. It isn't an argument for any particular vision of society. But it is an argument that you cannot have real freedom without having equality, that you cannot be concerned about liberal things, without being concerned about leftwing things. And that goes as well for many of the other battles that the left are involved in, freeing women from the dominion of their husbands, freeing homosexual people from the legal restrictions of those that don't share their morality, freeing the innocent from the tyranny of a despot who would rather hold us all in jail than listen to any of us. All these things are both leftwing and liberal- how they are achieved is a totally separate issue but they can only be acheived if we think about equality and freedom together and try to acheive both through our policies.
That's why I'm conspiring for the liberal left (though I have to say this blog will remain basically what it has always been)!
November 04, 2007
Clive James is a figure unlike most others in our world- James has made a career of being an omnivore. From the chatshow couch to the comic circuit to the learned essay, James has succeeded everywhere he has gone. Writing and broadcasting, he has turned his natural wit to good account and provided a series of sparkling memoirs to furnish the bookshelves of the learned with. Cultural Amnesia, his latest book, is a fine effort to capture the unique folds of James's own mental landscape- he provides a short essay on over 100 cultural characters mainly from the last century. All the essays come out of a single quote- and often James doesn't even pause to ponder the life, instead pondering the importance of that quote.
The quoted range from Duke Ellington to Hegel, Federico Fellini to Margerate Thatcher, from Tacitus and Edward Gibbon to Coco Chanel and Adolf Hitler. The range is astonishing- though the absense of any scientists is equally astonishing. James mentions an Albert Einstein but its the musician not his more famous namesake and relative the physicist. Indeed science is one of the leading absenses from the collection which is biassed very much towards the arts. Analytical philosophy is also underepresented- we have an essay on Wittgenstein but characteristically in it philosophy students are dismissed for giving him the 'credit for everything that would have struck them if they had ever been left along with the merest metaphysical lyric from the early seventeenth century.' The Wittgenstein that matters to philosophers is the one that 'they can prove only to each other' and what James is interested in is the Wittgenstein that matters to the writer- to the humanist.
For that is what this book really is, a monument to what we might call humanism. A humanism that sees the limits of the human as surely as it does the extent of his range. James is limited- but to stress that is to undermine really his acheivement here- which is to gather and express particles of knowledge and understanding across many fields and many languages. He gets some judgements wrong- he dismisses Edward Gibbon as a poor stylist. James tells us that 'what he [Gibbon] wrote rarely lets you forget that it has been written'- possibly that's true but its also Gibbon's virtue and not to see that is to miss what Gibbon was trying to do and therefore to criticise him by a standerd he wasn't attempting to reach. James doesn't get Gibbon's historical breadth or depth either- doesn't see that the styllistic tics are made up for by the fact that Gibbon was another such as James who spanned centuries in a massive project that will probably never be attempted let alone completed again.Quotation has this feature that it inspires you to seek out the epigram- the fragment that illuminates rather than the rolling cadence of prose. Martial the great Latin poet is perhaps the most eminently quotable of Latin poets in that what he wrote was bitchy and short, James in these essays has the same quality. Like the greatest essayists he can skewer wonderfully. He can also at his best capture real nuance- his description of Edward Said in this sentence is perfect, 'As a critic and man of letters he has an enviable scope but it is continually invaded by his political strictness'. It captures the many sidedness of Said- the political lack of nuance which led him to some cartoonish descriptions of orientalists and of the orient but also the greatness- for Said who always recognised Israel and wanted Palestinians to recognise the sorrows of the Jews was a great man. James is able to capture that and through a quotation of Said's about the Battle of Algiers, bring to life the double sidedness of Said.
But this book is not all nuance. James is more often than not on the good side and vows war against those who cravenly boosted tyranny. He writes eloquently about the Manns- Heinrich, Thomas and Golo- all of whom resisted Hitler from outside the boundaries of exile. Of all the praise though it is that devoted to Sophie Scholl which most resonated with me. Scholl, James tells us, 'was probably a saint' and died in complete silence. What James wants to do with praise is make us think- he points to the fact that in his judgement despite the fact that there is a perfect actress for the role alive today (Natalie Portman) Scholl should never be portrayed by Hollywood. The finality of her end is her tragedy- far better for it to be a more obscure German film starring the unknown Julia Jenstch to portray her for the public so that they too understand the finality of the fall of the ax upon her neck shut out one of the true heroines of the twentieth century and sent her to darkness.
If Scholl volunteered to die, despite the fact she did not have to, to make a point against an odious regime, then James rightly eviscerates those who have supported those odious regimes. Though Sartre is his betenoir- he hates Sartre's evading of responsibility, hates the fact that 'Sartre was called profound because it sounded if he was either that or nothing' but ultimately his essay on Sartre is not the most interesting. Rather I think it is the essay on a much slighter figure- Peirre Drieu La Rochelle- a leading intellectual of Vichy that really made me think. For what he captures in that essay is the moment of victory in 1945, when the Germans were driven out and La Rochelle committed suicide. The key fact for James though is to evaluate the hysteria- a hysteria he informs us drily that Sartre backed and that Camus (who actually had a resistance record) disdained (though Camus thought there ought to be a reckoning). He leaves us in no doubt of the guilt of Pierre Drieu La Rochelle- but also paints a picture of France in those years which is terrifyingly accurate.
Totalitarianism is one of the foci of this book- James argues long and hard against it. Whether it is Communist or Fascist, he suggests it is deeply repugnant and you get the sense that he thinks that clear writing, thinking and reading are its enemies. As he said recently to Stephen Colbert, intellectuals get things wrong all the time- but they get them wrong less than those who don't open themselves to intellectual pursuits. In reality this book is a book about heroes- but it is not a book about heroism. The essay structure enables there to be a convincing absense of structure- in the sense that James is not interested in archetypes but in individuals- his essays are at their most effective when they describe either of two things- the impact of writing upon him as an individual or the way that this individual's career worked. An essay on Nadezhda Mandelstam is incredibly effective at making you realise the pain that she must have felt as the Stalinist machinery of death whirled past her windows. It drives you to the reality of the statistics.
Though James is reassuringly committed to the dry substance of the real world, he is most acute when he focuses on individual experiences, exploring them and rendering them to his reader. His selection is driven, as he argues in his essay on Chris Marker, by the solidity of the facts that he sees and understands but his talent is for explaining experience. This is a book which is unashamedly focused on reality- James gives postmodernism and its creeds of unreality very short shrift indeed. He is openly contemptuous of philosophical relativism and disdain for truth- openly praises the empirical and solidly researched. He bases his love for art upon a respect for reality.
James's range of understanding in this book is incredible. James is a great evoker of what other authors do and write and film and play. He can convey the meaning of others' statements in such a way as to make you want to read and listen to and watch their books, music and films. He makes you want to stroll down the streets of Vienna in particular and pop into the cafes to hear the arguments and consume the culture. He makes you want to open the books, to understand what Contini means when he says that you need to learn poetry. He creates a desire in you to leap from cultural tree to tree- as James himself in these essays does- referring for instance in an essay on Marc Bloch to the seductions and disappointments of Pound's poetry. He made me want to learn languages- to read these authors in their original tongues and capture the calligraphy of sound that they all employed.
Ultimately there isn't a greater compliment for a book like this than to say that- to say that this book is like the trunk of a great tree, along whose branches if you pursue them are fruit much more gaudy than anything found in the original bark. This is a book that leads to other books. Its a book that can be read at one sitting or dipped into- yes there are mistakes and there are manifold errors. But to forgive someone for misunderstanding that Gibbon is amongst the greatest English historians requires a great acheivement and this book is a great and interesting acheivement.
The other day I wrote an article on analytical blogging, which got some negative attention from Dizzy, who makes a fairly amusing point against it though personally I'm not as convinced as he is that intelligence is only reserved for the elite. Its interesting as well that modern conservatives often have tended towards being unabashedly in favour of populism- that reinforces one of my feelings that modern conservatism and other historical forms of conservatism are not the same- I can't imagine Edmund Burke or Hayek even giving three cheers for the Sun in the way that Dizzy does!
However that isn't the main point of this post. Matt Sinclair asks a much more interesting question about smart people and blogging, and I think he is right to ask it and the answer in the case of this blog demonstrates something which I think is interesting. Matt asks "Why should someone with interesting and novel things to say use the blogosphere as a medium?", he goes on to deliver some interesting answers, all of which depend mostly on the community as a whole providing a forum. Matt imagines that blogging is a bit like an intellectual salon on the net, in which we can throw around ideas, as he rightly points out that presumes a membership, there is no point talking to onesself.
Somebody asked me on my thread about this, why I don't do more analytical work on politics. I do a bit, but nowhere near what Chris Dillow does on Stumbling and Mumbling- and I think this ties into another reason to maintain a blog, which is one of the basic reasons that Westminster Wisdom (the title is partly ironic) exists. This blog really isn't an analytical policy blog- though I do occasionally rummage through politics and policy, its really a purely egoistic exercise. For me a blog is the equivalent of an 18th Century common place book, ie its where I put down my impressions of the world so I can go back to them. An interesting quote, a fun video, a film review, even a review of a novel, anything which makes me remember how I reacted to something for the first time.
I think that is a valid reason to keep a blog- partly because experience flows past me at such a rate that I can never really grab hold of it. Throughout my life, amongst my major vices is forgetfulness, and that means that I often lose hold of what I should know or should remember. Here I have a resource to which I can turn, when I want to, to find out about say Rousseau's walks or Bresson's Joan of Arc. Part of that is it forces me to think about what I see and read more acutely than ever before: because I know I'm going to have to write an article up here on it. That makes me look deeper and try and understand more. Its also a good resource to remember what an idiot I am occasionally- there are moments on this blog where I know I've been a complete fool- reminding onesself of that is a good thing and doing it on a blog is fairly harmless. (Which in a way brings me back to Dizzy, acute mockery of your own pretensions is always a good thing to read!)
In answer to Matt's question therefore- I think there is another reason- in addition to the good ones he has given- for a person to keep a blog and that is as an online diary. Afterall that is what blogs started off being- and I wonder whether in the end that will be their principle use.
LATER Incidentally Dizzy should probably go and watch this.

Smoking Statistics Quiz
Smoking statistics are about how much does one spend on smoking, the percent of chemicals present in smoke and the revenue spent on smoking. Answer this quiz to know these terms….
What Makes Smoking Addictive?
Know how addicted you are to tobacco smoking and what consequences may arise with smoking by taking this simple quiz.
Smokeless Cigarettes and FDA – The Ongoing Battle!
The US Food and Drug Administration reported that testing of e-cigs from two popular smokeless cigarettes makers revealed many toxic, noxious chemicals, which include a main ingredient
Medical Use of Marijuana
Of late, there has been a lot of research on the benefits and risks of using marijuana for pain and other medical reasons. This article looks at the findings of a few studies on the medical use of marijuana.
Surveys reveal that the U.S. has the most number of women smokers, followed by China. Indian women are placed third. The survey also reveals that Indian women
- Respiratory Health Effects of Passive Smoking
- How to Quit Smoking in Holiday Season?
- Effects of Smoking in Public Places
- The Five D’s of Smoking Cessation
- Reasons to Quit Smoking
- What are Light Cigarettes?
- What are Menthol Cigarettes?
- Does Smoking Weed Kill Brain Cells?
- Anti-Smoking Slogans
- Nicotine Addiction and Withdrawal
- An Overview of Tobacco Treatments
- How Smoking Affects the Environment
- Is Hookah Smoking Safe?
- How to Overcome Nicotine Cravings
- What is Nicotine Replacement Therapy?
- Effects of Crack
- Smoking Around Children
- Gory Anti-Smoking Campaigns
- Teenage Smoking
- Smoking Diseases and Illnesses

Food and drink manufacturers that color their products with cochineal extract and carmine must now declare the ingredients on the label under a new Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ruling.
The FDA said it has revised its requirements for these color additives in response to reports of severe allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, to food containing cochineal extract and food and cosmetics containing carmine.
Derived from the ground bodies of female cochineal beetles, the colorings are currently used in a variety of products such as ice creams, yogurts, fruit drinks, alcoholic drinks and candy products, to which they bring a characteristic pink, red or purple color.
Under the ruling food and beverage manufacturers that use the color additives will soon be required to declare their presence by their respective names - "cochineal extract" or "carmine" - in the ingredient statement.
The FDA said this “will allow consumers who are allergic to these color additives to identify and thus avoid products that contain these color additives”.
Presently the colorings fall under the “artificial color”, “artificial color added” or “color added” banners on food labels, or by an equally informative term that makes clear that a color additive has been used in the food.
The new regulation is effective 24 months after date of publication (January 5, 2009). Voluntary compliance may begin immediately. Objections and requests for hearing can be submitted 30 days after date of publication.
The FDA said that the ruling was also in response to a citizen petition submitted by the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI).
CSPI said it petitioned the FDA in 1998 to require labeling after a study by a University of Michigan allergy expert who discovered that carmine was the cause of an allergic reaction in one of his patients. Subsequently, CSPI said it received adverse-reaction reports from several dozen consumers.
Commenting on the new ruling, the CSPI said the FDA should have required labels to disclose that carmine and cochineal are extracted from insects, which many consumers, including vegetarians, Jews, and Muslims, would be interested to know.
It added that carmine and cochineal extract remain in dozens of reddish-colored foods and beverages, including fruit drinks, ice creams, yogurts, and candies.
The FDA said cosmetics containing carmine should specifically declare the presence of carmine “prominently and conspicuously at least once in the labeling”. An example would be: "Contains carmine as a color additive".

Onuskis (Anishok or Anushishok in Yiddish) lies in the northeastern part of Lithuania, about 5 km. from the Latvian border and about 20 km. northwest of the District Administrative Center Rakishok (Rokiskis).
Anishok is situated on a plain between forested hills which is very scenic. The lands of the town belonged to the Polish Graf Komar, to whom the Jews of the town and the farmers of the area paid rent. Wealthier Jews bought land from him on which they built their houses. The mansion of the Graf was situated near the town.
The square in the center of town was ringed with shops, and the town's water supply well stood in the middle of the square. From the square a narrow alley led to the winding road to Rakishok. Most houses were built of wood, except for the tavern that was more substantial. This belonged to the Graf until he sold it to a Jew named Fain.
Before World War I a tombstone from the mid-eighteenth century was found in the Jewish cemetery, which suggests that Jews had settled in Anishok by that time. In the nineteenth century the Jews were the majority in the town. Before World War I about 80 to 90 Jewish families lived in Anishok, but during the war years their number decreased to about 50 to 60 families.
Most Anishok Jews had shops selling tools, grocery, haberdashery, hats and women's clothing. One Jew had a business in dyeing textiles. Others dealt in timber, horses and cattle. Others grew fruit. There were Jewish craftsmen and peddlers. Most income was earned on Sundays and on the Christian holidays when hundreds of peasants from the district came to church and afterwards did their shopping. Their best customers were the nearby Latvians, because at this time there was no border between Lithuania and Kurland (Latvia).
Before World War I and until the establishment of the Lithuania-Latvia border, the economic situation of the Anishok Jews was fairly good. They all led traditional lives. The Mithnagdim and Hasidim attended separate prayer houses. There were Hadarim for the Jewish boys. Jewish children were sent to study in the Jewish schools of Rakishok, Vilkomir and Kovno, and a few attended the local Lithuanian pro-gymnasium.
At the beginning of the twentieth century the ideals of Zionism and Haskalah gained support in Anishok. The Jewish youth embraced the Zionist and revolutionary ideas that were popular at the time.
The names of many Anishok Jews appear in the published lists of donors for the settlement of Eretz-Yisrael for the years 1898, 1900 and 1903. The fund raisers were M. Kaplan, R. Kaplan and M. Fain.
In 1902 and 1905 a circle of active revolutionaries was established in Anishok. Hirsh Lekert (1879-1902) was a member of this circle; he attempted to kill the Gubernator of Vilna, Fon Wal. The Gubernator was only injured and Lekert was caught and hanged. This assault made a great impression all over Russia and in particular among the Jews. Authors wrote about this event and the best known was the drama Hirsh Lekert by the Yiddish writer H. Leivik, that was performed for the first time in Vilna in 1931.
With the outbreak of war in 1914, as the front moved toward Anishok many Jews escaped to Russia. A few returned home in 1922 and 1923, but many remained there. The returning Jews found the town plundered and desolate without any economic prospects. Many of them then chose to settle in the district center Rakishok or in Kovno.
After the establishment of the Lithuanian state in 1918 and following the Law of Autonomies for Minorities issued by the new Lithuanian government, the Minister for Jewish Affairs, Dr. Menachem (Max) Soloveitshik, ordered elections for Community Committees (Va'adei Kehilah) to be held in the summer of 1919. In Anishok a community committee with five members was elected in 1920. It received administrative and financial support from the Ministry for Jewish Affairs in Kovno. Letters from the Ministry to the committee were written in three languages: Lithuanian, Yiddish and Hebrew. The committee was active in all aspects of Jewish life from 1920 until 1924.
As stated above, the severing of the connection with markets in Latvia caused economic hardships in the town. The estate owners and the peasants, who lost their clients in Latvia, were forced take their produce to the district center in order to sell it, and they did much of their own shopping there. As a result of this many of the Jewish merchants in Anishok lost their livelihood.
|A Jewish house in Anishok (1937)|
According to the government survey of 1931 the Jewish businesses included a pharmacy and a general store. In 1937 there were fourteen Jewish artisans: five tailors, four shoemakers, two butchers, two bakers and one other.
In 1939 there were no telephones in the town.
The economic situation became worse from year to year and many, in particular the young, left town to build their future abroad. Also the elderly moved to Rakishok and Kovno or joined their families abroad.
All this led to a decrease in the number of the Jewish families in Anishok. Only about twenty-five families remained in town, mostly elderly who were supported by their children in America and South Africa.
Among the rabbis who officiated in Anishok were:
Yisrael-Iser Klatzkin (1844-1921)Avraham-Dov Popel (1871-1923) who was among the builders of the Independence of Lithuania, later was Deputy Chairman of the Nationalrat (National Committee) of Lithuanian Jews, Chairman of the Association of Rabbis and a delegate to the Lithuanian Seimas where his speech against death penalty was printed in many newspapers around the world. Despite being active in the Agudath Yisrael party, he supported the funds for the settlement of Eretz-Yisrael. He died in Mariampol at the age of 52.
Tsevi-Nathan Kaplan, the last rabbi of the community, was murdered by the Lithuanians in 1941.
|Rabbi Avraham-Dov Popel|
Anishok Jews purchased Shekalim and took part in elections for the Zionist congresses. In 1927, 20 Shekalim were sold. In 1937, 55 Zionists voted for the nineteenth Zionist congress as follows: 20 for the Labor party, 24 voted for the General Zionists B, 6 for the General Zionists A and 5 for Mizrahi.
Jewish personages born in Anishok include:
Hirsh Lekert, who is mentioned above;
Yehoshua Bodzon (1858-1929), writer;
Beinush Belek, a melamed (teacher of a Heder). One of his sons, Leib Belek became a leader of the British Labor party and his second son Ben Zion was a leader of the leftist movement in Lithuania;
Yehoshua Bodzon wrote many popular novels in Yiddish that were published in Vilna in the 1890s. He later became an accountant.
In 1941 the Jews of Anishok were murdered by the Germans and their Lithuanian helpers. The location of the murder site is not known. Nor is it known whether the atrocities took place in the town or if the Jews were transported to be murdered along with the Jews of Rakishok or Obeliai.
According to a Lithuanian source the pharmacist Antanas Truskis hid the Jewish doctor Kovalsky.
Yad Vashem archives, Jerusalem, M-31/983; Koniukhovsky collection 0-71, files 88, 90
YIVO, New York, Collection of Lithuanian Jewish Communities, pages 4565, 4571, 4589
Bakaltchuk-Felin, Meilakh (Editor); Yizkor book of Rakishok and surroundings (Yiddish) Johannesburg, 1952, pages 366-369
Julius, Rafael; Pinkas Hakehiloth-Lita, Anishok, Yad Vashem, 1996 Folksblat, Kovno, 3.2.1935
The above article is an excerpt from Protecting Our Litvak Heritage by Josef Rosin. The book contains this article along with many others, plus an extensive description of the Litvak Jewish community in Lithuania that provides an excellent context to understand the above article. Click here to see where to obtain the book.
JewishGen, Inc. makes no representations regarding the accuracy of the translation.The reader may wish to refer to the original material for verification.
JewishGen is not responsible for inaccuracies or omissions in the original work and cannot rewrite or edit the text to correct inaccuracies and/or omissions.
Our mission is to produce a translation of the original work and we cannot verify the accuracy of statements or alter facts cited.
Protecting Our Litvak Heritage Yizkor Book Project JewishGen Home Page
Copyright © 1999-2013 by JewishGen, Inc.
Updated 27 Jul 2011 by OR

How can I help my children stay safe online?
First think about the possible dangers they face. These include the following:
- So-called ‘drive-by downloads’ (i.e. malicious programs that install on your computer automatically when you view a web page);
- The risk of infection through peer-to-peer (P2P) file-sharing programs that give others access to your computer;
- Unwanted advertising, including pop-ups and adware programs: these are sometimes installed automatically with freeware programs that are available for download on the Internet;
- Sexually explicit (or other inappropriate) content;
- Being tricked into disclosing personal information (about them or you);
- Downloading pirated material (e.g. music or video files);
- Being targeted by online bullies;
- Being approached (in Internet chat rooms, for example) by paedophiles.
What steps can I take to protect my children?
Children can be just as vulnerable online as they are in the real world and it’s important that you understand the potential dangers. There are things you can do to minimise the chance of them being exposed to these dangers.
Talk to your children about the potential dangers they face online.
If possible, locate your computer in a family room and try to make the computer a shared family experience.
Encourage your children to talk to you about anything they experience online that upsets them or makes them feel uncomfortable.
Restrict the content that can be accessed from your computer. Many Internet security solutions let you do this. In addition, Internet Explorer includes a Content Advisor that can help you do this (this can be found under Tools | Internet Options | Content ).
Follow the guidelines above for protecting your computer from malicious programs and hackers and explain to your children how this helps protect them.
Provide guidelines for them on what they may, or may not, do. Here are some of the things you should think about:
Are you happy to let your children...
register on social networking or other web sites?
make online purchases?
download music, video or program files?
use instant messaging programs?
visit Internet chat rooms?
(If the answer is 'yes' to the last two, make sure your children understand they should not chat to users that they do not know)
Remember that the answers may change as your children get older.
To protect your children online:
Talk to them about the potential dangers;
Keep the computer in a family room;
Encourage your children to talk to you about their online experience;
Provide them with guidelines for online activity;
Use your programs' settings to restrict content that your children can access online;
Follow the advice above on how to protect from malicious code and hacker attacks;

Bay of Pigs Invasion info
On the 17th of April, 1961, Brigade 2506, comprised of Cuban exiles, landed at the Bay of Pigs on the southern-central coast of Cuba. They were mostly young men who came from all sectors of society and regions of the island with one common goal: to overthrow the growing communism led by Fidel Castro who was imposing a rigid totalitarian system on this largest island of the Antilles. In three days of hard fighting they were defeated by highly superior forces. Almost 40 years after this event we must ask ourselves about the factors that determined the creation of the Brigade, the causes of their defeat, and its consequences for Cuba and the rest of the world.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND By early 1960 it was evident that the promises made by Castro about the restoration of democracy at the beginning of his government after the flight of dictator Fulgencio Batista on January 1st, 1959, had vanished. By that time the promise of general elections was discarded along with key men in the government who were truly prodemocratic. Also almost gone was the free press (nearly wiped out by mid-1960). There was a growing trend of confiscations of private property, while unions and student associations had been controlled through trickery. To make the picture more clear, members of the old and unpopular communist party were increasingly entering positions of power, while an effective repressive apparatus was being constructed under the model of those of Eastern Europe. By 1961, Castro had also intervened militarily in four Caribbean and Central American
Presiding over this process was the figure of a leader who, like no other one before in Cuba, had awakened enormous faith and trust from the people. He himself denied many times that his government had communist leanings, but its actions increasingly indicated that it was heading towards a new dictatorship of a totalitarian communist nature Resulting from those realities, inside as well as outside Cuba, preparations were being made to fight the new order by those who felt betrayed by it and by those who did not desire a regime of that nature clandestine urban groups were creating a growing anti-Castro movement, potentially very threatening to the incipient dictatorship. Through lliance with the USSR Castro. Because of this, many thought that only through the help of the United States was it possible to rid themselves of the new dictatorship that was developing around the most charismatic and unscrupulous leader ever produced in Cuba. Near the end of 1960, the dissatisfaction of the powerful and unbeaten northern neighbor and important members of the Cuban democratic leadership came together in a special way in an effort to overthrow Castro via military means, the only way possible due to his closure of peaceful alternatives
DEVELOPMENT OF THE MILITARY OPERATION
The initial military strategy outlined by the United States--in which many of the Cuban leaders placed an extreme confidence--consisted of the development of guerrilla warfare, which would be promoted by exiles that would land on various strategic points throughout the island. This plan was later changed in favor of a massive landing by a conventional expeditionary force also comprised of exiles. This was later known as Brigade 2506, honoring the number of the first person who gave his life in this process. The reasons for this change were due to the enormous quantity of weapons received by Castro from the USSR, especially MiG fighter aircraft, which would become operational by mid-1961. This situation required a conventional force to defeat such development. Another reason was the alleged lack of effectiveness of those who were carrying on the fight against Castro inside Cuba, although the fact that there was a lack of security within these clandestine movements due to government infiltration was also mentioned. The strategy of a massive landing undermined the internal effort to eliminate Castro from within the revolutionary ranks. In any event, today there is evidence that there was little effective cooperation between the rural guerrillas, that noticeably sprung up throughout the country, and the American agencies.
The military operation against Castro was the product of an American plan. This was prepared without adequate participation on the part of the exiled leaders, both civilian and military. This leadership was centered in the Revolutionary Council, directed by Dr. José Miró Cardona, former prime minister of Cuba in 1959. The military plan was the object of great debate in the cabinet of president Kennedy because of his preoccupation with keeping the flagrant intervention by the United States. This was a rather naïve worry because the information already revealed by the press regarding the training of the exiles left little room for doubt.
For these reasons the White House vetoed the landing at Trinidad-Casilda, on the southern-central coast. This was an ideal location selected by the American military officials who planned the operation. But it was perceived as too "revealing" of the presence of the U.S. and was changed, to the west, in the same area, in favor of the Bay of Pigs and adjacent Girón Beach, which was tactically and strategically inferior. The plan consisted of the landing of some 1,400 heavily armed exiles from Brigade 2506. This invasion was to be preceded by three days of aerial attacks from vintage World War II B-26 aircraft flown by Cuban pilots from bases in Nicaragua which were to destroy Castro's air force on the ground. This was comprised of faster and more modern aircraft left by the Batista regime. These planes had to be destroyed in order to achieve the crucial aerial supremacy without which the operation could not succeed. This premise was repeated many times by the instructors to the exiles who were worried about their blatant numerical inferiority. They were assured that "the sky would be theirs."
Upon establishing a beachhead, and with the continued support of the exile air force who would be based in that zone, the troops would advance, counting on internal support by way of uprisings and desertions and further support from abroad. The total power which the U.S. held over the military operation, based on its absolute logistical contribution, turned out to be fatal to the goal of overthrowing Castro. The Revolutionary Council, in practice, had no other alternative but to subordinate itself to the direction of the U.S., at the same time thinking about the invincibility and reliability of this powerful ally. However, the refusal on the part of president Kennedy to guarantee victory once the operation was launched, condemned to failure the actions of the exiles before their landing on the 17th of April, 1961. As a result of the naive fear of making too evident the American support (already well known) and of the public promise made by president Kennedy that he would not intervene in Cuba--a point that has been debated--the first aerial attack is partially conducted on April 15th on several air bases. This was carried out with half of the planes originally designated due to a presidential decision, since the attacks were to be presented as uprisings of Castro's air force. Those bombings don't destroy the enemy planes. Furthermore, due to the scandal generated, the two remaining planned air raids were canceled. After that moment, the operation was doomed due to the lack of fulfillment of its main premise. PART 1
Last edited by 5.56X45mm; April 19th, 2006 at 06:10..

Human growth hormone - HGH for short - might have a negative, or at least unnatural connotation to most. When you hear HGH in the news, it's most often talked about as injections, in many cases used to boost athletic performance. But did you know that HGH is actually a hormone the body produces naturally?
The pituitary gland, which is largely responsible for spurring, maintaining and regulating growth, secretes HGH. Since HGH is one of the main compounds that help the body grow, production is strongest in the teenage years, but the pituitary gland continues to secrete HGH into adulthood to help maintain existing muscle and tissue.
Here are some of the body's natural processes that are affected by HGH:
* While diet and exercise play a large role in determining your body composition, HGH is the natural compound that helps regulate your body composition as well.
* HGH also plays a role in metabolizing sugars and fats. While you control your intake of these items, HGH is one of the substances that helps process both of these necessary dietary compounds.
* Your body produces HGH to aid in developing both muscle and bone. When you get older, HGH works less as a growth engine and more as a recovery agent to help your muscles recoup from heavy activity and repair any damaged bone or tissue.
Due to its role in tissue growth and recovery, HGH injections are used by doctors to treat a number of conditions. In many cases, HGH treatments are used to treat growth disorders since there's often some sort of related deficiency that prevents the person from getting the normal level of HGH naturally. It may also be used to fight diseases that cause muscle wasting. However, HGH injections have not been approved for over-the-counter use for those who don't have one of these conditions.
There are also a number of over-the-counter supplements that aim to promote HGH production in the body. For those using these types of supplements, it's important to do your research (information can be found at sites like www.hgh-pills.org) to make sure the product is right for you and hasn't received any safety complaints to governing bodies like the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

17-year-old Helena Muffly wrote exactly 100 years ago today:
Thursday, September 19, 1912: We had a test in General History today. Wasn’t hard at all.
Her middle-aged granddaughter’s comments 100 years later:
I’m glad that the General History test wasn’t difficult for Grandma.
A hundred-year-old book called the Outlines of General History by V. A. Renouf contained information about how to develop good questions:
Different Kinds of Questions
The questions which are most frequently asked in exercises and examinations can be classed somewhat as follows:
Questions of Fact
- Personality: Who did a certain thing?
- Place: Where did a certain event happen? What places were affected by a certain cause or event?
- Time: When did a certain event happen? How long did a certain period last?
- Who built Memphis?
- Name all of the countries conquered by Alexander the Great.
- What year did Nineveh fall?
Questions of Comparison
- Comparison with recent or contemporary events or conditions in one’s own country.
- Comparison with events or periods in the history previously learned.
- Comparison of historical personalities.
- Does a man’s education stop when he has left school? What opportunities did the Athenians have for continuing their education through manhood?
- Compare the condition of debtors in early Rome with that of early Athens?
- Compare the government of Shih Hwang-ti with that of Darius?
Questions of Cause or Effect
- Geographical causes
- Causes lying in certain institutions
- Effects of certain events
- In what way did the natural formation of Greece encourage commerce?
- What were the causes of the Peloponnesian war?
- Why is the battle of Marathon counted among the decisive battles of the world?
Which types of questions did Grandma’s teacher include in the exam?
It’s been awhile–Where have the years gone?– since I’ve taken a history exam, but I think that many of the types of questions asked on a history test today would still fit into this categorization schema.
But, I bet that there are fewer questions today that ask about dates. It seems like students were asked to memorize more things back then than they are now.

Wednesday, April 21, 2010
The Cruellest Month
With temperatures reaching 45 degrees Celsius up north, Facebook updates have begun quoting the opening line of T.S.Eliot's The Waste Land: April is the cruellest month.
In the poem, the line is meant ironically. It is spoken from the point of view of those who feel threatened by the awakening of spring, who prefer winter's 'forgetful snow'.
APRIL is the cruellest month,
breeding Lilacs out of the dead land,
mixing Memory and desire, stirring
Dull roots with spring rain.
Winter kept us warm, covering
Earth in forgetful snow, feeding
A little life with dried tubers.
Eliot plays off the prologue to Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, with its evocation of the sweetness of spring that inspires people to leave their homes for pilgrimages. Here are the opening lines of the Prologue (in somewhat modernised spelling, with difficult words explained in brackets):
When that April with his showers soote (sweet)
The drought of March hath pierced to the root
And bathed every vein (rootlet) in such liquor (liquid)
Of which virtúe engendered is the flower;
When Zephyrus (West Wind) eke (also) with his sweete breath
Inspired hath in every holt and heath (grove & field)
The tender croppes, and the younge sun (spring sun)
Hath in the Ram (Aries) his halfe course y-run,
And smalle fowles maken melody
That sleepen (who sleep) all the night with open eye
[So pricketh them Natúre in their couráges], (spurs / spirits)
Then longen folk to go on pilgrimáges,
All this is a far cry from the oven-like plains of North India. Another misunderstood phrase frequently used in these months is 'Indian Summer'. An Indian Summer has nothing to do with India. It refers to a sudden warming of weather that is occasionally witnessed in parts of North America in October, confounding the expectations of those who assume temperatures will keep dropping through autumn. The Indians in question are Native Americans, not desis.

The rate of children living with unemployed parents went up 88 percent at the onset of the recession in 2007 to today, and while there are some positive trends, 9 percent of children are still expected to have jobless parents.
A new report titled “The Recession’s Ongoing Impact on Children, 2012: Indicators of Children’s Economic Well-Being” tracks how children throughout the country fared in the past few years.
Researchers found that:
- The number of children with parents unemployed for more than six months in Connecticut went up 197 percent since 2007.
- Nationally, 2.7 million more children lived with an unemployed parent during a typical month in 2012, compared to 2007 (an increase of 71%), bringing the 2012 total to 6.3 million children;
- 2.8 million (44 percent of those living with an unemployed parent) lived, during a typical 2012 month, with a parent unemployed six months or longer;
- 8.8 million more additional children relied upon SNAP for food in 2012, compared to 2007, bringing the total number of children receiving SNAP to 21.6 million (one in four) nationwide;
- 16 million children (more than one in five) currently live in poverty; and
- The number of states that are high child poverty states (where more than one-in-five children live in poverty) has nearly doubled during the recession, from 14 in 2007 to 27 in 2011
“The numbers tell us two critical things: first, the recession continues to hit America’s children hard; and second, smart investments in children’s health and well-being can mitigate the harm, “said First Focus President Bruce Lesley.”
These indicators became less severe in 2012, but remain well above the 2007 figures.

"Mommy, I can't breathe all the way!" These words would instill fear in any parent, but for the parent of an asthmatic, such a comment can spell the difference between life and death. Teri LaBarbera of Poughkeepsie, New York, never thought she would hear these words from her seven-year-old son, Brian, but in February, Brian had his first asthma attack and was brought to the hospital emergency room.
"Brian never [used to have] a problem with his chest, lungs, or breathing, but after having bronchitis in March, he couldn't seem to shake being sick," explains Teri. "After four visits, the doctor told us, 'I think it's time we consider it could be asthma.' Bronchitis just sounds like a cold in kids, but asthma sounds so serious."
Asthma is serious. It affects more than 17 million Americans, and of this number, nearly five million are children. According to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA), asthma is the leading cause of school absences from a chronic illness among children ages five to 17. "It accounts for an annual loss of more than 14 million school days per year (approximately eight days for each student with asthma) and more hospitalizations than any other childhood disease. It is estimated that children with asthma spend nearly eight million days per year restricted to bed," reports the AAFA website.
Asthma is a disease that has no cure, but it is manageable. It is described as a chronic lung disease and is characterized by inflammation of the airways due to increased sensitivity to a variety of triggers (which can cause narrowing of the airways and breathing difficulty).
"We, as parents and patients, think of asthma as a condition that has asthma attacks and symptom-free periods," explains Dr. Pradeep Sharma, MD, pediatric allergist in Poughkeepsie. "However, asthma is a disease with chronic inflammation of the bronchi (the tubes that bring oxygen to the lungs). If there are no symptoms, inflammation isn't present, but it doesn't mean you're asthma-free. Treatment continues over a long period of time. It's a lifelong condition."

A civil engineer would be the person who practices civil engineering, the branch focused entirely on the style, construction and upkeep of public works. Civil engineers are applied either with the government or by private companies landing contracts to produce such public works. Though the qualifications vary by country, being a civil engineer requires at the very least a college degree. Sometimes, you can advertise like a professional after receiving formal certification.
A civil engineer designs safe structures that meet standard codes while in the regions they are being constructed in. These structures really should be beautifully made with efficiency, maintenance and other economic concerns to endure through many years of use. With regards to transportation, he builds structures to facilitate the graceful flow of traffic also to allow expansion greater user rates. These structures include tunnels, bridges, and freeway interchanges. He also constructs facilities handling fresh and waste water, including sewage plants, delivery systems for river, dams, flood protection systems, seawalls and levees. He likewise can work on projects like a major job site or a city power plant.
There are various specialties inside civil engineering field. These specialties include structural, hydraulic, environmental and geotechnical engineers. Most develop drawings and plans for construction. These engineers are professionals taught to solve problems specifically on-page matters. They are knowledgeable of methods to cope with various problems occurring on-page works.
The works of the civil engineer play a critical role the way it equates for your overall safety of men and women in a variety of facets. Being such a professional needs strong resolve for using civil engineering background in planning and overseeing various construction efforts in a number of aspects of this field. Younger crowd applies engineering principles to ensure the structures are designed within the safest, sturdiest manner. Down to civil engineering graduates is normally devoted to construction jobs.
He’d also have to analyze the proposed site location plus the entire construction job to generally be completed at this sort of site. This engineer also analyzes this process for completing produced phases all the way. This task involves planning in the construction projects that is to be developing in conjunction with the data from your analysis of the proposed project. Additionally, they should inspect the choices to guarantee to explicitly follow rules, regulations and guidelines for construction.
The interest on individuals graduated from engineering schools can be going up. Engineering has been rapidly expanding because the steady improvement in civil jobs within the infrastructure and construction industries continues. The continuous and rising requirement for the maintenance and construction of latest facilities is one of the most crucial benefits of which has a civil engineering job. The growing volume of civil engineering graduates to supervise the projects is attributed to this demand. Civil engineers may take on government funded projects if private businesses start lowering their particular projects.
Anybody can certainly achieve goal to become a famous and successful civil engineer insurance firms the correct resources and also the right collection of an engineering school.
For additional information in regards to the various specialties of engineering or search the full directory of engineering degree programs you can do so at our online with free streaming engineering career guide.
Engineering Degrees 101 is made specifically to provide you with extensive engineering career and employment data in addition to looking at many of the accelerated engineering education and training alternatives. The knowledge includes occupation descriptions, salaries, like job opportunities available, details of engineering working conditions, job satisfaction, advantages of the profession pluses detailing the easiest approach to turn into licensed engineer. The information can also include a complete directory and contact information on schools offering engineering degree programs in the us, as well as course structure and curriculum details.

Welcome to Architecture
The built environment is part of our lives, shelters our activities and the historic, built environment supports our sense of identity. As defined by the Heritage Act, 1995 [PDF 96KB], 'architectural heritage' includes all structures, buildings, traditional and designed, and groups of buildings including street-scapes and urban vistas, which are of historical, archaeological, artistic, engineering, scientific, social or technical interest.
In partnership with the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, the Heritage Council administers a grants scheme to REPS 4 participants for the conservation and repair of Traditional Farm Buildings.
The conservation of the built heritage has a contribution to make to the achievement of environmental balance in human affairs, or ‘sustainable development’.

LAVC Writing Center
Simple fragments can usually be easily fixed once a writer learns to check each sentence for a subject and a verb. But, there are other types of fragments that are a little tougher to identify and correct because they follow a different set of rules than simple fragments. This handout will help to answer some of the questions and provide solutions for helping to avoid complex fragments.
Can you find a complex fragment by asking the question, “Does this sentence have a subject and a verb?”
Common Causes of Complex Fragments
A group of words with a subject and an –ing verb can still be a fragment.
Fragment: Some of the athletes running in the Olympics.
Complete Sentence: Some of the athletes are running in the Olympics.
The above fragment has a subject and a verb, but it’s still a fragment. Whenever a sentence has an –ing verb, it must also have a helping verb (was, is, are, were, etc.).
- A group of words that contains a complete sentence, but begins with a subordinator can be a fragment.
Fragment: Although we were going to dinner for Bill’s birthday.
Complete Sentence: Although we were going to dinner for Bill’s birthday, we
were still going to have another party for him on the weekend.
In this case, “although” is a subordinator, or a word that makes an independent clause
into a dependent clause. When a subordinator is used, the dependent clause must be
used in conjunction with a comma and an independent clause to make a complete
sentence. Some popular subordinators are: when, until, after, before, however,
while, because, since, though, if, so that, so, and where.
- A group of words that contains a complete sentence, but begins with a coordinating conjunction can be a fragment.
Fragment: So the dog ran away with the spoon.
Complete Sentence: The farmer ate all the bones, so the dog ran away with the spoon.
Coordinating conjunctions act like subordinators. Since the sentence begins with a coordinating conjunction, this group of words becomes a dependent clause. To turn this clause into a sentence, the writer could add an independent clause and a comma before the coordinating conjunction. See the Coordinating Conjunctions handout for more information on them.
- A group of words that contains a complete sentence, but begins with a relative pronoun (that, who, whose, whom, which, when, etc.) can be a fragment.
Fragment: That he should have been told first.
Complete Sentence: Everyone agreed that he should have been told first.
In this example, the use of a relative pronoun at the beginning makes this phrase a dependent clause. In order to make this a complete sentence, the writer can either remove the word “That” or add information before it to clear up the meaning.
More Causes of Complex Fragments
Verbal phrases may be fragments:
Participial phrases (when verb phrases act as adjectives)
Fragment: Jumping as high as he could
Complete Sentence: The boy, jumping as high as he could, grabbed the ball.
Gerund Phrases (when –ing verb phrases act as a subject or object)
Fragment: Rolling in the grass
Complete Sentence: Rolling in the grass made him itch.
Infinitive Phrases (verb phrases contain “to” and another verb acting as a noun, adjective, or adverb)
Fragment: To be or not to be
Complete Sentence: To be or not to be is the question.
There are still more common causes of fragments that you can look for in your writing. Phrases that help writers create complex sentences can be also be causes of complex fragments, if they aren’t used correctly.
Still More Causes of Fragments
Parenthetical Phrases, or Appositives may be fragments
These are phrases used to add supplemental information and usually interrupt the flow of a sentence.
Fragment: Tom, a doctor
Complete Sentence: Tom, a doctor, is very tall.
Unconnected lists are fragments
What information does your list belong to?
Fragment: Onions, tomato, and garlic
Complete Sentence: Tomato sauce has three main ingredients: onions, tomato, and garlic.
Expressions that introduce an example may be fragments.
Such as, for example, as in, like, etc.
Fragment: For example, a fish.
Complete Sentence: There are many good pets, for example, a fish.
Prepositional Phrases may be fragments.
See the Prepositions handout for more information about prepositional phrases.
Fragment: At the park.
Complete Sentence: There was a game at the park.
Exceptions to the Rule
Everybody knows that any good rule has to have a couple of exceptions. Rules that govern fragments are no different. People use fragments all the time when they speak. Can you imagine having to speak in complete sentences every time you had a conversation, especially when you could answer a question in just a word or two? Probably not.
But, when we write, there are rules that we have follow so that our writing makes sense. Of course, there are exceptions to this rule, too. So, every writer wants to know, “When can I use fragments and get away with them?”
These are some common places where fragments are allowed in writing, even though it’s still important to make sure that what you write will make sense to anyone who is going to read it:
- Imperatives – When a writer gives a command, the subject is usually implied, and therefore, a sentence without a subject can be considered complete.
Ex: Throw me the ball. (The implied subject is “You.”)
- Creative Writing – Author’s use fragments all the time for emphasis or to imitate speech. When you’re writing a story, fragments can be a great tool, once you know how to use them correctly.
- Advertising – Fragments are used in advertising for the same reasons as when they’re used in creative writing.
- Informal Situations – When you’re writing a letter to a friend, or a journal entry, or any other type of informal exercises, usually it’s acceptable to use fragments in your writing.
Finally, a writer should be able to check for fragments in their own writing. But how?
One way to evaluate your writing is to read it slowly and carefully. Ask yourself, “If I made this statement to a stranger, would the statement make sense on it’s own?” If no, then you might have a fragment.
Another great way to check for fragments is to see if you can turn the statement into a yes/no question.
John, the pastor at my church.
Did John, the pastor at my church?
This question doesn’t make sense, so we have a fragment.
John, the pastor at my church, makes great barbeque ribs.
Does John, the pastor at my church, make great barbeque ribs?
This is a question we can answer. It’s not a fragment.
For the following exercises, try first to determine whether or not the following sentences are complete. If not, revise the sentences so that they are complete. If the exercises begin as complex sentences, try and fix them so that they remain so.
- Geraldine, the runner in the green jumpsuit jogging the track.
- However, the meeting still went well, according to the head of the company.
- Which is the first thing that he thought of when he built the castle, he thought.
- So, I called my other friend to ask him the same question.
- Riding a horse is the most fun activity that anyone can do in his or her spare time.
- To drive from New York to Los Angeles, and to go to a Dodger game, and to sit in the outfield seats.
- Such as you could only see at the original IceCapades.
- Rudy, a twelve-year-old girl, loved playing football and beating up her brothers.
- A rubber ducky, two pieces of string, twenty-four paper clips, a monkey wrench, and your mother’s blessing.
- Around four o’clock, and close to the school they used to go to when they were kids.
This handout is based on the following websites:
“Common Causes of Sentence Fragments.” St. Cloud State University: Literacy Education
Online. 02 Feb. 2005. <http://leo.stcloudstate.edu/punct/fragmentcauses.html>.
“Fragments.” Big Dog’s Grammar. 02 Feb. 2005. <http://aliscot.com/bigdog/fragments.htm>.
“The Grammar Outlaw.” Acadia University English Department. 02 Feb. 2005.
“Sentence Fragments.” Capital Community College. 02 Feb. 2001.
“Sentence Fragments.” UIUC Center for Writing Studies. 02 Feb. 2005.
“Verbals and Verbal Phrases.” UIUC Center for Writing Studies. 02 Feb. 2005.
- Active Voice Vs. Passive Voice
- Adjective and Adverbs
- APA Format (Sample included)
- The Comma
- Creating A Resume
- Essay Writing
- Fragments II
- Gerunds And Infinitives
- In-class Essay Exams
- Internet Basics
- Internet Research
- Microsoft Word Basics
- MLA Format (Updated)
- Paragraph Development
- Parts of Speech
- Personal Statement Essays
- Pronoun Agreement
- Run-on Sentences
- Speech Giving
- Study Skills/Time Management
- Subject Verb Agreement
- Thesis Statements
- Verb Tenses
- Verbs With -ED Endings
- The Writing Process
- Writing A Summary

Sport and National Identity in the Post-War World
Edited by Dilwyn Porter, Adrian Smith
Published March 11th 2004 by Routledge – 208 pages
What is the relationship between sport and national identity? What can sport tell us about changing perceptions of national identity?
Bringing together the work of established historians and younger commentators, this illuminating text surveys the last half-century, giving due attention to the place of sport in our social and political history.
It Includes studies of:
· English football and British decline
· Englishness and sport
· Ethnicity and nationalism in Scotland
· Social change and national pride in Wales
· Irish international football and Irishness
· Sport and identity in South Africa
· Cricket and identity crisis in the Caribbean
· Baseball, exceptionalism and American Sport
· Popular mythology surrounding the sporting rivalry between New Zealand and Australia
Sport and National Identity in the Post-War World presents a wealth of original research into contemporary social history and provides illuminating material for historians and sociologists alike.
Introduction 1. Sport and national identity in contemporary England 2. 'Your boys took one hell of a beating!' English football and British decline, c.1950-80 3. 'Every day I wake up and I thank the Lord I'm Welsh': sport and national identity in post-war Wales 4. 'Cry for Us, Argentina': sport and national identity in late twentieth-century Scotland 5. Who are the boys in Green? Irish identity and soccer in the Republic of Ireland 6. 'One Nation, One Soul, One Dream, One Goal?' Sport and national identity in South Africa 7. Cricket and a crisis of identity in the Anglophone Caribbean 8. Baseball and American exceptionalism 9. Black against gold: New Zealand-Australia sporting rivalry in the modern era

Our Antiemetics Main Article provides a comprehensive look at the who, what, when and how of Antiemetics
Definition of Antiemetics
Antiemetics: 1. As a noun, a drug taken to prevent or treat nausea and vomiting. As, for example, the antihistamine meclizine hydrochloride (Bonine).
Last Editorial Review: 6/14/2012
Back to MedTerms online medical dictionary A-Z List
Need help identifying pills and medications?
Get the latest health and medical information delivered direct to your inbox FREE!

O'Reilly Book Excerpts: Java Programming with Oracle SQLJ
Contexts and Multithreading
This excerpt is Chapter 8 from Java Programming with Oracle SQLJ, published in August 2001 by O'Reilly.
There are two important objects used in SQLJ that affect the execution of database operations: connection contexts and execution contexts. Connection contexts are used to connect to a database. All embedded SQL statements within a SQLJ program run in a connection context. Connection contexts make it possible to create multiple connections to a database or to connect to more than one database at a time. An execution context is used to hold the number of rows affected by a SQL operation, along with any warnings generated by the database. Execution contexts are used to control certain aspects of how a SQL statement is executed. For example, you can use an execution context to control the timeout period after which a SQL operation is abandoned.
A multithreaded program is one that is able to carry out several tasks in parallel using Java threads. As you will see in this chapter, execution contexts are very important when writing a multithreaded SQLJ program.

Metastatic tumors in the lungs are cancers that developed at other places in the body (or other parts of the lungs) and spread through the bloodstream or lymphatic system to the lungs. It is different than lung cancer that starts in the lungs.
Surgery to take a sample of tissue from the lungs (surgical lung biopsy)
Chemotherapy is usually used to treat metastatic cancer to the lung. Surgery isn't always done, because usually the cancer is in other parts of the body not seen by imaging tests. Surgery to remove the tumors seen on an x-ray is not likely to be helpful. However, surgery may be an option when:
The first (primary) tumor has been removed
The cancer has spread to only limited areas of the lung
The lung tumors can be completely removed with surgery
However, the main tumor must be curable, and the patient must be strong enough to go through the surgery and recovery.
There are other experimental treatments. One of these treatments uses local heat probes to destroy the area. Another places chemotherapy medicines directly into the artery that supplies blood to the part of the lung containing the tumor.
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a support group where members share common experiences and problems. For this condition, see cancer support group.
A cure is unlikely in most cases. It is rare for someone to live more than 5 years with metastatic cancer to the lungs. However, the outlook depends on the specific type of primary cancer.
You and your family may want to start thinking about end-of-life planning, such as:
Ettinger DS. Lung cancer and other pulmonary neoplasms. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 197.
David C. Dugdale, III, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine. Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.

Teaching and Learning are inextricably linked.
Some teachers have the philosophy that their job is only to present the information.
What do you think? If learning has not taken place, have you taught??
There are many theories about how learning takes place.
Be sure to read about them in Chapter 4!
We are going to concentrate on a couple of concepts.
First, Bloom's Taxonomy.
You probably remember that from your education classes.
The levels you see represent different levels of thinking
Here is another way to look at it with a little more detail.
BLOOM’S REVISED TAXONOMY
Generating new ideas, products, or ways of viewing things
Designing, constructing, planning, producing, inventing.
Justifying a decision or course of action
Checking, hypothesising, critiquing, experimenting, judging
Breaking information into parts to explore understandings and relationships
Comparing, organising, deconstructing, interrogating, finding
Using information in another familiar situation
Implementing, carrying out, using, executing
Explaining ideas or concepts
Interpreting, summarising, paraphrasing, classifying, explaining
Recognising, listing, describing, retrieving, naming, finding
Notice that 'Remembering' is at the bottom of the food chain and that 'Creating' is at the top. It is helpful to assess our classroom activities and categorize them. Are we concentrating too much on the lower levels?
Take a look at this planning guide:
Bloom's Revised Taxonomy Planning Framework
One pitfall for music teachers is to consider 'exploring' to be 'creating.' You know what I mean, when we put an instrument in a student's hand, let him/her noodle around, and then call that 'improvisation.'
Hmmmm. . . . .
Creating, at least in this sense, is the highest level of thinking, so as we discuss this week, be sure to use 'creating' as a higher form than 'exploring.'
Now let's look at another concept:
Multiple intelligences is a theory developed by Howard Gardner. He said that intelligence based upon IQ tests was too limited and that there are actually 8 different kinds of intelligence that we all possess to various degrees.
For an explanation of this theory, follow the link below. Here is an example of a good use of Wikipedia. There is a brief description of the theory and its parts. If you scroll down to the bottom, there is an excellent bibliography. Check it out:
Now, take the test yourself
Multiple Intelligence Test
The link below is a website that gives very helpful information to educators about using the knowledge of multiple intelligences in the classroom.
Now, what if you were to combine Bloom's taxonomy with Multiple Intelligences and apply the two to your classroom.
Here is a master chart called
Blooming Smarts Master Planning Matrix
This chart combines the different levels of thinking (Bloom's Revised Taxonomy) with the different kinds of intelligence (Multiple Intelligences). You can use this to plan activities that incorporate all levels of thinking and all kinds of intelligence. It will challenge your creativity, but just think of the ramifications of addressing the strengths of all of your students on every level!

Find Out More, Session 9: Love of Learning
In "Love Will Guide Us," a Tapestry of Faith program
Books geared toward children and families include:
- A Child's Introduction to the Night Sky: The Story of the Stars, Planets, and Constellations — and How You Can Find Them in the Sky by Michael Driscoll (Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers, 2004)
- Astronomy by Kristen Lippincott (DK Eyewitness Books, 2008)
- The Stars: A New Way To See Them by H. A. Rey (Houghton Mifflin Company, 2008)
- Maybe Yes, Maybe No by Dan Barker (Prometheus Books, 1993). In this child's introduction to healthy skepticism and critical thinking, the ten-year-old heroine, Andrea, is "always asking questions," writes Barker, because she thinks you should prove the truth.
- Humanism, What's That? by Helen Bennett (Prometheus Books, 2005). "This small volume holds out the hope and openness of Humanism in a form that can help young people confront Fundamentalist approaches to religion with confidence," writes Rev. William Sinkford, past President of the UUA.
This work is made possible by the generosity of individual donors and congregations. Please consider making a donation today.
Last updated on Thursday, October 27, 2011.
- About the Authors
- Session 1
- Session 2
- Session 3
- Session 4
- Session 5
- Session 6
- Session 7
- Session 8
- Session 9
- Session 10
- Session 11
- Session 12
- Session 13
- Session 14
- Session 15
- Session 16
- List of Stories
- List of Handouts
- List of Leader Resources

VMware Workstation 4Features | Documentation | Knowledge Base | Discussion Forums
With shared folders, you can easily share files among virtual machines and the host computer. To use shared folders, you must have the current version of VMware Tools installed in the guest operating system and you must use the Virtual Machine Control Panel to specify which directories are to be shared.
You can use shared folders with virtual machines running the following guest operating systems:
To set up one or more shared folders for a virtual machine, be sure the virtual machine is open in Workstation and click its tab to make it the active virtual machine. Go to Edit > Virtual Machine Settings > Options and click Shared folders.
You can add one or more directories to the list. Those directories may be on the host computer or they may be network directories accessible from the host computer.
In a Windows virtual machine, shared folders appear in My Network Places (Network Neighborhood in a Windows NT virtual machine) under VMware Shared Folders. For example, if you specify the name Test files for one of your shared folders, you can navigate to it by opening My Network Places > VMware Shared Folders > .host > Shared Folders > Test files.
You can also go directly to the folder using the UNC path
You can map a shared folder to a drive letter just as you would with a network share.
Note: To see shared folders displayed in this way, you must update VMware Tools in the virtual machine to the current version. If your guest operating system has the version of VMware Tools that shipped with VMware Workstation 4.0, shared folders appear as folders on a designated drive letter.
In a Linux virtual machine, shared folders appear under /mnt/hgfs. So the shared folder in this example would appear as /mnt/hgfs/Test files.
To add a new shared folder to the list, click Add. On a Windows host, a wizard guides you through the process. On a Linux host, a dialog box appears. Enter the required information, then click OK.
Provide the following information:
To change the settings for a shared folder on the list, click the folder's name to highlight it, then click Properties. The Properties dialog box appears.
Change any settings you wish, then click OK.
Note: You can use shared folders to share any type of file. However, Windows shortcuts and Linux symbolic links do not work correctly if you try to use them via shared folders.
Caution: Do not open a file in a shared folder from more than one application at a time. For example, you should not open the same file using an application on the host operating system and another application in the guest operating system. In some circumstances, doing so could cause data corruption in the file.

One of the most striking aspects of German-Jewish modernism, and certainly what distinguishes it from the surrounding German milieu, is its meditation on Jewish tradition, which to the modernists represented a pre-modern authenticity that they felt they had lost. Curiously, and perhaps not unlike my own rabbis, German-speaking Jewish modernists most commonly fixed their gaze not just on any Jewish tradition but that of Eastern European or, more vaguely, 'Oriental' Jews, a term that enabled them to stress their own distance from tradition while still claiming a mystical as well as genetic connection. Like other Orientalists, German modernists regarded the Eastern Jews as exotic and even intimidating, like Kafka's gatekeeper. Yet they also saw in the Eastern Jew a vision of their own personal origins, a ghost of authenticity past. For what are Western Jews, the Austrian writer Joseph Roth asked, if not Eastern Jews who had forgotten?
Roth mourned what seemed to him to be the irreversible process by which Jews westernized, "gave up," and lost the "sad beauty" he eulogized in his essay "The Wandering Jews" as well as his novel, Job. He, like Kafka, seemed to believe that there was no going back. Others, however, proposed various ways of reconnecting. The great Expressionist poet Else Lasker-Schüler liked pretending that she was, in fact, the Oriental "Prinz Jussuff." The novelist Jacob Wassermann similarly flattered himself by boasting of an "Oriental force" in his blood that powered his creativity.
Few, however, made as much out of this Jewish Orientalism as Martin Buber, who defined Western Jews as Orientals whom emancipation had denatured. Buber reassures his readers that the soul of the Jew is intact: "the Jew has remained an Oriental." One can even detect the Oriental spirit, he wrote, "in the most assimilated Jew, if one knows how to gain access to his soul; and even those who have eradicated the last vestiges of Judaism from the content of their thinking still, and ineradicably, carry Judaism within them in the pattern of their thought." For Buber, the Orient still thrived in Eastern Europe among the "decadent yet still wondrous Hasid of our days." The renewal of Judaism in the West lay precisely in turning to the East for inspiration and instruction.
Much of the German-Jewish reflection on 'Oriental' Jews is irrelevant today. Buber's Poland is long gone, Yiddish is dead, and the "Hasid of our days" is wondrous to very few. (Indeed, Buber's Orient never existed in the first place, as it was to a large extent the expression of his own yearnings.) What we can learn from, however, is the German-speaking Jewish modernists' ability to identify with Jewish tradition while remaining outside of it. They turned to Eastern European Judaism without renouncing their own modernity, without denying the distance between the traditions and themselves. In fact, that distance was the only thing of which they were really certain.
Obviously their relationship with tradition was attenuated and artificial. The modernists always regarded Jewish tradition through their own subjectivist lens, reifying it, orientalizing it, imposing numerous discursive constraints that deformed their perception of it. They were to a great extent its authors, and we should not only recognize this fact, but draw on it for inspiration as we renew and reinvent Jewish tradition to suit our own era. However, their Orientalism also brought them into an intimate relationship with the real liturgy, language, law, and lore of the Jewish people. Not content to just talk about the tradition, they tried to get inside it and learn it. Thus Kafka studied Hebrew and fetishized the Yiddish theater. Gershom Scholem became the great historian of Jewish mysticism. Whatever their path to tradition, they avoided the nihilism according which all knowledge, because it is so contingent, is suspect and therefore to be refused. Instead, they groped for ways to live with the Law and with themselves.
The Queer Guy at the Strip Club
The Gifts of the German Jews: Toward a Postmodern Judaism
My first shabbos
Stones of Jerusalem
Holocaust Video Testimonies: The Other Reality TV
Josh Tells a Bedtime Story
Zeek in Print
Buy online here
The Zeek Archive

|Air date||December 4, 1969|
|Season||Season 1 (1969-1970)|
|Sponsors||D, E, M, 8, 9|
- Ernie and Bert: Bert and Ernie try to figure out who owns a cabinet containing cookies. Bert says that the cabinet is his, because he has his first initial, B, on the door. However, the B is spread between two doors, and Ernie opens one door, making the other look like an E.
- Buddy and Jim try to eat soup with a fork.
- Ernie and Bert: Ernie gets Bert to play a game with him, in which he says "I one the sandbox," Bert says "I two the sandbox," and so on until Bert gets to "I eight the sandbox." "You ate the sandbox? How'd it taste?" Ernie asks.
- Sesame Street Animal Films: Footage of all types of birds on land, including flamingos and pigeons.
- Cartoon: Two boys notice a D, saying it looks fat. A resonant voice (Gary Owens) informs them that it's the letter D. This leads to a jazzy story about a dog who digs for dice, wins a duck, and buys a dinosaur with a dime. Moral: "If you dig a dinosaur, drop your duck for a dime."
- An Anything Muppet woman sings "Minute Waltz."
- Ernie and Bert: In a three-part sketch, Ernie conducts an "alphabet test" (using a poster from the Sesame Street Learning Kit). While Bert checks the poster, Ernie tries to recite the alphabet from memory. After a couple of snags, Ernie completes it. When Bert challenges him to say it backwards, Ernie turns his back from Bert and recites the alphabet, facing the poster.
- Animation: "E Imagination": A surreal story of a boy eating a peach atop an eagle witnesseing a queen on her knee, dreaming of eating ice cream in a land of steam. (First: Episode 0001)
- Clay animation: "E" -- the word "egg" is spelled out and becomes an egg, which then hatches an eagle. (First: Episode 0003)
- Cartoon: An octopus one-man band helps viewers learn how to count to ten. (aired twice) (First: Episode 0004)
- How a magnifying glass works
- Film: "What Are Kids Made Of?"
|Previous episode:||Next episode:|
|Episode 0018||Episode 0020|

The China widely bruited as the next hegemonic power is the product of 150 years of false starts, repeated disappointments, and astonishing violence. During the 19th century China was often at war with foreign countries but internal warfare was far worse; the famous Taiping Rebellion alone claimed tens of millions of lives. China's imperial system collapsed in 1912 and decades of internal chaos followed. The eight years of war between China and Japan—July 1937 to September 1945—displayed a ferocity comparable to the German-Soviet front in Europe.
After the China-Japan war, the civil war resumed, and there were millions of casualties. In 1950, the new People's Republic of China invaded Tibet and battled armed resistance until 1959. Turkic peoples in the northwest of the country also fought Chinese rule and they, too, were bloodily suppressed. Mao Zedong (1893-1976) then turned against the Chinese people themselves. He initiated the Great Leap Forward in the 1950s, a brutal campaign of collectivization and man-made famine that took more than 40 million lives. In the 1960s, he started the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, which cost more lives and wrought more destruction. Mao's death in 1976 triggered a brief, but intense, power struggle, from which a 75-year-old man named Deng Xiaoping (1904-1997) emerged as the country's dominant political figure.
Now Ezra Vogel has taken on the daunting task of explaining how Deng, inheriting the mess Mao had made, set China on a radically new course. "Reform and opening up," as Deng called his policy, is into its fourth decade and few will argue with Vogel that Deng's program has had an enormous influence. Vogel brings a formidable background to his depiction of Deng's efforts. Now emeritus professor at Harvard, he has been a sociologist, a China—focused intelligence officer, and an industrious "Pekingologist," that is, someone who pays close attention to the inner workings of China's Communist Party and the political system it has created.
* * *
Vogel devotes but a few score of his almost 900 pages to Deng's activities before the consolidation of his position in the late 1970s. Deng became a Communist when he was 18. By 1930, he had allied himself with Mao Zedong's faction inside the party and he rose rapidly. He survived the Long March and the intra-party purges associated with it. He commanded troops in the protracted Communist-Nationalist civil war. After the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, he was an unwavering Mao loyalist and, in 1957, the chairman made him the party's highest-ranking administrative official, general secretary.
Vogel leaves us to fend for ourselves if we wish to discern Deng's mindset. One instructive episode occurs during his leadership of the Chinese delegation to the famous Soviet Communist Party Congress in 1956 where Nikita Khrushchev, Joseph Stalin's successor, powerfully criticized Stalin's crimes—not so much the ones Stalin had committed against tens of millions of Soviet citizens, but those against members of the Communist Party. Vogel does not quote Khrushchev but one can easily find and read what Deng heard Khrushchev say about Stalin:
Stalin did not tolerate collegiality...he practiced brutal violence...his character was capricious and despotic...he demanded absolute submission to his opinion...whoever opposed him was doomed to moral and physical liquidation...Stalin showed in a whole series of cases his intolerance, his brutality and his abuse of power...he chose the path of repression and physical annihilation.
Khrushchev called Stalin's personality cult "an expression of the most dissolute flattery, an example of making a man into a godhead."
All of this was more than merely reminiscent of Mao Zedong. Deng was appalled and, when he returned to China, he joined Mao in a spirited defense of Stalin; indeed, Deng himself wrote the pro-Stalin polemics that marked the initial phase of the Sino-Soviet split. But Deng was more than a polemicist; he was also a practitioner. Vogel does not reflect on what Mao and Deng saw in each other nor, more important to his book, on the deeper personal qualities that Deng would later bring to his own post-1978 program. "Deng, the implementer," Vogel writes, "had always been more practical and realistic than Mao, the philosopher, poet, and dreamer." A partnership of dreamer and doer, indeed: as Mao's chief operating officer, Deng was deeply involved in many murderous episodes of the 1950s, culminating in the "Great Leap Forward."
Still, for Vogel, the first four decades of Deng's career are not as interesting or as significant as the last three. The murder and mayhem just happened. Vogel's tone is flat, but it is also morally obtuse. Put plainly, Deng's infatuation with Mao's philosophy, poetry, and dreams helped to destroy tens of millions of lives.
* * *
But what of Deng's sense of himself? For decades, he had seen comrades perish and suffer. More than once, Mao had capriciously demoted him and sent him into rough and dangerous internal exile. Deng's son was beaten into paralysis while imprisoned by the Red Guards and the father of his third wife was killed in a "land reform" campaign. Many turned on the party, but Deng's faith in its historic mission endured. Indeed, when he had the chance, Deng directed a "historical evaluation" of Mao that pronounced him "seventy percent right." The 30% wrong was the campaigns he had directed against party members, threatening the party's hold on power. Thus, many good party members victimized by Mao were to be "rehabilitated" if dead or, if still alive, returned to positions of influence. As for the rest of Mao's legacy, it is by Deng's order that Mao still looks out over Tiananmen Square and his face still appears on the country's currency.
Vogel says that Deng had his reasons. Maintenance of the Communist Party's monopoly on power was one of the four objectives of his plan. Deng could not imagine a way forward without the party's dictatorship and thus he consistently suppressed advocates of political liberalization, most notoriously in 1989 when he ordered military forces into Tiananmen Square. Hu Jintao, now the head of both China's Communist Party and its government, was brought to Beijing by Deng in 1989; he had drawn Deng's attention after imposing martial law in Tibet to crush local dissent.
Deng believed that his program of "reform and opening up" in both its economic and political parts would save the party and perpetuate its rule even as it transformed the society. It was a gambit unprecedented in the history of Communist dictatorships, almost all of them now defunct. Does Deng's program make the case for Chinese exceptionalism? The Chinese Communist Party has been saved even as Chinese society has been radically transformed—thoroughly, unimaginably transformed. Deng's Long March is therefore no ordinary episode and it is well worthwhile trying to understand how it happened.
* * *
Vogel is now 82 and the transformed China about which he writes so extensively is a vivid contrast to the first decades of the People's Republic, which he also knew. In truth, those of us who are not yet 82 but still old enough to remember that People's Republic find it hard to express our amazement to younger people whose first exposure to China is a recent one. Things are so much better now than they were then that it can seem crotchety and grudging to point out contemporary shortcomings. But all of us need to get beyond our amazement when we see the skylines of skyscraper-filled cities that were once provincial backwaters. The People's Republic no longer measures itself solely against its sordid past, and we should not either. Its own standard is its "peer competitors" of today.
By that measure, how should we regard the past 30 years in China? Vogel recounts a blizzard of things that happened during this period and his industrious scholarship does us the great service of tracking Deng's every move through the party's labyrinth. He shows how Deng skillfully played a weak diplomatic hand, prodding the United States, Western Europe, and Japan to fashion a grand strategy against the Soviet Union that would work to China's advantage. By offering China as an eager collaborator, Deng secured essential backing from the industrial democracies for his plans. Vogel also reminds us of the decisive presence, nearby, of "Confucian" and "Chinese" success stories—Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong—that Deng would draw upon for expertise and capital.
* * *
The fundamental problem with Vogel's account is that it is another variation on the "triumphalist" theme originally spun by China's Communist Party and now performed around the world. All the triumphalist narratives derive from a claim first made by Mao Zedong in 1950: "Without the Communist Party There Would Be No New China." The slogan later became the basis for a catchy ditty often sung during the Cultural Revolution. Now, with revised lyrics of course, it is an international smash hit. At home, this unexamined assertion is used to buttress the party's bedrock claim to continuation of its monopoly on political power—that it has been the architect of New China, as no other group of people could have been. The party presents itself as the best solver of China's problems; it claims that it alone possesses unique understanding; it admits of no other possibility. The central question of contemporary Chinese politics is thus a contest over this claim: does China still need an all-powerful Communist Party? And this question immediately leads us to an underlying one: did China ever need an all-powerful Communist Party?
Today, we have both 60 years of experience with the People's Republic itself and a much deeper knowledge of China's modern history with which to engage these questions. We also have Vogel's book which, though certainly not written to promote previously unmentionable heresies, forces us to consider them on almost every one of its pages. In fact, when we place Vogel's account of Deng's time in power against what we know of China and the world, we cannot help being far less impressed than Vogel thinks we should be. In the first place, a blueprint like Deng's appeared in the mid-19th century when even the Taiping rebels drew up detailed plans for the renovation of the country. It is also now well understood that the so-called "self-strengtheners" of the late 19th and early 20th centuries were well along in major "reform and opening up" that was rapidly integrating China into the global economy even as major reforms were being implemented in education and governance. In fact, these processes were well-enough along so that, today, many younger Chinese historians question whether the last dynasty should have been overthrown at all. In the event, the leaders of the early republic, especially Sun Yat-sen, moved forward along the same track, and the decades prior to the founding of the People's Republic were filled with significant achievements.
Meanwhile, the first 30 years of the People's Republic are now seen as the disruptive and destructive decades they actually were. At best, we can say that Deng helped to restart history or, better, rejoin it. Fortunately for China, other places had not been so unfortunate in their leaders. Vogel describes at great length the critical role of money and advice and, most important, inspiration from Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan, Capitalist Roaders all. In sum, the correct formulation should be: "Without the Communist Party, New China Would Have Shown Up Decades Sooner"—and at but a tiny fraction of the cost in human and material destruction wrought by Mao, Deng, and their cohort.
In 1989 Ezra Vogel published a detailed 500-page analysis of how the first 10 years of Deng's program were faring in Guangdong, its showplace province. He called it One Step Ahead in China. More than 20 years later, in the ways that matter most, China has fallen many steps behind, and ominously so. In the end, Deng Xiaoping made it harder for China to catch up, even as he made it appear that China was sprinting ahead.

SCSI bus types
From an electrical point of view, there are two incompatible bus types: single-ended
and differential. This means that there are two different main groups of SCSI devices
and controllers, which cannot be mixed on the same bus. It is possible however
to use special converter hardware to transform a single-ended bus into a differential
one (and vice versa). The differences between the bus types are explained in the
In SCSI related documentation there is a sort of jargon in use to abbreviate the
different bus types and speeds.
Ultra: 40 Mbyte/s
FWD: Fast Wide Differential 20Mbyte/s
FND: Fast Narrow Differential 10Mbyte/s
FN: Fast Narrow 10Mbyte/s
SE: Single Ended 5Mbyte/s
Wide is a bit ambiguous, it can indicate 16 or 32 bit buses. The 32-bit variant
is not (yet) in use, so wide usually means 16 bit.
Fast means that the timing on the bus is somewhat different, so that on a narrow
(8 bit) bus 10 Mbyte/s are possible instead of 5 Mbyte/s for 'slow' SCSI. Ultra
is faster again by a factor of 2.
It should be noted that the data lines > 8 are only used for data transfers
and device addressing. The transfers of commands and status messages etc are
only performed on the lowest 8 data lines. The standard allows narrow devices
to operate on a wide bus. The useable bus width is negotiated between the devices.
It is important to monitor device addressing closely when mixing wide and narrow.

The best way to learn vocabulary is through a set list or group of words you want to know. Creating a list is crucial to keeping a schedule that is right for you especially if you have a specific schedule with work and family. A list of words you want to learn daily or weekly help you set a goal for yourself so you can learn a specific amount of material within your own schedule.
When you form a list of words, evaluate a larger list and cut it down into parts. Cut up your list so that it is categorized into parts that are easier to learn and memorize. It's easier and more convenient to learn twenty to thirty words a week rather than hundreds of a time.
Learning words in smaller sections also gives you a way to clearly research them through your chose CD software. It's also more convenient for you to learn vocabulary words and use them in your everyday life such as conversations, writing, and even formal speeches.
After you make your list, make an effort to browse your purchased CD software for the words you want to learn. Good CD software for learning vocabulary will help you engrain the words into your mind so that you wont forget what you have learned shortly afterward.
- Vocabulary Improvement Techniques
- Ways to Increase Vocabulary Quickly
- Vocabulary Builder Course
- Using Vocabulary Software
- Vocabulary CD Programs
- GRE Vocabulary Primer
- Business Vocabulary Course
Vocabulary CD Programs:
- Using Software CDs for Learning Vocabulary
- Vocabulary Trees and Word Discovery
- Form Lists
- Dictionaries Online
- CDs have Improved Technology
- Incorporate Verbs and Nouns

- Posted by:
- Scot Leavitt
- Course Number:
- MTH 211
- Course Title:
- Foundations of Elem Math I
- Credit Hours:
- Lecture hours:
- Lecture/Lab hours:
- Lab hours:
- Special Fee:
Surveys mathematical topics for those interested in the presentation of mathematics at the K-9 levels. Topics emphasized are problem solving, patterns, sequences, set theory, logic, numeration systems, number bases, arithmetic operations, and number theory. Various manipulative and problem solving strategies are used. Prerequisite: MTH 95 or higher, and WR 115 and RD 115 or equivalent placement test scores. Audit available.
Addendum to Course Description
This is the first term of a three-term sequence (MTH 211, 212, and 213).
Foundations of Elementary Math I is intended to examine the conceptual basis of elementary mathematics and to provide students with opportunities to experience using manipulatives to model problem solving, computational operations with whole numbers, topics in number theory and set theory. The content and pedagogy is based on the NCTM standards. Emphasis is on why mathematics works as it does rather than on memorization of algorithms.
Intended Outcomes for the course
Upon successful completion students should be able to:
• Understand the theoretical foundations of mathematics focusing on whole number arithmetic as taught at the K-9 level in order to develop
mathematical knowledge for teaching.
• Use various problem solving strategies and algebraic reasoning to create mathematical models, analyze real world scenarios, judge if the results are reasonable, and then interpret and clearly communicate the results.
• Participate in a teacher education program.
• Use appropriate mathematics, including correct mathematical terminology, notation, and symbolic processes, and use technology to explore the
foundations of elementary mathematics.
Course Activities and Design
In-class time is primarily activity/discussion or lecture/lab emphasizing the use of manipulatives and problem solving techniques. Activities will include group work, field experience, or teaching demonstrations.
Outcome Assessment Strategies
1. At least two proctored examinations.
2. At least one writing assignment and
3. At least two of the following additional measures:
a. Take-home examinations.
b. Graded homework.
d. Individual/Group projects.
e. In-class activities.
h. Individual projects exploring the NCTM standards.
i. Individual or team teaching demonstration(s).
j. Field experience
k. Service Learning
Course Content (Themes, Concepts, Issues and Skills)
1.0 MATHEMATICS AND PROBLEM SOLVING
The instructional goal is to develop problem solving ability.
1.1 Utilize Polya's four-step problem solving process.
1.2 Develop problem solving strategies, including making a drawing, guessing and checking, making a table, using a model, and working backward.
1.3 Explore patterns and sequences, and their relationship to problem solving.
1.4 Use algebra and algebra manipulatives to problem solve.
1.5 Solve application problems utilizing functions and graphs.
2.0 SETS AND LOGIC
The instructional goal is to learn the fundamental concepts of set theory and logic.
2.1 Explore attributes and classification.
2.2 Use set theory symbolism.
2.3 Represent set concepts using Venn diagrams.
2.4 Understand and use the concepts of subset, intersection, union, and complement of a set.
2.5 Utilize set theory in application problems.
2.6 Apply deductive reasoning.
2.7 Use symbolic logic to explore premises, conclusions, and validity.
3.0 NUMERATION SYSTEMS AND WHOLE NUMBERS
The instructional goal is to develop an understanding of systems of numeration and the system of whole numbers.
3.1 Explore numeration systems of other cultures.
3.2 Define the set of whole numbers and their properties.
3.3 Model, compute, and investigate whole number operations in several bases.
3.4 Estimate and use mental arithmetic.
4.0 NUMBER THEORY
The instructional goal is to understand elementary concepts of number theory and how these concepts are used in the elementary curriculum.
4.1 Explore divisibility.
4.2 Identify prime and composite numbers.
4.3 Prime factor numbers and determine when numbers are “relatively prime.”
4.4 Find the least common multiple (LCM) and the greatest common divisor/factor (GCD/F) of two or more numbers.
4.5 Use “clock arithmetic” and other simple modular arithmetic applications.

4 New Species Of Zombie Ant Fungi Discovered In Brazilian Rainforest
Four new Brazilian species in the genus Ophiocordyceps have been published in the online journal PLoS ONE. The fungi, named by Dr. Harry Evans and Dr. David Hughes, belong to a group of "zombifying" fungi that infect ants and then manipulate their behavior, eventually killing the ants after securing a prime location for spore dispersal.
These results appear in a paper by Evans et al. entitled Hidden Diversity Behind the Zombie-Ant Fungus Ophiocordyceps unilateralis: Four New Species Described from Carpenter Ants in Minas Gerais, Brazil. This paper is the first to validly publish new fungal names in an online-only journal while still complying with the rules and recommendations of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN).
Beyond this important milestone, the paper is noteworthy for the attention it draws to undiscovered, complex, biological interactions in threatened habitats. The four new species all come from the Atlantic Rainforest of Brazil which is the most heavily degraded biodiversity hotspot on the planet. Ninety-two percent of its original coverage is gone.
The effect of biodiversity loss on community structure is well known. What researchers don’t know is how parasites, such as these zombie-inducing fungi, cope with fragmentation. Here the authors show that each of the four species is highly specialized on one ant species and has a suite of adaptations and spore types to ensure infection. The life-cycle of these fungi that infect, manipulate and kill ants before growing spore producing stalks from their heads is remarkably complicated. The present work establishes the identification tools to move forward and ask how forest fragmentation affects such disease dynamics.
On the Net:

New clues about the bacteria that cause Lyme disease could lead to a novel strategy to reduce infections, according to a study to be published in mBio®, the online open-access journal of the American Society for Microbiology, on December 4. The study reveals that the immune system of the white-footed mouse, a very common reservoir for Borrelia burgdorferi (the bacterium that causes the disease), responds differently to different strains of the bacterium, a finding that will help scientists tweak the animals' immune systems to prevent infection. A vaccine that keeps these wild mice free of the pathogen could significantly curb the spread of the disease from mice to ticks to humans.
"There's no human vaccine, and there's not likely to be one," says Alan Barbour of the University of California, Irvine, the lead author of the study. "We have to focus on lowering the risk. One way to do that is by treating the animals that carry the disease." Rabies offers a good example of how this might be accomplished, says Barbour. By deploying vaccine-laced food bait, public health officials have managed to lower the rabies infection rate in wildlife and significantly limited the spread of the disease to pets and humans.
Although Lyme disease only emerged in the U.S. in the past 40 years or so, around 25,000 cases are now reported every year in this country and the medical costs of these cases are estimated to range in the billions of dollars. Despite the growing importance of the disease, little is known about the evolution and ecology of the bacterium that causes the illness.
Barbour and his colleagues sought to understand why as many as 15 different strains of B. burgdorferi exist in the wild at differing degrees of prevalence. In the parts of the country where Lyme disease is most common, the majority of white-footed mice are infected with B. burgdorferi during the course of the year. Unlike humans and lab mice, white-footed mice don't get sick when they're infected so the bacteria grow and multiply within them, and when a deer tick bites it sucks up the bacteria along with its blood meal.
In the lab, the group at UC Irvine exposed white-footed mice to various strains of B. burgdorferi and tracked the course of the infection. All the B. burgdorferi strains infected the white-footed mice, but some strains managed to grow to high densities in various mouse tissues while others did not.
Barbour says the immune reactions the mice mounted against the various strains explain these discrepancies: the greater the immune response, the fewer bacteria found in a mouse's tissues and vice-versa. Importantly, the strains that grew to greatest densities within the mice are also the strains that are most prevalent in the wild.
When they looked at the immune reaction to individual B. burgdorferi proteins the authors found a complex interplay of reactivities. The mice reacted in different degrees to the various proteins present in a single bacterial strain, which could explain why such a great diversity of B. burgdorferi strains are sustained in the wild, say the authors.
Barbour says knowing more about how the white-footed mouse reacts to all the various B. burgdorferi strains and immunogenic proteins will help vaccine developers select the best proteins to put in a vaccine. "The best candidate for the mouse vaccine is something that's the same in all the [B. burgdorferi] strains," he says.
Once a vaccine for the white-footed mouse is developed, it will need to be tested by exposing immunized mice to a selected set of diverse B. burgdorferi strains, says Barbour, and the results of this study can help make that selection. "If we can find five that are representative, that would be an advantage."
This study, he says, "is going to provide a foundation for future studies in understanding the infection in these animals as we proceed with developing vaccines."

Phil/FA 310 Introduction to Aesthetics
Instructor: Dr. Norman Lillegard Office: H 229 587 7384
Office Hours: 10.00 ‑11.00 a.m. and 1-2 p.m. MWF and by appointment
Texts: Puzzles about Art (ed. Battin etc.) and Basic Issues in Aesthetics by Eaton (In UC and Bradley).
Course Title: Questions about the Arts That Won’t Go Away.
Art; can you define it? Are there non-subjective standards of criticism/evaluation? Why bother with the arts? Why spend (public) money on galleries, subsidies for playwrights or orchestras, etc.? Are there correct interpretations of art works? Does interpretation depend upon the artists intentions? Should art be “moral” in any sense? Should it be censored in any way? Is avant-garde art really art at all? What is the “ontological status” of various art works? How do art works differ from products of the crafts, if at all? How if at all do “fine arts” differ from entertainment? Does, or should, art “imitate” life or anything else? What about “art for arts sake?” Is art a medium of expression? Expression of what? The Artist’s soul? Her emotions? Should “works” produced by computers (or monkeys!) be counted as works of art? Do the arts have a future or are the fine arts done for, about to be replaced by decoration, entertainment, craft? And so forth.
The Purposes of this Course: To address the questions listed above and related questions. To become familiar with some of the principal answers that have been proposed from the Greeks to the present. To gain practice in thinking critically and with a sense of the options available about these questions. Perhaps, to formulate some defensible views on these matters that will inform one’s own practices in the future. Perhaps, to find ways of defending civilization against barbarism (!!??).
We will be studying the views of some major thinkers, but the aim is not that you be able to repeat their views, but that you learn to think with them. Therefore, the ability to parrot views (whether those of an author, the instructor or anyone else's) or regurgitate information (like a quiz show participant) is of no use to you or anyone. You will not be tested on such an ability. Exams are designed to test understanding of arguments and issues, and critical reading skills, rather than retention of information. However, you do need to be familiar with some relevant examples and illustrations, and some terminology.
! Attend class and participate, do the readings, do all written assignments, pass the exams. Two exams. (multiple choice, T/F, see sample exams on web page). First exam worth 120 pts, Final exam is comprehensive, worth 180 pts.
! Quizzes: there will be frequent (once a week or more) unannounced quizzes. Missed quizzes cannot be made up. Each quiz will be worth 6 – 12 points, and will consist of multiple choice and T/F questions. Total, ca. 130 pts.
! A short paper (no less than 1500 words) on a topic approved by the instructor must be completed and handed in by mid-term and revised in the light of criticisms by the final. NO PAPER WILL BE ACCEPTED AFTER THE MID TERM. 100 pts.
! One report on a UTM art event (exhibit, theatre, concert). 25 pts.
! Attendance. Regular attendance and informed participation in class are essential since (a)not everything covered in class is included in the texts (b) you will need help with this material, and that is what class sessions, and the instructor, are for. 40 points.
! Extra Credit: Don’t count on much. Carefully prepared reports or other class presentations (including student prepared debates under the instructor's guidance) can earn extra points. (Max. of 30 pts.). Presentation of actual (original) art works with discussion relating to the readings might be especially valuable.
Total points ca. 600. Normally %90 of total points gets you an 'A', %80 a 'B' and so forth, but significant adjustments for curve are made when necessary.
The instructor’s web page for this course will include sample exams, lists of important terms, and outlines of classes. All quizzes will also be preserved on that page for review purposes. Access the Phil/FA 310 page through the UTM page (click on faculty staff, then on faculty web pages) or by using www.utm.edu/~nlillega/lillegard.htm. and clicking on relevant link.
Class Conduct, Instructor's Role, etc. What I Expect of Students.
1.Treat each other with respect. 2.Treat the instructor with respect. 3.Do not talk unless called on.
4. Do not leave the room without permission except in extreme emergency. 5. Be on time.
6. Be eager to learn. The best indication of progress is engagement with the issues and ideas we deal with.
7. Do not be afraid to say "I don't understand." 8. Expect the same of me as I expect of you. (Except for #3, and #4, of course. You will see that I follow #7 a lot.)
NB. Any kind of cheating is a serious offense and will be dealt with accordingly. It also ought to be beneath the dignity of each and every student.
Classes will consist of a mix of lecture, discussion, possible occasional reports, and viewing of videos,
listening to recordings, etc. Students are expected to treat other students in a polite fashion, even though they should
feel free to express disagreement on ANY topic or ANY claim that is advanced by anyone, including the instructor.
At the same time, each student must attempt to exercise responsibility by keeping discussion focused on the subject at
hand and by listening carefully to the responses of the instructor and other participants.
Particular value is placed on argument, as opposed to mere expression of opinion. Say what you believe, but be prepared to say why. The instructor will attempt to clarify difficult concepts and passages in the text, and provide relevant examples. Students are encouraged to provide their own examples. If there is an art work (painting, pot, poem etc.) by yourself or someone else that you want to discuss, bring it or describe it and some class time will be spent on it, provided there is some connection to the readings.
Students should feel free to interrupt with questions or comments, even though on occasion answers may be postponed for the sake of coherence. The instructor is pledged to careful consideration of any view, including those which he finds unsupportable, and to critical thinking with any student who values thoughtful discussion. Students who feel a need for individual help should feel free to ask..
NOTE: "Any student
eligible for and requesting academic accommodations due to a disability is requested
to provide a letter of accommodation from P.A.C.E. or
COURSE OUTLINE: (Approximate. Content and time periods may vary slightly.)
Week 1 (1/18) Overview of course. Kinds of “arts.” The notion of “fine art.” Defining art. Art criticism. Read Battin, 1-26. Be familiar with the 24 cases described.
Week 2 (1/24) Week I continued. Defining “art” and theories of art. Eaton, ch. 1.
Week 3 (1/31) Week II continued. Creativity. Selections from Battin. Eaton, ch. 2.
Week 4 (2/7)Week 3 continued. Eaton ch. 3. Viewers, taste, emotion etc. Selections from Battin ch. 2
Week 5 (2/14) Eaton ch. 4. Languages of art.
Week 6 (2/21) Eaton ch. 5. Art objects. Battin selections.
Week 7 (2/28) MIDTERM EXAM Wed. Mar. 2 Paper due. Interpretation and criticism. Eaton ch. 6. Selections from Battin ch. 3,4, 6.
Week 8 (3/7) Week 7 cont. Battin ch. 6 Forgeries, etc.
Week 9 (3/14 – 18 SPRING BREAK)
Week 10 (3/21) Week 8 continued. The value of Art. Eaton ch. 7. Selections from Battin ch. 5.
Week 11 (3/28) Meaning and truth in Literature. Handouts. Art, public policy, Eaton ch. 7
Week 12 (4/4) Art, ethics. Eaton ch. 7. Handouts. .
Week 13 (4/11) The end (or future) of the arts. Handouts.
Week 14 (4/18) . Discussions of papers, themes.
Week 15 (4/25) “ “
Week 16. Classes end May 2. FINAL EXAMS, MAY 5-11.
Article for week 13, 14. http://www.eurozine.com/article/2003_02_25_lillegard_en.html
Plato – Republic, Ion.
Aristotle – Poetics 1-15.
Mo Tzu, Hsun Tzu (On music)
Plotinus – Enneads I.6
Hume – Of the Standard of Taste
Kant – Critique of Aesthetic Judgement
Friedrich Schiller, Letters 26-27
Hegel – Intro. to Aesthetics 1-3.
Schopenhauer, World as Will and Representation
Tolstoy – On Art.
Coomoraswamy- The Dance of Siva
Dewey – Art as Experience
Heidegger – The Origin of the Work of Art
Collingwood – Principles of Art
Cavell – The Claim of Reason and Must We Mean What we Say (various essays).
Danto – The Philosophical Disenfranchisment of Art.
Wollheim – Art and its Objects
Expression in __________ (music, painting etc.)
Censorship of the Arts
Fiction and truth.
Meaning and Intention in Literature
Tragedy and Ethical Criticism of Art
Application of selected aesthetic theories to __________ (Drama, Painting, Film etc.)
Art vs. Entertainment
The Aesthetics of Nature
The Historical Nature of the Arts.
Art, Propaganda, Politics.
Battin, 1-26 Questions 1 - 21 below
1. What does case 4 add to case 1 and 2 and 3, if anything?
2. What does 5 add to 1,2,3, 4, if anything?
3. What does 6 etc.
4. What does 7
QG 2. Read Eaton, 1-13
1. What are the four general types of aesthetic theory?
2. Give some reasons for thinking aesthetic theories are not even possible.
Eaton p.14-31. 1 - below
1. Assuming that something is a work of art only if someone works on it in some way, be prepared to illustrate each of the following views about what kind of work is required to produce an artwork, as opposed to simply a (non-artistic) artifact:
a. art works result from the particular unique personalities of artists
b. art works result from a creative and original activity, where what makes an activity creative is either that it
i. consists in something more than following rules to produce an envisaged end
ii. consists in paying attention to features of things which have “artistic potential.”
c. art works result from carrying out an artistic “intention” (particular kinds of intention make certain things works of art)
d. art works result from (successful) attempts to express something (like an emotion).
2. Give criticisms of each of a-d above, as found in Eaton.
3. How does Aristotle respond to the claim that the arts are “irrational?”
4. Be prepared to illustrate and critique each of the following views on art as expression of an emotion (E): in a work of art
a. the artist expresses his/her own E in the work
b. the work arouses an E in the “viewer”
c. a and b combined: the artist expresses an E and the same E is aroused in the “viewer” (Tolstoy-type view of art as “communication”)
d. the work “depicts” an E
e. the work has in itself the properties or traits of people who feel E (Langer)
f. the work “treats something in a way that demonstrates” E (Sircello)
5. Compare and contrast Croce’s and Dewey’s views on art as an expression of the artist’s “idea.”
Eaton, p. 34-52
Battin, p. 28-58
1. Eaton suggests that there are three sets of criteria that might be used to sort people who are having an “aesthetic experience.” What are they?
2. Taste on the Hume/Sibley view includes
a. special sensitivity to properties objectively present in a work
b. the idea that the perceptual faculties employed by a person with taste are different from ordinary perceptual faculties.
c. the judgements of people with taste will converge
What are some criticisms of a, b and c?
3. Are viewer emotional responses to works of art
a. real ordinary? (does the viewer feel real sadness, for example)
b. not real but special aesthetic? (Burke’s “delight”, or, metaresponse)
c. ordinary but in a non-ordinary way? (in control etc.)
Discuss each of a-c pro and con.
4. What is the problem of “negative emotions”?
5. What are some problems with the idea that the “aesthetic attitude” is essentially “non-practical” or involves “distancing?”
6. Explain and illustrate the Sibley/Hungerford view that non-aesthetic properties never entail any aesthetic properties (or, aesthetic properties are never “condition governed.” Mention the “looks/is not really” test)
7. Give some criticisms of the Sibley/Hungerford view.
8. According to Dickie, the aesthetic attitude is a myth: the jealous husband and the lighting technician are not attending in a different way, they are attending to different ____________.
Mention some possibilities.
Read (carefully!!) Eaton, 53-74
Think about these examples: Hobo signs, a musical phrase (Handel), Bach’s Nun kom der Heiden Heiland, Lover’s kiss, Jan Steen’s painting, Battin 3.13, 3.15, a poem (cf. Battin, 2.16), Dǖrer’s Melencolia I.
Ask these questions about these examples, and write down your answers:
1.Do they refer to, or contain parts that refer to, something? If so HOW is the reference achieved?
2. Do they state something? If so, HOW?
In answering 1 and 2, take account of the fact that referring and stating are usually done through language, and that actual verbal language is completely missing from most of these examples.
When you have answered 1 and 2 as FULLY as you can, note
(a)all the similarities or identities between the different cases, and
(b) all the differences.
Remember that these answers require reference to certain fundamental contrasts, such as that between conventional and the natural, between reference and resemblance, between iconic and non-iconic signs. Also keep in mind that these contrasts are not always sharp.
Study Eaton 76-101.
Eaton, 104- 123. Battin, 60-102
Eaton, 125-147 Battin, 148-178
T or F
1. Something might seem to count as a work of art because it is displayed in a certain way.
2. One question that arises in connection with “sound sculpture” is this: are there genres of art that are constrained by the “materials” used?
1. Artist centered theories of art could include expression theories.
2. Weitz denies that it is possible to define (give necc and suff conditions for)the concept ‘work of art’ because
a. it is an “open concept”
b. there are no resemblances at all between some art works and others
c. there are at best family resemblances between some art works and others
d. a and c.
1. According to Sircello, a painting could express a love of animals in the sense that the artist painted the animals “lovingly.”
2. If a work of art expresses sadness in the sense that it made the viewer feel sad, then it is mysterious why most people would want anything to do with it.
1. The idea of the “aesthetic attitude” typically includes the ideas that
(a) a special faculty is required for aesthetic perception
(b) aesthetic response is non-practical
(c) aesthetic responses are to conditioned-governed properties
(d) all of these.
2. Dickie claims that what makes a response aesthetic is what sorts of things the “viewer” responds to.
3. Twains two different responses to a sunrise on the river illustrate
(a) the difference between a practical and a non-practical response
(b) the difference between an aesthetic and a non-aesthetic response
(c) the difference between a response that shows taste and one that does not.
(d) a and b.
1. An 18th century garden, like that at Stowe, that leaves certain things out (like a statue of Queen Ann) and locates certain things lower than others, seems to make various statements, including negations.
2. Both Gombrich and Goodman emphasize the conventional aspect of artistic representation.
3. The more a sign looks like or in some way resembles what it refers to, the more “iconic” it is.
1. It is not implausible to think of Brancusi’s “lovers kiss” as referring to or representing a lover’s kiss
(a) by resembling in some slight way two lovers
(b) by “standing for” a lover’s kiss by the use of slightly iconic signs
(c) by evoking feelings relating to unity, difference, bridging, inner and outer divisions, and the like
(d) any or all of these.
2. Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice could be said to
(a)communicate knowledge or understanding of human life and character
(b) be true to life
(c) be a good novel because it invites disinterested contemplation (the aesthetic attitude)
(d) all of these
(e) a and b.
1. Formalists argue that
(a) only properties directly observed in a art work are relevant to aesthetics
(b) the artists intention is relevant to aesthetics
(c) such traits as shading (in a painting), thematic development (music), or structure (novel) are aesthetically relevant.
(d) all of these
(e) a and c.
2. Clive Bell and Roger Frye are probably the best known formalist critics.
1. Marxist aesthetics is contextual in a very broad sense.
2. The context of a work of art could include
(a) the historical/political situation in which it was produced
(b) the prevailing artistic traditions at the time of its production
(c) the personal idiosyncracies of the artist
(d)all of these
(e) none of these.
1. Contextualists hold the view that all that matters in a work of art are its intrinsic properties.
2. According to the institutional theory of art, an object, X, becomes an art work
(a) when the artist produces X
(b) when art institutions confer on X the status ‘art work’
(c) when enough people see that in fact the work is worthy of appreciation
(d) none of these.
1. Everyone would agree that since James says that The Turn of the Screw is just a ghost story, that therefore the best interpretation is one that treats it as a Ghost story.
2. There is a clear difference between interpreting a work of art and evaluating it.
1. If someone interprets ‘dark satanic mills’ in Blake’s Preface to Milton to refer to sooty industrial factories, they
(a) have not taken into account the author’s intentions
(b) have taken into account the historical circumstances of the poem’s composition
(c) have obviously made the poem less enjoyable
(d) all of these.
2. Giving reasons for the belief that a work of art is a good work is not like giving reasons for believing that a breakfast is nutritious, or for believing that it is not a good idea to go 80 mph in a 30 mph zone.
1. The case of Virgil’s and Mendelssohn’s death bed wishes respecting their masterpieces illustrates the conflict between the value placed on art works and other values.
2. Tolstoy argued that the only good art works were
a. works that had economic value
b. works that appealed to people with taste
c. works that had intrinsically pleasing properties
d. all of these.
e. none of these.
3. Aesthetic value (the value of the arts) could, on some views, be
a. a function of moral values
b. in competition with economic values
c. not in competition with any other values
d. all of these
e. none of these.
1. The 18th century revisions of King Lear illustrate
a. a conflict between aesthetic and economic values
b. how some people want art works to serve moral didacticism
c. how questions of authorship can never be settled
d. all of these.
2. The belief that “earthworks” should not be subject to the requirements of environmental protection suggests that social values and aesthetic values can conflict.
3. It is clear that religious subject matter in an art work will make it a work of religious art.
Class Outlines Phil/FA 310 Aesthetics
A.What sorts of things (actions etc.) count as works of art? Or, What is the “definition” of ‘art?’ Examples:
B. Should works of art express something? Like what? Examples:
C. Is there some right way to “interpret” works of art? Examples:
1. q. What is the problem in (A)?
Answ. Deciding what features of a thing make it a work of art.
2. q. What is the problem in (B)?
Answ. Same as 1?
3. Any additional feature for (C)?
1. Organizing the intuitions:
Should we focus on
I.1 The Artist I.2The Object
(intention, (Beauty, formal
Expression etc.) properties, etc.)
I.3The Viewer I.4The Setting
A. aesthetic theories tend to focus on one of these. E.g. it is necessary and sufficient for x’s being a work of art, that it be produced with an “artistic” intention.
i. perhaps there cannot be such theories. Perhaps ‘art’ or ‘aesthetic’ or ‘beauty’ are open concepts. Weitz and Wittgenstein.
ii. language games and games.
“what is common to all games?”
a. family resemblances.
2. The cognitive status of evaluative
claims about art;
A. is ‘that is a good painting’ like
‘that is a good knife’ or not?
1. (I,1)Focusing on the artist:
A. focus on the artists inner states and the EXPRESSION of those states.
B. art works result from the particular unique personalities of artists
C. art works result from a creative and original activity, where what makes an activity creative is either that it
i. consists in something more than following rules to produce an envisaged end
ii. consists in paying attention to features of things which have “artistic potential.”
D. art works result from carrying out an artistic “intention” (particular kinds of intention make certain things works of art)
E. art works result from (successful) attempts to express something (like an emotion).
2. Exploration of E. Art as expression of an emotion (E):
in a work of art
A. the artist expresses his/her own E in the work
B. the work arouses an E in the “viewer”
C. a and b combined: the artist expresses an E and the same E is aroused in the “viewer” (Tolstoy-type view of art as “communication”)
D. the work “depicts” an E
E. the work has in itself the properties or traits of people who feel E (Langer)
F. the work “treats something in a way that demonstrates” E (Sircello)
3. Croce’s and Dewey’s views on art as an expression of the artist’s “idea.”
1. Eaton on three sets of criteria that might be used to sort people who are having an “aesthetic experience.”
2. Exploration of (1,i). The idea of Taste The Hume/Sibley view of taste includes
A. special sensitivity to properties objectively present in a work
B. the idea that the perceptual faculties employed by a person with taste are different from ordinary perceptual faculties.
C. the judgments of people with taste will converge
3. (Exploration of 1.ii)Viewer emotional responses to works of art. How should we describe those responses?
A. They consist of real ordinary emotions? (does the viewer feel real sadness, for example)
B. not real but special aesthetic? (Burke’s “delight”, or, metaresponses) (This seems to fit with 1.i)
C. ordinary (like ‘sad’) but in a non-ordinary way? (in control etc.)
D. The problem of “negative emotions” Examples:
4. Exploring another approach to 1.i.
A.The “aesthetic attitude” : essentially “non-practical” or involves “distancing.”
i. examples: from Twain, Bullough, (caught in a fog).
B. Aesthetic attitude and The Sibley/Hungerford view that non-aesthetic properties never entail any aesthetic properties (or, aesthetic properties are never “condition governed.” ‘It is red and gold’ (non-aesthetic properties) never entails ‘it is beautiful’ (aesthetic property).
i. the “looks/is not really” test.
Can sensibly say ‘it looks yellow but is not’ but cannot say ‘it looks beautiful but is not.’
7. Exploring 1.iii. Rejection of aesthetic attitude theory. Dickie: the aesthetic attitude is a myth: the jealous husband and the lighting technician are not attending in a different way, they are attending to different _things___________. (he is referring to Bullough)
Mention some possibilities.
So, What things should we attend to in works of art? Which are important?
A. Beardsley – regional qualities, formal unity. Lists on p. 49
i. examples from Battin
WEEK V The Arts and (as) Language
1. Does “getting A” (A could be any sort of non-linguistic art work) require something like learning a language?
A. In a language, words (are used to) refer to things and sentences (are used to) say things. Examples:
ques. What would correspond to words (lexical items) in non-linguistic art?
i. elements that “refer”. cf. medieval iconlogicae
ii. more general cases of “elements” “standing for” something.
Ques. What would correspond to sentences? cases of something (a string of elements) “saying” something.
2. Exploration of idea of elements in art works referring to something.
Ques. How can x stand for y?
A. by representing it? More obvious examples from painting.
Less obvious ones from music, literature.
i. representing and imitating.
ii. imitating by resembling.
iii. differences between resembling and representing. x represents a horse. Does it resemble one? Two chairs resemble each other. Do they represent each other?
iv. cf. examples from Hobo language, Handel.
v. on the other hand, a stick drawing can “represent” X. Does it resemble it?
B. If representation does not work through resemblance, how does it work? Gombrich and Goodman; it works somewhat the way a regular language does. Art really is a lot like verbal language.
i. denoting by convention.
C. The ingredients of a language – signs, syntax, semantics.
a. Signs, semantics, and natural/non-natural, or conventional, relations. Cf. ‘dog’ and a picture of a dog. Road signs.
Now, how much knowledge of conventions do we need to see what the picture “represents?” How much to produce a representation?
i. ways to classify signs. Natural. Conventional.
Another way to classify signs – icon, index(indication), symbol. Or, iconic, iconlogical, iconographical. Is a road sign iconic?
i. degrees of iconicity.
B. syntax. How the signs (“lexical items”) are arranged makes a difference to “meaning.” Cf. a sentence, a musical phrase, Steen.
3. Gombrich – reference does not depend upon resemblance.
A. making and matching, schema and correction.
i. schema are learned from the present “tradition.” Like learning a vocabulary. Thus the arts are historically located.
ii. however the individual artists can “correct” or modify the schema.
iii. figures, shapes, are not chosen because they resemble x, but because they are good “substitutes” for x.
Even in painting, the “signs” are more like symbols, less like icons, then we usually recognize.
4. Goodman – goes even further than Gombrich in denying resemblance. Shapes in paintings are conventional denoters.
A. Seems obviously wrong. In painting SEEING plays a fundamental role. Not so with “reading” a text.
B. Goodman agrees that the “symbols” in painting are not “notational.” You don’t “read the painting” and then produce it, the way you read a score, or a poem, and then produce it (perhaps many times many ways).
i. in a poem, all the identifying features of it are in the printed or spoken poem itself. Likewise, for a piece of music, Goodman thinks.
ii. in a poem, etc. the features are repeatable. That is essential according to Goodman, for being language.
iii. That is NOT the case for paintings. So they are not language. But they do employ conventional signs, like language does.
C. Goodman seems wrong about music. Can’t tell just from the score how to reproduce or “repeat” it.
D. In a language familiarity in varieties of contexts, grasp of syntax, is required for grasping the reference. Examples: rose, rose. Similarly in painting, music? Historical element. Durer.
3. Problems with the art-language analogy with respect to painting, music.
No logical connectives
No conjoining of separate works to make more complex “statements”
Not clear what the lexical items in paintings, music, are.
Truth in the Arts.
1.Different ways fiction might be true.
a. Possible worlds.
b. Fiction can tell us truths about people, places. Tolstoy on families. Dickens on London etc.
2. Pictures and truth. If no language, then no truth?
a.True to life. A picture is worth a thousand words. Etc.
b. Symbols that make a statement. Polish triangles and circles.
c. Can pictures lie? Yes. In more than one way. False in relation to some particular fact.(Curtis’ photos of Indians) Or, false to “life.”
3. Music and truth. Making a statement? Lieing?
Or is music the most formal art?
Expressing and stating.
1. The ontological status of works of art: what kind of “being” do they have? E.g. a painting, a poem, a song.
a. spatial – non spatial (temporal)
b. performing – non performing
c. works that are only types – works that have tokens.
2. What is included in the work of art? Is the context part of it? Examples.
a. Pole – the history as part of the work.
1. Context is irrelevant.
“Message” is irrelevant (art as language?).
Representation is irrelevant.
Artist’s intentions are irrelevant.
Intrinsic properties (presentational properties) are all that matter.
Ques. Is expression irrelevant?
a. examples from Painting, Music, Literature, film.
Cf. a film remake. Content remains the same. “form” is new. Cf. p. 81
Are changes part of it?
b. Ques. Is it possible to view (notice) ONLY the formal properties?
Answer: Different cases: Mona Lisa, Notre Dame, Braque, Brancusi, Liden, Strandqvist. A Bach prelude. A Bach Fugue. A Mozart sonata. A lyric. A sestina.
What are the “formal elements” in each? (goes well beyond Eaton, p. 80)
Cf. “Sonata Allegro form” – A(tonic) – B (dominant?) – repeat- Development, recapitulation A (subdominant?) – B tonic. Codas, bridges, etc. Development in bridges. Of bridges.
Fry, “the content doesn’t matter”(p. 81)
Clive Bell, religious feeling and “significant” form.
Liden and the poem.
c. connections between formalism and “special aesthetic emotions” (see Week IV, C 3.) Connections between formalism and aesthetic attitude theories. Connections to Plato, Kant.
NOTICE how fuzzy these distinctions actually are. One is always getting one KIND of content or another. There are lots of kinds. Eaton p. 83. Liden.
1. Kinds of context.
a. Conventional associations (iconlogicae!)
b. artist’s life.
c. art-historical facts
d. plain old historical facts
e. including, “social” facts (political etc.)
Cf. Steen. Homer. Durer.
Van Eyck (3.13). Liden. Bach’s
2. Marxist Aesthetics
a. Example: Berger on oil painting vs. e.g. ink. Possessions. The oils in English manors. (Cornwallis).
b. problem: exceptions Rembrandt’s biblical subjects. Other kinds of counterexamples. “Ownership” and “Three Beauties.” (Ukiyo-e – pictures of the fleeting world). Which comes first, (religious, metaphysical, ethical ) ideas or economic arrangements? Vaclav Havel.
3. Less sweeping contextualism. Walton.
a. Which “intrinsic features” get our attention depends upon “extrinsic” information.
b. in opposition to formalists – you cannot just stare (listen etc.) and notice certain “intrinsic” properties.
Examples (cf. 1 c): knowing what a sonnet is (historical facts) directs our attention to the 14 line, couplet–at-the end structure. Those are standard features which determine to what category a poem belongs.
The subject matter of the sonnet (love e.g.) is a variable feature. A poem with 13 lines could not be a sonnet, since having 13 lines is a “contra standard” feature so far as sonnets go (it disqualifies anything as a sonnet).
Other examples: how do you “hear” the opening line of Afternoon of a Faun? Which of its formal properties stand out? Must know the genre. Suppose you were expecting a classical symphony! (What, this is no classical symphony! What gives here?). Even knowing you have an orchestra makes a difference to the “properties” of that solo. (the radical of presentation).
Week IX Break
1. Institutional theory
a. Dickie; a work of art is
1. an artifact
2. some aspects of which have a “conferred status”
Cf. examples from Battin, avant garde art.
a. analogies – being married, being president. Observable features are not sufficient, or even necessary.
b. “the art world” does the conferring. Makes something a “candidate for appreciation.”
1. what are the boundaries of the art world?
2. HOW does
it confer (where is the “ritual”?).
3. what counts as “appreciation”? (Many different things). Give examples.
4. not just anything could be a candidate for appreciation. Examples;
5. don’t those who confer status do so for some reason? (Wolheim)
e.g. they think X is worthy of appreciation.
2. The Art World (Danto)
a. Art worlds are constituted by “institutions”
1. Danto goes beyond Dickie – there is no mystery about how certain objects get a status conferred
2. Works of art are constituted culturally or socially – like a language.
b. Identifying something as a work of art requires initiation into a culture.
Cf. Seeing scribbles and seeing a sentence (something “meaningful”).
3. Eaton – art and traditions of discourse.
a. x is a work of art iff x is discussed in such a way that audiences attend to intrinsic properties of x considered worthy of attention in aesthetic traditions (e.g. moulding in late Renaissance art).
b. worthy? What about “bad” art?
1. Both bad and good art invite attention to the same sorts of properties, i.e. those that are attended to within current aesthetic traditions.
2. In bad art, those properties do not please (don’t please whom?).
a. Certain basic forms or structures are found across cultures – cf. fairy or folk tales.
1. problem – James writes novels for sure – they fit that genre. But, THAT is not what matters most about them. What does?
a. The “elements” that constitute art works are not fixed by any interpretation or linked to anything permanent.
1. the elements (e.g. words, sentences) interact with each other, with larger contexts, endlessly. Cf. the sentence on p. 99, Eaton.
1. Texts (etc.) as occasions for “play” which never comes to an end.
2. Spy the “ideological” constructions and de construct them.
Representation? Resemblance? Convention? Iconic symbol?
Durer: Melencolia I
Denoting? Referring? Symbolizing? DEGREES of iconicity.
Reference within a system.
Portrait of Nicolaes Ruts
Oil on panel
118.5 x 88.5 cm
The Frick Collection,
Fan K'uan (d. after 1023)
Travelers Amid Streams and Mountains
Ink and color on silk
Franz Marc; Blue Horses
Winslow Homer “
Van Gogh - Shoes
Questions about interpretation:
Setting works from different periods “side by side.”
Mondrian Yellow, Red, White
Mondrian Broadway Boogie Woogie
Using Mondrian to illustrate a distinction between “style” and “repertoire” (Wollheim)
Setting an individual artist’s works “side by side.”
ART AND OTHER VALUES
Tolstoy’s (good) question. Either get a good answer or change your lives!!!
1. examples. The flower vase (p. 127)
a. economic value
b. sentimental value
c. historical value (cf.
d. art historical value
e. cultural value
f. ethical value
g. religious/ “philosophical” value (e.g. epistemic value)
1. c, e, f, g, as “truth” values (cf. art as “language”)
2. what does “aesthetic value” amount to when separated from 1a-g?
a. inherent value?(cf. formalism, theories of “aesthetic experience”, “disinterested contemplation” etc. Contrast with?)
b. consequential value? (cf. Plato –
Tolstoy – (think of what he DID value)
3. Art and ethical values.
N.B. Eaton connects consequential value in the arts with consequentialist ethics. THAT IS MOSTLY CONFUSING OR A MISTAKE.
Illustration: Plato is certainly not a consequentialist in ethics. But he evaluates art in terms of its value for knowledge. What makes the arts bad, or suspect, is that they make people even more ignorant than they already are (i.e. it has that bad consequence). But what is bad about being ignorant is not that IT has bad consequences, but because it is an intrinsically bad condition to be in.
One other sorry defect in Eaton: she begins by trying to limit the discussion of art/ethics to “consequentialist or deontological” ethics. But it seems pretty clear that the arts connect up with ethics largely through “VIRTUES” and some of her examples even illustrate that, e.g. Putnam, Richards.
Illustration: coming to see the world in various (richer?) ways might contribute to development of “character.” Virtues are “character” traits.
a. art and violation of moral principles (examples from Battin)
b. art and production of bad consequences (examples from Battin)
c. Pornographic “art” as an example.
1. moral principles
2. bad consequences
3. Consider that the bad consequence might be the “stunting of growth.”
4. Art and Public Policy
a. The NEA. Serrano.
b. Public art. Serra’s “Tilted arc” (v. Battin p. 181-193)
c. Public commemoration, history ( the
EATON on the AESTHETIC
1. aesthetic experience is –
2. aesthetic value is –
a. problem with 2. The notion of “pleasure” is either too broad or too narrow.
1. too broad if it includes any “pro attitude.”
2. too narrow if construed as mere sensuous enjoyment.
3. In fact, Eaton’s account still belongs to the “grand narrative.”
1. the (300 year old) GRAND NARRATIVE.
It consists of these ingredients:
a. art has now (by the 18th cent.) “freed” itself from service to anything extraneous to itself. And that is supposed to be progress! (Be able to illustrate the theoretical expressions of this idea from course content).
b. it is progress because when it is thus freed, art “comes into it own”, finds its proper place in life. Freed art can shape our engagement with it in the proper or appropriate way.
1. properly, it is the object of “engrossed contemplation.”
c. art releases us from social fragmentation, reintegrates human life into a “pristine” condition (the romanticist idea).
1. Art works as objects of transcendent worth.
2. The prophetic/messianic mission of art.
3. Art works as an avenue to “God”
2. Give up the grand narrative!!
a. art works, and artists, are not the unsullied items that the grand narrative supposes. (cf. Pound)
b. and anyway, art works are still immersed in “uses” of all sorts.
2. commemorative or public art
3. liturgical art
4. “political” art
c. the “mode of engagement” with such art is NOT disinterested, engrossed contemplation. (cf. kissing the Vietman memorial and kissing icons). Consider also the mode of engagement with certain photographs.
Lillegard (yah, that’s right)
1. A codicil to Wolterstorf. Art is not at an end. The Grand Narrative is?
Ordinary Narratives, tradition rooted in day to day contingencies, constitute art works in ways that make a great variety of modes of engagement possible.
a. Inta Ruka (narratives of birth, suffering, death, for remembering or memorial) Contrast to Adams, or Maplethorpe.
b. Gorecki – memorial, again. The virtues of remembering “roots.” History filtered consciously (rather than unconsciously!)
c. Rouault – memorial, protest, religion.
d. Kate Campbell (local history and…)
e. Anselm Kiefer (ironical /serious use of mythical, architectural, literary traditions, historical memory etc.)
Rouault – Old King - traditions of production, thought and belief, social protest, testimony to conscience, le sang du pauvre.
Two smaller works from the same period, principally in watercolor, combine darker themes with lush visual presentations. Your Golden Hair, Margarete (1980) quotes Romanian Jewish poet Paul Celan's poem Death Fugue, which is set in a concentration camp. Kiefer has sometimes depicted the German heroine's locks as straw adhered to the canvas; in this work, they appear in watercolor as sheaves of wheat in a field.
Winter Storm Clearing
In each of his images
Think of Bullough in the fog!
Mapplethorpe: formalism + eroticism…not exactly a new idea! Contrast Adams and Mapplethorpe to Ruka.
Think Georgia O’Keefe!
Georgia O’Keefe - Jack in the Pulpit II
"A phrase O'Keeffe used in a letter to Anita Pollitzer, "Tonight I walked into the sunset". (11 September 1916), is like all of her best art: immediate, concrete, all-encompassing, with a surprising syntax. Sunset is the time when the world appears least structured, when forms tend to dissolve and are replaced by new colors and sensations. O'Keeffe acted to suspend time, producing art that would capture the transient. For example, O'Keeffe made of a flower, with all its fragility, a permanent image without season, wilt, or decay. Enlarged and reconstructed in oil on canvas or pastel on paper, it is a vehicle for pure expression rather than an example of botanical illustration. In her art, fleeting effects of natural phenomena or personal emotion become symbols, permanent points of reference.” (Jack Cowart. Lillegard’s emphasis). Cf. Zen flower arranging, which stresses precisely the fact of contingency, impermanence, the approach of decay.
Where does art leave off, and decoration begin? You would never feel tempted to ask that question about Ruka’s work. It clearly is not decoration. The same cannot be said for O’Keefe (which is not to say that her art is not valuable in various ways).
1. According to Weitz it is not possible to define ‘art.’ Why?
2. Mention some reasons for thinking that what makes something a work of art is the intentions with which it was produced. Some reasons against. Give an example or two.
3. ditto 2, but “circumstances in which it was produced or presented.”
4. Eaton proposes a fourfold classification of aesthetic theories: they are
5. Eaton mentions six construals of ‘X (a work of art) expresses E.’ What are they? What is a point in favor of each one? A point against?
6. If artists express emotions in their works, does that make art “irrational?” Why would anyone think so? What would Plato have said? Aristotle?
7. Give some examples of the sorts of qualities or properties that a person of “taste” attends to in art works. Give a criticism of the view that certain qualities are noticed only by a person of taste, whereas others can be noticed by just about anyone. Use Sibley on Van Gogh for examples.
8. What is meant by the “aesthetic attitude?” Illustrate the idea from Twain and Bullough.
9. One problem with aesthetic attitude theory is that it applies equally well to ________ nature and ___ works. It completely leaves the artist’s own activity out of the account.
10. What is the problem of negative emotions? Give some examples of art works involving negative emotions, and give an account of them that explains why people would be interested in such works.
11. Discuss two versions of the view that art works are the result of a special kind of creative activity.
12. What might be some examples of special aesthetic emotions?
13. Describe a case of an ordinary emotion that is included in a response to an art work, but in a special way.
14. Give an illustration of Dickie’s view that what distinguishes aesthetic response is the things that are attended to, rather than the manner of the response.
15. The following are ways in which art works, or elements in them, have been thought to refer to something: they might refer by representing; imitating; resembling; being conventionally related to; standing for. Illustrate each of these using the following examples (a single example might illustrate more than one of these); Handel’s ‘All we like Sheep;’ The bat, and the compass, in Durer’s Melecholia I ; Hobo signs and road signs; a musical phrase (Handel); Brancusi’s “The Lover’s kiss;” The figures in Jan Steen’s painting; Battin 3.13, 3.15.
16. Discuss two ways a work of fiction might be “true.” Give examples.
17. Discuss two ways a painting or other visual art might be “true” Give examples.
18. Discuss ways in which fiction or visual art might be “false” or “lie.”
19. Various “signs” or symbols in art works vary in their degree of “iconicity;” Illustrate with reference to a piece of music, a painting or sculpture. You can use the examples from question 15 if necessary.
20. Could works of visual art, or of music, have a “syntax?” Illustrate.
21. Give a few examples from painting, music, literature, of “formal” properties.
22. Formalism: use several examples of different sorts of art works that might suggest different answers to this question: is it possible to notice only the formal properties of an art work?
23. Give some examples of art works that exist only as types. As tokens.
24. Formalists supposedly claim that the only properties of works of art that deserve attention are those immediately present in the work. Critique this notion by connecting it to
a. the “grand narrative”
b. Clive Bell’s “pantheist” religiosity
25. Mention as many different kinds of “context” of an art work that might be important to its status and significance as an art work as you can think of.
26. Give an illustration of Marxist contextualism using two of the works above.
27. Give several illustrations of Walton’s anti-formalist notion that which intrinsic features of an art work get our attention depends upon extrinsic information.
28. Explain what Dickie means when he claims that art works have features due to a “conferred status.” Then offer three criticisms of the institutional theory.
29. Give reasons for thinking that there is no such thing as pure “factual” description of an art work.
30. Give reasons for thinking interpretation of art works is not merely “subjective.” Include a discussion of the kinds of “reason giving” involved in interpretation, and the idea of the non-transferability of critical judgments.
31. Use the cited interpretations of Winslow Homer and Gaugin (spirit of the dead watching) to illustrate “political correctness” in criticism.
32. Illustrate the idea that criticism consists in “inviting and pointing” by considering the following cases:
a. pointing out art-historical facts by setting Durer and Ostade side by side (what fact become noticeable?) Give another example.
b. pointing out facts about repertoire by putting one artist’s work next to another of that same artist’s work (cf.Mondrian).
c. pointing out various “unities” in a Tolstoy story.
d. pointing out the fact that the early 18th
cent. is an age of increasing “individualism” (cf.
e. pointing out
33. For each of 32 a-d, connect to question 25.
34. Illustrate Eaton’s definition of art by reference to typical reactions to Egyptian wall paintings on the one hand, a Rembrandt portrait on the other.
35. Show how interpretation of an art work can be improved or made more correct by attending to
a. the artist’s intention
b. art-historical facts
c. ordinary historical facts
d. facts intrinsic to the work.
Illustrate each of these from Battin, Eaton or class examples.
36. a.Mention at least three “other values” that might conflict with so-called aesthetic value. Illustrate (from Battin, Eaton, class). Begin with a discussion of Tolstoy, and mention Plato, and Riefenstahl.
b. mention at least three “other values” that might be enhanced by or communicated through art works. Illustrate. Mention Aristotle in one illustration.
37. Discuss several difficulties in separating “esthetic” value from other values. Illustrate.
38. Discuss issues of art and public policy in relation to Serrano, Maplethorpe, Serra. Sketch several positions (e.g. “there should be no public art” or “art should be constrained by moral norms”) and argue pro and con.
39. Describe the main ingredients in the “grand narrative” as Wolterstorff conceives it. Then illustrate some alternative (non-grand narrative) approaches to art works.
40. Illustrate each of the following (discussed in Wolterstorff and Lillegard) using examples from class, and point out different kinds of engagement with art works which these examples suggest;
a. art and memorial (give several)
b. art and narrative (esp. keep in mind ordinary life narratives, “birth, copulation, death” ).
c. art and morality (discuss virtues in particular. See quote 1 below)
d. art and religion
e. art and political statement
f. the end of art, decoration, and formalism.
g. art and testimony (testifying). To what? Truisms.
Include a discussion of the photography of Adams, Maplethorpe, Ruka wherever they fit.
photographs were the core of
1. A quote from “Spirit and the End of Art”
“A story, if it is going to work as a story and not just as an incidental means to the expression of an ideology, must show the unfolding of life through time. And that in turn requires continuity in its subjects. Now virtues are precisely such formed traits as provide continuity in a life. Our ability to appreciate a life as virtuous depends upon our grasp of the way in which existence gets form through passionate commitment and formed response. Virtues are precisely patterns of formed response, dispositions of thought, feeling and action which continue and enforce a coherent life. Vices too take on significance in relationship to possibilities of achieved continuity. We understand what it means for a life to fall apart because we understand what it means for a life to come together”
Another quote to reflect on;
2. “The photographs of Inta Ruka should be viewed as an amalgamation of images and text. . .it is a broad and clear manifestation of an ethical position. To quote Prof. Klavins; “it reconciles with reality.” Even though people may be inscribed in some particular social context. . .for me, you and her country people there is only one life with a beginning and an end.” (Helena Demakova, in Inta Ruka: My Country People)
3. “ In Rilke's poem "Death Experienced," in memory of
Countess Schwerin, he writes: "when, though, you went, there broke upon
this scene/a shining segment of realities/ in at the crack you
disappeared through: green/of real green, real sunshine, real trees."3
It is remarkable how close in spirit, even in detail, Rilke's lines are
to the following lines from a poem by Orville Kelly written to his wife
as he faced certain death from cancer: "Summer, and I never knew a
bird/could sing so sweet and clear,.. .I never knew the sky could be so
deep a blue, /Until I knew I could not grow old with you..."4 These are
characteristic expressions of the grace-filled enhancement of existence
which can only be realized in the face of my own death, fully accepted.
At this point I will enter a few remarks on cloning, as promised above. My original argument was intended to establish the claim that what we can sensibly say and think about ourselves depends in part upon the fact that we are the kind of beings who are begotten, born, reproduce in a certain way and die. Being born contrasts with being manufactured. We count as "our kind" others brought into existence in like manner, that is, through acts of begetting which are fundamentally biological and not subject to perfect control. Thus it is natural even for many people who are not religious believers to think of a child as in some way a "gift." These facts have, I believe, a direct relevance to what we should think about cloning of humans. In his testimony before congress the theologian/ethicist Gilbert Meilander argued that the idea of "begetting" is essentially opposed to "making" and that the fact that our children are begotten rather than made is fundamental to the conceptual background required for thinking of them as free and sharers in a common dignity, as more than just functions of our individual projects or outputs of our desires and wishes.(Meilander's statement, presented to the National Bioethics Advisory Commission on March l3th, 1997, is printed in First Things, #74 (July/August 1997), p.41-43.) The fear that cloning would alter that background is I believe well founded.
I have accused Sennett of gnosticizing tendencies. The gnostics' distaste for earthly life is rooted in a hatred of contingency, the limitations of space, time, mortal embodiment and our inability to control our lives, which seem to them obstacles to
"spiritual" release and realization. . .”
(From Lillegard, “Reply to Sennett and Wildman” in CrossCurrents 1998)

On 1980 May 22, the Japanese video game manufacturer Namco released a new game that was invented by their employee 岩谷徹 (Toru Iwatani).
The game was called 「パックマン」 and was written as “Puckman” in the English alphabet in Japan.
On that day thirty years ago, the game was released at only one video game arcade (ゲームセンター) in 渋谷 (Shibuya, Tokyo).
The game was given the name 「パックマン」 because 「パック」 (“pakku“) or 「パックパック」 (“pakku-pakku“) is the word Japanese use to describe chewing (click here to read a post I wrote that describes this word and other like it in the Japanese language) and the point of the game is to maneuver the yellow Pac-man character around a maze and eat every dot in the maze without running into any of the four ghosts that run around the maze at the same time. There are four strategically-placed “power” dots that temporarily turn the tables and allow Pac-Man to eat the ghosts.
It was probably decided to use the letters “Puckman” to write the game’s name in Japan because “pakku-pakku” sounds similar to “puck-puck“…at least when said with a Japanese accent.
Anyways, this game was an instant success in Japan and caught the attention of “Midway” game manufacturer in America and a deal was struck to bring 「パックマン」 (“Puck-Man“) to the U.S.
But first, Midway decided, the name should be altered before kids in America vandalize the machine to make the “P” in “Puck-man” look like an “F”.
So, “Pac-Man” was introduced to America in the early ’80s and became a part of America’s pop-culture almost instantly.
Just like most kids in America (and probably other countries too) in the early ’80s, I was obsessed with Pac-Man for awhile.
It’s hard to believe that it’s already been thirty years since Pac-Man was first introduced to the world!
I heard that Pac-Man was recently added to the “Guiness Book Of World Records” for being the most readily recognized video-game character around the world even today.
Even the Google search engine changed their logo temporarily to honor Pac-Man‘s 30th anniversary.
Click here to try the Pac-Man game on the Google website. Click the “Insert Coin” button the site, a game starts then use your keyboards arrow keys to move Pac-Man around the maze.

via BBC’s The Code
Starlings create these amazing patterns when flying together. It seems they follow three simple rules and if you recreate them as a software model, you can get the same patterns. Fly at the same speed, always stay the same distance between you and your neighbours and if you see a predator, leg it.
Meanwhile a 13 year old uses the Fibonacci sequence to redesign solar panels to be more like trees and so more efficient.

(IRAN: مسجد سلیمان) is a city in the Khuzestan province in southwestern Iran. The first modern oil wells of the Middle East were discovered and drilled in this area. It is mostly populated by the Bakhtiari Lur people with estimated population of 127,634 in 2005.
The name of the city is assumed to have its origins from a belief of local inhabitants calling the ruins of an Achaemenid palace as the Irsoleyman, which means "Mosque of Solomon."
The primary settlement of the city formed about 100 years ago as a result of petroleum industry development in the Middle East when the first negotiations on the establishment of the Anglo-Bakhtiari Oil Company were in progress between William Knox D'Arcy representatives and Bakhtiari Tribe leaders (Khans).
In 1908 the first oil well in the Middle East was drilled in the region of Naftoon in the center of this city, so the 100th year anniversary of oil drilling in the Middle East was celebrated in 2008 in this city.
The historical name of the city is "Parsoumash", this name was given to this city by "Persians" who came from the west to this area.
During medieval times it was called "Talghar", the name of a land in the vicinity of Karoon river. Later on the city was called "Jahangiri" , then "Naftoun", and finally Masjed Soleyman .
When Arabs attacked this region, they intended to destroy the fire temple in this city, but they encountered objection and resistance. It is said that "Moses" established "Sar Masjed" fire temple to develop his religion and it was respected by the population.
The name of the city was changed to Masjed Soleyman after Mohammad Reza Pahlavi's visit in 1303 solar year.
It is also believed that this was the birth place of "Kourosh" the king. In 1287 solar year there was a big turn in Middle East by exploring Oil in Masjed Soleyman. The city became a company city when British experts moved in. The culture of the city was also influenced by the British empire.
2000 national monuments are expected to exist in this province and the towns around , about 400 of them have been found and excavated.
Besides Karoon, there are some other rivers in the city such as "Shour", "Tambi", and "Cham Asiyab".
The majority of the population is Bakhtiyari tribes , whom are living on the slope of Zagros Mountain. "Gelim", "Chogha", and "Khersak" are among the handicrafts of this region
Sar Masjed fire temple
Professor Grishman believes this monument is related to the Persian era and he also believes that this temple is older than "Pasargad" castle or even "Perspolice". He notes that this monument is related to 8th century B.C.
Bardneshandeh temple "Bard" in Bakhtiyari Language means "stone" which is in a column shape installed in the earth. The height is 3.5 m and the thickness is 50 cm.
Archaeologists believe that this is the oldest open temple in Iran. The carving of the temple is related to Achaemean. The monument is located on the route from Masjed Soleyman to Andika.
In this monument there are remains of walls made of stone and plaster. The length of the wall is 250 m and the width is 150 m. There are paintings and designs on the wall implying a religious message.
The foreigner's cemetery
In the vicinity of "Zaman Abad" village, there is a cemetery for American and British. There is also another Armenian cemetery located in "Naftoon" quarter.
The old sirens
The fire department of the oil company is located opposite Nazaja department. An alarm went off for waking the labours and also it was a sign of starting and finishing work.
This siren left sweet memories for people inhabiting in the region.
Beautiful building of oil company
The Oil company hospital located in "Kalge" was constructed in 1303.
It is the first and the most well equipped hospital in the country.
The first and best well equipped golf club is located in "Bibiyan" quarter in Masjed Soleyman.
The athletes of this club are still the best golf players in the country.
The railway is located on the border of Karoon River in Masjed Soleyman city center. It is counted as the first railway of the country.
The railway transported the equipment and the goods to industrial establishments in Masjed Soleyman, which had been carried by ships through Karoon River and anchored in Darkhazineh 100 km away for Ahwaz.

Development of a new way to make a powerful tool for altering gene sequences should greatly increase the ability of researchers to knock out or otherwise alter the expression of any gene they are studying. The new method allows investigators to quickly create a large number of TALENs (transcription activator-like effector nucleases), enzymes that target specific DNA sequences and have several advantages over zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), which have become a critical tool for investigating gene function and potential gene therapy applications.
"I believe that TALENs and the ability to make them in high throughput, which this new technology allows, could literally change the way much of biology is practiced by enabling rapid and simple targeted knockout of any gene of interest by any researcher," says J. Keith Joung, MD, PhD, associate chief for Research in the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) Department of Pathology and co-senior author of the report that will appear in Nature Biotechnology and has received advance online release.
TALENs take advantage of TAL effectors, proteins naturally secreted by a plant bacteria that are able to recognize specific base pairs of DNA. A string of the appropriate TAL effectors can be designed to recognize and bind to any desired DNA sequence. TALENs are created by attaching a nuclease, an enzyme that snips through both DNA strands at the desired location, allowing the introduction of new genetic material. TALENs are able to target longer gene sequences than is possible with ZFNs and are significantly easier to construct. But until now there has been no inexpensive, publicly available method of rapidly generating a large number of TALENs.
The method developed by Joung and his colleagues called the FLASH (fast ligation-based automatable solid-phase high-throughput) system assembles DNA fragments encoding a TALEN on a magnetic bead held in place by an external magnet, allowing automated construction by a liquid-handling robot of DNA that encodes as many as 96 TALENs in a single day at a cost of around $75 per TALEN. Joung's team also developed a manual version of FLASH that would allow labs without access to robotic equipment to construct up to 24 TALEN sequences a day. In their test of the system in human cells, the investigators found that FLASH-assembled TALENs were able to successfully induce breaks in 84 of 96 targeted genes known to be involved in cancer or in epigenetic regulation.
"Finding that 85 to 90 percent of FLASH-assembled TALENs have very high genome-editing activity in human cells means that we can essentially target any DNA sequence of interest, a capability that greatly exceeds what has been possible with other nucleases," says Jeffry D. Sander, PhD, co-senior author of the FLASH report and a fellow in Joung's laboratory. "The ability to make a TALEN for any DNA sequence with a high probability of success changes the way we think about gene-altering technology because now the question isn't whether you can target your gene of interest but rather which genes do you want to target and alter."
The research team also found that the longer a TALEN was, the less likely it was to have toxic effects on a cell, which they suspect may indicate that shorter TALENs have a greater probability of binding to and altering unintended gene sites. Joung notes that this supports the importance of designing longer TALENs for future research and potential therapeutic applications.
In 2008, Joung and colleagues at other institutions established the Zinc Finger Consortium (http://zincfingers.org), which has made a method of engineering ZFNs broadly available to academic laboratories. His team is now making the information and materials required to create TALENs with FLASH available within the academic community, and information about accessing those tools is available at http://TALengineering.org. Gene editing nucleases, including both ZFNs and TALENs, were recently named "Method of the Year" for 2011 by the journal Nature Methods.
Joung says, "While I believe that TALENs ease of design and better targeting range will probably make them a preferred option over ZFNs made by publicly available methods, ZFNs' smaller size and the less repetitive nature of their amino acid sequences may give them advantages for certain applications. For the time being, it will be important to continue developing both technologies." Joung is an associate professor of Pathology and Sander an instructor in Pathology at Harvard Medical School,
Explore further: Researchers conduct first genomic survey of human skin fungal diversity

|Tropical Fish||Marine Fish||Pet Birds||Dogs||Cats|
|Reptiles||Amphibians||Small Pets||Insects & Spiders||Wildlife|
Brucellosis in dogs
Brucellosis is a bacterial disease that can lead to a wide range of problems, including orchitis (testicle inflammation), uveitis (inflammation of the middle layer of the eye), and miscarriage in dogs. Dogs are not the only ones affected by this disease; it infects a lot of domestic animals world wide, including cattle, swine and goats. Humans can also suffer from Brucellosis. In dogs, the disease is caused by a bacterium named Brucella canis, while goats and sheep are infected with Brucella melitensis, pigs with Brucella ovis, and so on.
Brucellosis transmission in dogs
In dogs, sexual transmission is the most common form of Brucellosis transmission. They can however get the disease in other ways as well, e.g. by having contact with foetuses that has been aborted due to Brucellosis.
Brucellosis symptoms in dogs
In dogs, the Brucellosis bacteria normally settle down in the genitals and the lymphatic system, but it is possible for it to spread to the kidneys, eyes and the intervertebral disc as well. When Brucellosis infects the intervertebral disc, the result is discospondylitis.
In dogs, symptoms from the reproductive organs are common. Male dogs can for instance develop scrotal and testicular inflammations, while female dogs can have miscarriages. Fever is uncommon, but the pain associated with Brucellosis can make the dog weak. If the disease spreads to kidneys, eyes or the intervertebral disc symptoms can begin to show from these organs.
The best way of preventing Brucellosis is to test all dogs prior to breeding. A blood test can show if the dog is infected with Brucellosis. Avoiding “accidental” mating is naturally also important.
You have to be careful when handling dogs infected with Brucellosis, because humans can catch Brucellosis from animals, e.g. by having contact with aborted foetuses, blood or semen. If you only pet and care for your dog in a normal fashion and leave everything that involves blood and semen to the veterinarian your risk of getting Brucellosis is very low. If your immune system is compromised, e.g. due to HIV, cancer or immunosuppressant drugs (common after transplants) you should not care for a dog with Brucellosis.
Brucellosis treatment for dogs
Brucellosis in dogs can be treated with antibiotics, but it is hard to cure and prolonged medication is often required. Antibiotics such as rifampicin, tetracycline, streptomycin and getnamicin are all effective against the Brucella bacteria.
One frequently used method is to use a combination of doxycycline and rifampin during 6 weeks. Another combination is intramuscular injections of streptomycin for two weeks combined with doxycyline pills for 45 days. It can however take several months for the dog to fully recover. Fatal Brucellosis is uncommon, but in a few cases the does disease leads to endocarditis.
The reason why antibiotics have to be administered during several weeks is the fact that the Brucellosis bacteria incubates within the cells of the dog. Using doxycycline only is never a good idea, because doxycycline needs to be combined with other drugs to prevent the Brucellosis from reappearing.
West Highland White Terrier

Family name: Pandanaceae (Pandanus family)
English names: Screwpine, Pandanus
Pohnpeian name: Kipar
Kosraen name: Mweng
Chuukese name: Fach
Yapese name: Choy
Habit: Shrub or tree. It grows up to 25 feet (8m) or more in height, with aerial prop roots and prickly stem.
Leaves: Linear leaves spirally arranged at branch tips, up to 6 feet (2m) or more length, M-shaped in cross section, margins and midrib of lower surface prickly (serrate).
Flowers: Male flowers tiny, in dense, white inflorescences with large white bracts. Female flowers in a head. Both appear at branch tips.
Fruit: Globose shape, separated pieces (phalanges) are tooth-like shape (angular), wedge-shape orange sections (prudes) are edible, husk fibrous, one to several-seeded.
Location & Habituation: Pandanus tectorius is native to all the archipelagoes of Micronesia. It is found all over Micronesia due to its growing advantage on rocky and sandy shores of atolls and high islands. Micronesia is mostly consists of atolls and high islands, thus abets the growth of Pandanus tectorius. Pandanus tectorius is a terrestrial plant; it grows on the ground.
Uses: Pandanus tectorius is one of the most useful trees in Micronesia. The leaves, which are the most useful part of the plant, are woven or plaited into mats, thatch, sails, baskets, hats, local fans, marmars, anticrafts, and many other items. Tip of prop roots are eaten and are often used as native medicine in Pohnpei and maybe in other Micronesian islands as well. The fruit is a major source of food in Micronesia especially on the atolls. They can be eaten raw or cooked. Either way, it is very healthy. Besides serving as a food, its fibrous helps clean the teeth, acting as a natural dental floss.
Overall Summary: In English this cultivated tree is known as the "Screwpine." Kipar in Pohnpei; Fach in Chuuk; Mweng in Kosrae; and Choy in Yap. Pandanus tectorius is native to Micronesia. It was brought to Pohnpei by the early Micronesians. Pandanus tectorius is a wide-branched tree that grows up to heights of about 25 feet (8m). The prickly trunk has few to many aerial prop roots and the leaves are long (up to 6 feet, 3m) with serrated magins (thorny leaf edges). The large edible fruit is an aggregate of many angular, wedge-shaped orange sections (drupes). Although it does grow from seed, the fruit rarely does produce seed. This is a strong indication that people have been reproducing Pandanus tectorius by planting cuttings for many generations. Besides serving as a food, the fibrous helps clean the teeth, acting as a natural dental floss. The dried leaves are used to weave hats, baskets, mats, and other items. The tips of the aerial roots are used in traditional medicine.
Specimen photographed and web page created by: Jenson Santos, October 1998.
Culturally Significant Plant -- Pandanus Tree Mwokillese: Kupar
The pandanus tree is a very important tree to the Mwokillese people. To this day, the pandanus tree still holds special meaning to them. Because of this tree, people gather together for feast, activities, or just to enjoy the day. They use this plant to build houses, and to weave mats, hats, even masks for the warrior dances. They also use this plant as a means of food and, in the old days, dental floss.
All the parts of the tree has it's own unique use. The bark, for example, was used in the old days to build houses for the people of Mwokil. They thought that this was the strongest tree that could support their houses. It was used as the foundation to the house. Then they completed it by using the leaves to make thatched roofs. But then again that is not the only use for the leaf. The people had a lot of warrior dances that needed masks to be used. Since there were no cardboard boxes to make masks with and no stores to buy them at, they had to make the masks locally. These, the masks, are held dear to the old people who are still alive today and their kids. The mats that they slept on and the hats that they wore to block the heat of the sun were also made from the leaves. The fruit also comes in handy. Back then, they had a season for the pandanus tree. Whenever the fruits started getting ripe. They would harvest the crop and gather together to make whatever kinds of recipes they could. They would boil it and add grated coconut to it, or make a special plate from it and all sorts of things that we, now-a-days, don't do anymore.
In these days, the Mwokillese on Pohnpei would look forward to going down to the Mwokil Atoll. The Mwokillese on this island don't weave mats because they are too caught up with the western technologies on this island. If they don't have mats they buy them. This is why it never stops to excite them thinking about all those mats that they know would be waiting for them. Not only are they long-lasting than the ones in the stores, but they are also FREE. Each lady would be very proud of her mat if she got one. They would brag about how many they have or how new it looks or just because they have one. The Mwokil Atoll uses these mats as their only means of gifts to everyone and anyone who visits the atoll. The fruit attracts a lot of visitors towhere it grows. When it is ripe, all family members gather together to enjoy the fruits and, of course, the day.
These are only just some of the reason why the pandanus tree is so special to us.
Botany home page
Lee Ling home
COM-FSM home page

Researchers have found a strain of bacteria that can infect mosquitoes and make them resistant to the malaria parasite. The study, in the journal Science, showed the parasite struggled to survive in infected mosquitoes. Malaria is spread between people by the insects so it is hoped that giving m... Read More
Bacteria may draw other bacteria to a site of infection by laying down trails of a “molecular glue” that lead free-swimming individuals to come together and organize into colonies.
In the study, researchers were looking at how a species of bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa attach and mov... Read More
A 65-year-old Frenchman is hospitalized after contracting France's first case of a deadly new respiratory virus related to SARS, and French health authorities said Wednesday they are trying to find anyone who might have been in contact with him to prevent it from spreading.
It's unclear how o... Read More
Through the serendipity of science, researchers at the University of Pittsburgh have discovered a potential treatment for deadly, drug-resistant bacterial infections that uses the same approach that HIV uses to infect cells.
The National Institutes of Health-supported discovery will be descr... Read More
Researchers from UNSW have cautioned that more work is needed to understand how micro-organisms respond to the disinfecting properties of silver nano-particles, increasingly used in consumer goods, and for medical and environmental applications.
Although nanosilver has effective antimicrobial... Read More
Scientists have long believed that measuring the amount of HIV in a person’s blood is an indicator of whether the virus is actively reproducing.
A University of Delaware-led research team reports new evidence that hidden virus replication may be occurring within the body’s tissue, despite un... Read More
On May 8th JoVE will publish research that demonstrates how a biosensor can detect antibiotic resistance in bacteria. This new technology is a preliminary step in identifying and fighting superbugs, a major public health concern that has led to more deaths than AIDS in the United States in recen... Read More
Those of you with an interest in virology, or perhaps simply sensationalism, have probably seen the recent headlines proclaiming another laboratory-made killer influenza virus. From The Independent: ‘Appalling irresponsibility: Senior scientists attack Chinese researchers for creating new strain... Read More
With cold temperatures, low humidity and high levels of ultraviolet (UV) radiation, conditions 10 kilometers above Earth’s surface may seem inhospitable. But next time you’re flying, consider this: The air outside your airplane window might be filled with an array of microscopic life that affect... Read More
To infect its host, the respiratory pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa takes an ordinary protein usually involved in making other proteins and adds three small molecules to turn it into a key for gaining access to human cells. In a study to be published May 7 in mBio, the online open-access journal... Read More
A new study led by researchers from Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH) and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in the UK has, for the first time, used genome sequencing technology to track the changes in a bacterial population following the introduction of a vaccine. The study follows how th... Read More
Certain types of anti-depressants have been linked to an increase in the risk of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) finds a study in BioMed Central's open access journal BMC Medicine. Awareness of this link should improve identification and early treatment of CDI.
Certain types of anti-dep... Read More
A new approach to treating antibiotic-resistant infections has been developed by University of Wollongong (UOW) and University of New South Wales’ (UNSW) researchers who have patented the new technology and entered into commercialization discussions with two French pharmaceutical companies.
A... Read More
That word "microbiome" — describing the collection of bacteria that live in and on our bodies — keeps popping up. This time, researchers say that children whose parents clean their pacifiers by sucking them might be less likely to develop allergic conditions because of how their parents' saliva ... Read More
Shanghai Daily has a web page set up that shows the geographic distribution of H7N9 infections and fatalities in China. There is also a news feed, information on symptoms and a photo gallery. Click "source" to view. Read More
(via Wired's Superbug blog) In my last post 36 hours ago, I raised questions about Saudi Arabia’s apparent delay in reporting new cases of the novel coronavirus that has been causing low-level unease since last summer. (For the full history of that, check these posts.) So it’s only fair to say t... Read More
Spring cleaning is always a good way to get rid of those hard-to-reach cobwebs that appear around the house. However, when they appear in cooling tanks for spent nuclear fuel and have never been seen there before, special attention is warranted.
Sometime in Fiscal Year 2011, “cobwebs” of bact... Read More
A new federal report blames a combination of problems for a mysterious and dramatic disappearance of U.S. honeybees since 2006.
The intertwined factors cited include a parasitic mite, multiple viruses, bacteria, poor nutrition, genetics, habitat loss and pesticides.
The multiple causes mak... Read More
Chinese scientists are being criticized for their “appalling irresponsibility” after they intentionally developed a new mutant influenza strain in a veterinary laboratory, the Independent reported.
Experts have warned that the new virus strains could potentially escape the lab, which could c... Read More

In public schools, regular homework generally begins by fifth or sixth grade, though short assignments may be given much earlier. Children under ten will usually need the most encouragement; you may have to help them get started, remind them of their study time, and check lessons after they're completed. Provide them with healthy snacks and a quiet place to work, but don't banish them to a deserted corner of the house. Let your child get started, and wait until they ask for your help. Avoid the temptation to do the actual work; in the long run, this only hurts them. However, if your child repeatedly struggles with a subject, and simply can't finish it, consult his or her teacher. There may be an underlying problem that needs corrected, or they may require special help from a tutor. When looking over your child's work, be diplomatic. Remember that children will be even more sensitive to criticism from a parent, than from their teacher. With very young children, don't worry about misspelled words in the homework. It's usually better to overlook minor mistakes, focusing instead on their accomplishments. Later, as the complexity of their homework increases, you can gently point out corrections in spelling or grammar.
©2004 Bluestreak Media. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

Kamrul starts his day very early in the morning. He leaves his bed just after sunrise and washes his face from the nearest pond. After having a little cold rice from the previous night, he leaves for work.
These days, Kamrul feels very relaxed. He doesn’t have to pay rent to the cycle van owner daily. He has his own van now. It is the most useful gift for his family.
Kamrul has been. His new cycle van ensures a decent life for his family. Kamrul considers himself a fortunate father of a Compassion-assisted child. His 8-year-old daughter, Mukta, is the channel of blessings in his family.
Every morning, Kamrul drives to the nearest village market for passengers or a load to carry. If he is fortunate enough, he can get more than two passengers at a time and heavy stuff to carry. He earns 100-120 taka (U.S.$1.45-$1.74) per day by driving his cycle van.
“One hundred taka ($1.45) per day for me is the same as 100,000 taka ($1,450) for the rich people living in the big cities. This 100 taka allows me to buy food for my children and keep my family.”
In the rainy and cold season he earns less than that, but the money is still adequate to buy food for his children. It wouldn’t be possible if he didn’t have his own cycle van.
Previously, he had to pay around 100-120 taka as rent for a cycle van. He had very little left for his family. To pay the owner on a regular basis was a Herculean task for Kamrul. It took eight out of his 11 hours of working to earn the money for the owner.
Now Kamrul believes that his bad days are over and he can do something more for his children and family.
Kamrul’s working hours are now more flexible. To work eight hours throughout the day is enough for him to take care of his family.
Whenever he is on the road driving his cycle van, he keeps the faces of his children in his mind rather than the worry of paying the owner of the cycle van. You made this possible for him.
Kamrul had a bitter childhood. After the death of his father, his mother was kicked out of the house by his stepbrothers. His father married twice, and Kamrul’s mother was the second wife.
It is common in Bangladesh for stepmothers not to be well-accepted by their stepchildren. Kamrul’s mother had to struggle a lot to raise her children. She stayed in a different town from them and worked as a housemaid. She was unable to provide education for her children.
Kamrul grew up to become an illiterate rickshaw puller. He couldn’t manage to live in another town, and seven years ago returned to his own village. His stebrothers didn’t receive him warmly. He asked them to allow him to stay on his father’s land, but they said no.
With help of the local people, he got a small piece of the land, but every day he has to face the anger of his vicious stepbrothers.
In his 30 years of life, Kamrul has never been well-treated by people, except for his mother. When he first came in touch with the Compassion staff, he was amazed by their compassionate attitude. Now Kamrul is astonished by your love for him and his family.
“From my childhood I got used to mistreatment. I never got love and sympathy from my stepbrothers or neighbors.
“But the love that the Compassion sponsors have shown to me is unconditional. They bought me a new cycle van just after knowing about my struggling. This is beyond my imagination. They improved our living. I am grateful to them.”
Kamrul is very popular at the child development center because of his sincerity. The center manager and church pastor always call him whenever they need to carry goods a distance.
Kamrul carries all the sacks of rice, lentil, vegetables and chicken on his van for the center. It is very helpful for the church as well as for Kamrul. He is their “official” cycle van driver.
Seven months ago, Kamrul used to carry the stuff of other people on his rented cycle van. Many people used to buy goods and food stuffs from the local market, and Kamrul carried those on his van. He couldn’t afford to buy stuff for his family. Conditions have changed.
He is now able to earn adequate money to buy products from the weekly market.
Last Friday he went to the market with his daughter, Mukta. He didn’t take his cycle van with him as they had been there just for shopping. Kamrul bought cooking oil, potatoes, onions, spices, biscuits and soap.
Mukta asked for potato chips, and Kamrul was happy to buy her a packet of potato chips. He was very satisfied while he was heading back to his home holding the hand of his daughter.
Kamrul is a very hardworking individual and always thinks about his family. He took a loan of 12,000 taka ($174) from a local organization. He invested the money to grow a paddy. This year he has received 420 kilograms of paddy, which provides five months of rice for his family. He has to pay the local organization 340 taka ($4.93) weekly.
With his new van, he is able to save 50 taka per day; at the end of the week he has 350 taka to pay his weekly debt. The paddy will ensure rice is available three times a day for his family.
Nowadays Mukta doesn’t have to go hungry in the morning. Every morning her mother serves her steamy rice and vegetables before she leaves for the development center.
The new cycle van doesn’t mean that all the problems are removed from Kamrul’s life. He is still having some difficulties.
Last month his stepbrothers beat him and his wife badly in front of their children. They threatened them and told Kamrul to leave the land where he and his family are staying.
Kamrul and his wife were in great physical pain. Kamrul bought medicine for his wife. It wouldn’t be possible for him to spend money for medicine if he didn’t own the cycle van.
“I am always anxious about my house. The land belonged to my father so I have a small share on that land. But my stepbrothers and their sons want to deprive me.
“Compassion built a new house for us on that land after the cyclone disaster last year, but my stepbrothers want the land back, so they are trying to destroy my house.
“They have never taken care of my family but always try to push us toward the edge.
“Compassion took care of us by providing the van, which is the only earning way for me to survive. Even the medicine I bought for my wife were by the money I earned from the new cycle van.”
Kamrul loves his children more than his own life. He has a great expectation for his daughter, Mukta.
Kamrul never got the opportunity to complete his studies. He wants both of his children to grow up as well-educated human beings.
From his childhood experience he knows how bitter it is to live without food as well as love. He loves his kids and tries to work at his level best to ensure they have food and clothes. He always worked hard, but now with his new cycle van he has started to work harder.
He knows he has commitments to keep to his family as well as to the sponsors of Compassion. Kamrul is trying to make the most of his cycle van because the more he drives the greater chance that his children will never go hungry.
Thank you for standing beside this responsible and hardworking father.

The protein content in vegetables is of inferior quality when compared to meat fat. Therefore, high protein vegetables need to be combined with other protein supplements to fulfill the complete share of proteins and vegetables. Such a protein supplement is primarily essential for those who are generally vegetarians and have to depend upon low calorie and low fat diets. For instance, if you eat plant protein in form of vegetable curry along with rice or bread then the required amount of protein is surely accessible.
The importance of high protein vegetables lies in the fact that often the amino acid content of low protein vegetables cannot properly be utilized for growth or maintenance of tissues. Therefore, during such cases the vegetable protein is either burnt as fuel or stored as body fat.
It was often believed that high protein vegetables or high protein diets are extremely beneficial for humans and especially for the athletes. This is far from the truth. High proteins can never make a good diet. It is true that protein is an essential nutrient and it has a major role to play in making our body function properly. However, this does not mean that we require protein in huge proportions. In addition to this, protein supplements are in most cases costly, needless and even injurious for some.
According to a general survey, the Vegan diets of the Americans are low in protein content in comparison to standard American diets. However, it has already been mentioned that it is not at all a credit to have high protein diets and at times, such a diet may give way to osteoporosis 4 and kidney diseases.
Some examples of high protein vegetables include a varied quantity of beans, grains, nuts and seeds. Remember, protein contains essential amino acids, often referred to as building blocks of the body. In reality, our body is in need of amino acid and not protein. We need twenty different varieties of amino acids of which our body cannot produce nine out of the entire variety. Therefore, under such circumstances the amino acid content of the protein rich vegetables are absolutely essential for our body.
Soybeans, quinoa (a grain), and spinach are some examples of high protein vegetables. However, not all protein rich vegetables have all essential amino acids. For instance, grains have low Lysine content and legumes have low Methionine content in comparison to other vegetables having considerable protein content.
The basic idea is to combine low protein contents with the high ones for the exact availability of amino acid content. Such a way of procuring high protein vegetables and diets is indeed rational but the process is entirely complex and fairly complicated.
Your daily requirement of high protein vegetables is:
- One cup of cooked soybeans (29 gms of protein), lentils (18 gms of protein), black beans (15 gms of protein), kidney beans (13 gms of protein), chickpeas (12 gms of protein), veggie baked beans (12 gms of protein), pinto beans (12 gms of protein), black-eyed peas (11 gms of protein), peas (9 gms of protein), spinach (5 gms of protein) and broccoli (4 gms of protein) should all be eaten
- Four ounces tofu (11 gms of protein) and firm (11 gms of protein) should be eaten
- 1/4cups sunflower seeds (4 gms protein) are necessary for you diet.
Therefore, if you are a vegan, it is not enough for you to include only one essential protein item in your diet. The source has to be varied and correct in matters of amino acid content.

- At Home
Teenage boys grow rapidly and gain weight rapidly throughout their adolescent years. For some, it seems impossible for their weight to catch up with their height; they may feel too lean and be sensitive about the lack of mass. For others, prepubescent weight--added to the additional weight gain of the adolescent body--can become too much; they may exceed a recommended weight for their height. Even for teenage boys who walk a middle line between the two weight extremes, eating a health diet is a very important part of good adolescent growth. The basic diet for all body types is the same; more or less weight gain can be dealt with simply by adjusting amounts of particular food types. Regular exercise is also an important component of any good diet.

A Critically Endangered species of Madagascan frog has bred successfully for the first time at North Queensferry’s Deep Sea World.
More than 30 tiny golden mantella tadpoles, measuring less than 10mm in length have been born at the aquarium.
Zoologists at the centre are now waiting anxiously to see how many of the tadpoles will transform into froglets.
The golden mantella frog is only found in the high forests of Eastern Madagascar – where the frogs are confined to a fragment of forest, surrounded by farmland and human settlements and is threatened by logging.
Deep Sea World’s Zoological Manager Chris Smith, said: “We have been looking after a group of seven adult frogs here for the past four years and this is the first time they have bred.
“It’s a fantastic achievement and we are now talking to other captive breeding programmes around the world to try and ensure as many of the tadpoles as possible reach maturity.
“If all goes well these tadpoles should start to change into froglets in the next two months.”
As its name suggests, the frog is a bright golden colour and, although not toxic, it is thought the frog may mimic the vivid colouration of poison frogs to fool would-be predators.
The adult frogs are totally land-based and don’t have webbed feet.
In the wild the eggs are laid on the forest floor and the tadpoles have to find their own way to the water.
Unlike some species of frog the golden mantella is not a great parent and once the eggs have been laid they are ignored by the adults.
They live in small groups, known as ‘armies’ which usually contain twice as many males than females.
Critically Endangered is the highest risk category assigned by the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List for wild species and means that a species' numbers have decreased, or will decrease, by 80% within three generations.
This is great news for North Queensferry! Will you be visiting the froglets? Remember to post your pictures and comments here at s1northqueensferry.

|Securing and Optimizing Linux: RedHat Edition -A Hands on Guide|
|Prev||Chapter 29. Software -Network Server, web/Apache||Next|
This step is necessary only if you think that you'll use an access file authentication system for your web site. Access file authentication is used when you have the need to protect some part of your web site with a user password. With Apache, a lot of options exist to protect your site with usernames and passwords.
The dbmmanage program utility of Apache can be used to create and update usernames and passwords of HTTP users. This method use a DBM format files that is the fastest mechanism when you have thousands users to manage in your password file. First of all, it's important to change the permission of this program to be 0750/-rwxr-x---, writable only by the super-user root, readable and executable by group and nothing for the others.
To change the permissions on the dbmmanage program, use the following command:
[root@deep ]/# chmod 750 /usr/bin/dbmmanage
To create a username and password, use the following command:
[root@deep ]/# /usr/bin/dbmmanage /etc/httpd/.dbmpasswd adduser username
New password: Re-type new password: User username added with password encrypted to l4jrdAL9MH0K.
If you use the dbmmanage utility with your Apache web server to create passwords and usernames, don't forget to include in your /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf configuration file the part of your web site you need to protect with user password authentication: Edit the httpd.conf file vi /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf and add the following lines to protect the private directory of your web site ona with user password authentication:
<Directory "/home/httpd/ona/private"> Options None AllowOverride AuthConfig AuthName "restricted stuff" AuthType Basic AuthDBUserFile /etc/httpd/.dbmpasswd require valid-user </Directory>
You must restart Apache web server for the changes to take effect: To restart Apache, use the following commands:
[root@deep ]/# /etc/rc.d/init.d/httpd restart
Shutting down http: [ OK ] Starting httpd: [ OK ]
Finally, we must test the new protected directory named private. To verify that it works, point your web browser to the following address: http://my-web-server/private/. The <my-web-server> is the address where your Apache web server lives. The </private/> is the directory we want to protect with user password authentication.
As we already know, the immutable bit can be used to prevent deletion, overwriting or creation of a symbolic link to a file. Once your httpd.conf file has been configured, it's a good idea to immunize it with the following command:
[root@deep ]/# chattr +i /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf

Along with pain, consider the following negative health effects of Early Childhood Caries (ECC):
ECC can also impact a child's education. According to a 1992 study by Helen Gift, et al, approximately 51 million school hours per year
are missed due to dental problems, most of which result from caries. More school is missed by poor, Hispanic females without dental insurance than any other children. Missed school for children also translates into missed work and lost wages for caregivers.
The financial burden of repairing severe ECC is enormous. ECC results in increased office, dental, and ER visits, with such costs often far exceeding those of preventive dental care.
Several studies have investigated the cost of prevention versus treatment of disease and confirm that it is significantly more expensive to treat caries than to prevent them. It is approximately 10 times more expensive to provide inpatient care for dental caries-related symptoms than to provide that same patient with the recommended periodic preventive care.

The 2013 Contest is now closed. Congratulations to all our winning entrants! Check back this winter for information about our 2014 PBS KIDS GO! Writers Contest.
Entrants must be in kindergarten, first, second or third grade.
Only one entry per person will be accepted; all subsequent entries will be disqualified.
Only single author stories qualify (no co-authored stories).
Stories can be fact or fiction, and prose or poetry.
Kindergarten and first grade stories: minimum of 50 words, maximum of 200 words.
Second and third grade stories: minimum of 100 words, maximum of 350 words.
Children who cannot write may dictate their story to be printed, written legibly or typed.
Text may be integrated into the illustration pages or on separate pages.
Non-English text must be translated on the same page and the translation text must adhere to word count.
Invented spelling is accepted.
Stories must have at least five original, clear and colorful illustrations.
Original art can include drawings, photographs, collages, and 3-D.
Stories must be created on one side of the paper and numbered on the back of each page.

you consider that for almost the first year of his life, your puppy is dealing with some big changes going on in his mouth.
One of the biggest challenges in raising a puppy is dealing with all of the chewing they do. It can be a bit less frustrating if
Dogs have two sets of teeth: 28 deciduous (baby) teeth, which will eventually be replaced by 42 permanent (adult) teeth. When a puppy is two or three weeks old, the deciduous teeth begin to erupt through the gums, starting with the incisors, followed by the canine teeth, and finally the premolars. All of the deciduous teeth should be in place by about eight weeks of age. These first teeth are small, and painfully sharp, as owners of young puppies know. This is part of the reason most mother dogs begin to wean their pups at five or six weeks of age.
Losing Their Baby Teeth
By eight to twelve weeks of age, the roots of the deciduous teeth are starting to resorb and the teeth begin to loosen and fall out. This makes room for the permanent teeth to erupt normally. As with the deciduous teeth, the permanent incisors are the first to come in, followed by the canine teeth, and the premolars. The last teeth to erupt in the adult set are the molars. Puppies do not have molars, which is why there are fewer deciduous teeth. In most breeds of dogs, all of the permanent teeth should be present by about eight months of age.
Are the Adult Teeth Coming in Normally?
Just as you should begin an at-home dental care program as soon as you get your new puppy, this is also the time we recommend you start observing his teeth to make sure they are coming in normally. Any baby teeth that don’t fall out to make way for the adult teeth are called retained deciduous teeth. Having two teeth crowded into a space meant for one can cause dental problems. Food can get caught between the teeth and cause periodontal disease. The pressure from the retained deciduous tooth can push the adult tooth into an abnormal position, where it may push against the lip or gum causing an ulcer, or prevent the upper and lower teeth from coming together properly, which may cause chewing problems. Retained deciduous teeth need to be removed surgically. Ideally, this should be done as soon as they are noticed, so that the adult tooth has the best chance of coming in normally. At the time the dog is neutered, typically around 4-6 months of age, any retained deciduous teeth should definitely be removed.

Education is the single most important issue facing urban America. Much talk centers on the "digital divide," but we must first deal with the educational divide. The lack of access to quality education for all has helped produce poverty with all its trappings, including crime and drug abuse. The link is undeniable; seven of 10 prison inmates are functionally illiterate, according to a recent National Adult Literacy Survey. Clearly, tough decisions have to be made. The present system of social promotions, based on quantity of age rather than the quality of knowledge, shortchanges our children. For years I have seen full-grown men and women with high-school diplomas who needed someone to help them to fill out simple applications. According to the National Assessment of Education Progress, nearly 70 percent of fourth-graders in poor inner-city schools cannot read at grade level. Stephen Sample of the University of Southern California observed that "the United States, the country with the best universities in the world, has among the worst elementary and secondary schools." This is an American tragedy. Earlier this year I spoke with a first-year teacher who was bubbling over with enthusiasm. I spoke with her again some months later; her excitement had been replaced by frustration. She had discovered that half of her fifth-grade class was reading at a second-grade level. She looked at me with helplessness in her eyes. Someone must find the courage to make the tough decisions to stop this madness. If we fail to do so, not only will our children continue to be victimized, but also there will be a great exodus of brilliant teachers from our school systems. Right away, we can take these steps: Reward good teachers. Hold parents accountable for their children's behavior. Hold teachers accountable for the academic performance of their students. Change the way we handle discipline, and institute a uniform code of conduct and consistently enforce it. Another promising young teacher told me of an embarrassing incident that took place between a sixth-grade student and his teacher. The student verbally assaulted the teacher with words so vulgar and caustic that the teacher's only response was tears. The next day the child was right back in school. This kind of behavior not only dishonors and disrespects the teacher; it also disrupts the classroom. And it must not be tolerated. Many people point to the lack of classroom space, too many students in a class, or lack of funding as the biggest problems in education. But history shows otherwise. Many older black Americans can remember when nearly all black schools were incubators for educational excellence-even though their books, facilities, and supplies were hand-me-downs, far inferior to those used by others. I'm talking about schools like Williston High School in Wilmington, N.C., once known as the "greatest school under the sun." I'm talking about schools like Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C., an educational gem from 1870 to 1955. During Dunbar's academic peak, when college attendance was the exception rather than the rule for all Americans, three-quarters of Dunbar's graduates went on to college. The difference between then and now is that the students were inspired; they had confidence that they could do anything, in spite of everything. School, home, and church wove a circle of familiarity around these children, and these institutions played a cooperative, organized role in influencing the behavior and achievements of the young. As I see it, this makes an interesting argument for charter schools and some sort of voucher program. Most of us would agree that these are not the final solution to urban school problems. But I believe these at least would give families some viable options. We know that when inner-city children graduate from high school, many of them are functionally illiterate. Is it not cruel to condemn their younger siblings to the same fate? These families want choices; study after study has shown that the majority of African-Americans are in favor of vouchers. Some "experts" predict that vouchers will be the destruction of the public school. I refuse to accept that notion. I have much more faith in our public-school system than that. Vouchers will only stimulate and bring out the best in them through much-needed competition. We must raise the standard. We must no longer be willing to settle for mediocrity in the education of our precious youth. The fault lies squarely at our feet because we are no longer demanding and expecting our children to excel, and they are not disappointing us. Americans must no longer sacrifice the future of the children by shoveling them into the blazing incinerators of poorly performing schools. Years ago I played professional football. Anyone who consistently failed to do his job was soon out of a job. Excuses didn't help. Everyone understood this; it wasn't kind, but neither is the marketplace. When our children reach the marketplace, the ones who merely were shuffled through poorly performing schools will be at a real disadvantage. Society will not treat them kindly when they fail to get the job done, and excuses won't help them, either. That's why I am hopeful about Rod Paige, our new secretary of education. He showed during his tenure with the Houston Independent School District that he's willing to think outside the box. For example, he contacted private schools to help with children who were struggling academically, and he developed a system for holding schools accountable for student performance. It was high praise indeed when former Houston ISD board member Don McAdams said Mr. Paige "started Houston ISD on a path of creating a performance culture." Excellence can only be achieved through the rewarding of good teachers, discipline, testing, and returning to the days of commitment, to accountability for all. We must insist on performance and settle on nothing less than excellence. May God help us.
-Herb Lusk is pastor of Philadelphia's Greater Exodus Baptist Church

The school is test-piloting a “Bring Your Own Device” program for students, in which kids can bring their cell phones or other wireless devices – e-readers, laptops – into the classroom to supplement their learning.
Since you’re reading these sentences in the order I wrote them, you’ve guessed what happened.
Students in the school’s college-prep macroeconomics class found a way to beat the system during an exam. According to reports, one student would snap a photo of the test with his phone, then excuse himself to the bathroom, where he would send the photo to other students who hadn’t yet taken the test so they could research the precise answers they needed to pass with flying colors.
Administrators refused to comment to the media, but the school’s newspaper (yay, high-school journalism!) scooped the world by getting an interview with the principal, who explained what happened. The paper also quoted an instructor as saying the exposed cheating incident made the Bring Your Own Device program “look like the stupidest idea ever.”
Which is what I thought. At first.
Academic cheating probably has been around since pupils could palm cuneiform tablets to pass that big alchemy midterm. Technology makes cheating easier, or more tempting, or more devious.
At Dartmouth College in 2000, a visiting computer science professor left the answer to a problem on the class’ website and showed the Web address on an overhead projector. But since it was impossible to determine exactly which students logged onto which computers to cheat, 78 students were cleared of any charges.
Another Ivy League cheating scandal boiled over earlier this year at Harvard. More than 100 students of an Introduction to Congress class – about half the class – were implicated in a scheme in which students plagiarized material from study guides for a take-home final exam. To be fair, considering that the class dealt with Congress, you’d think stealing would be required as part of the syllabus.
Cheating scandals even hit the U.S. Naval Academy in 1994. In 2007, they hit Indiana University’s dentistry school, Duke University’s business school and football players at Florida State University. At California’s Diablo Valley College a few years ago, a cheating ring was discovered in which students apparently traded cash and even sexual favors for better grades.
Cheating is being rubbed into our culture like a stain increasingly impossible to remove. Continually we hear about students cheating on tests. Shifty spouses cheat on one another. Shady businesses cheat shareholders. Crooked politicians cheat constituents. Steroid-hungry athletes cheat against clean sportsmanship. Video games even tout “cheat codes” to play a game at an unfair advantage that you’re actually expected to enjoy.
And kids – adults, too, really – are soaking all of that in. The message: The honest and often hard road to success is for suckers. Or maybe you feel that you’ve worked hard enough, and you somehow deserve a little edge to improve your performance.
Why do people cheat? To get ahead? To look good? To dodge the fear of failure? Or because the cheater shrugs it off because he thinks everybody else is cheating?
It’s all those reasons, and you probably can think of a few more. And think about this: Cheating early in life sows seeds for cheating later in life. A Josephson Institute of Ethics character study issued in 2009 found that high-schoolers who cheat on tests are three times as likely to become workers who lie to customers, taxpayers who cheat on their returns and insurance-holders who cheat on their claims.
Cheating has to be fought like you would any epidemic.
They lost a battle in Naperville Ill. But in Fayette County, Ga., school officials are shooting for success.
Fayette schools, in southern suburban Atlanta, also are piloting a program that allows students to use wireless devices. Officials call their program Bring Your Own Technology. According to the school system’s website, the program “uses that personal technology the student is familiar with, provides it a safe location on a student virtual network, and allows its use for educational purposes.”
When it’s put like that, it makes more sense. Engage kids through the portals through which they view the world. If a kid is most comfortable hunched over her phone, you might as well pump some knowledge through to the kid’s screen while she’s there.
It’s being done at schools across the country. And it’s coming sooner or later to schools in the CSRA. Count on it. That wireless genie is out of the bottle.
The key – and this is where Naperville dropped the ball – lies in relentless supervision.
Students get to keep their electronics, but teachers and administrators still have to retain rigid control. Kids should be allowed to network solely by the school’s rules, accessing only school-sanctioned material. Any and all cheating shenanigans have to be anticipated and stomped out.
As I was writing this, I was reminded that it’s exam time for a lot of schools in the CSRA. Here’s hoping all pupils hit the books instead of hitting the “easy” button by cheating.
Cheating erodes the trust others have in you. It tears down your confidence. It stains your soul.
That’s not just advice for the students. That goes for the rest of us.

BitNot[n] gives the bitwise NOT of the integer n.
Integer mathematical function (see Section A.3.10).
BitNot[n] turns ones into zeros and vice versa in the binary bit representation of n.
Integers are assumed to be represented in two's complement form, with an unlimited number of digits, so that BitNot[n] is simply equivalent to .
See The Mathematica Book: Section 3.2.4.
See also: BitAnd, BitOr, BitXor, Not.
THIS IS DOCUMENTATION FOR AN OBSOLETE PRODUCT.
SEE THE DOCUMENTATION CENTER
FOR THE LATEST INFORMATION.

A photograph by Kathy Keatley Garvey captures a honeybee's sting, with its abdominal tissue trailing behind.
UC Davis communications specialist Kathy Keatley Garvey in the Department of Entomology said she has taken at least 1 million photos of honeybees in her lifetime, but this snapshot won the first-place gold feature photo award in an Association for Communication Excellence competition...Source (wait for it)... The Sacramento... Bee. Relevant information and additional photos in the sequence at the photographer's post at Bug Squad.
The images showed the progression of the sting, but the most interesting part was that the bee's abdominal tissue lingered behind, she said. "As far as I know, nobody's been able to record anything like this," Garvey said. She said the only time she's seen it illustrated was in a textbook.
Via BoingBoing, where I found this interesting observation in a comment:
Their stingers developed for defending their hives by stinging the rigid bodies of other bees and insects, not for stinging the stretchy skin of mammals. One bee can sting another bee/insect several times.I didn't know that. You learn something every day.

Parsons, Talcott, 1902–79, American sociologist, b. Colorado Springs, Colo., educated at Amherst College (B.A., 1924), London School of Economics, and Univ. of Heidelberg (Ph.D., 1927). He was on the faculty at Harvard from 1927 until his retirement in 1974. He is known for his attempt to construct a single theoretical framework within which general and specific characteristics of societies could be systematically classified; it is known as structural-functional theory. Parsons was also interested in medical sociology and the professions in general. In recent years he has been criticized for understating the importance of social conflict. Among his writings are The Structure of Social Action (1937), The Social System (1951), Structure and Process in Modern Societies (1960), Social Structure and Personality (1964), Societies (1966), Sociological Theory and Modern Society (1967), and Politics and Social Structure (1969).
See studies by W. C. Mitchell (1967), H. Turk and R. L. Simpson, ed. (1971), and J. Alexander (1984).
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
More on Talcott Parsons from Fact Monster:
See more Encyclopedia articles on: Sociology: Biographies

EDU8111 Emerging Environments for Learning
|Semester 3, 2012 Online Toowoomba|
|Faculty or Section :||Faculty of Education|
|School or Department :||Education|
|Version produced :||21 May 2013|
Examiner: Janice Jones
Moderator: Roderick Fogarty
Learning environments are designed, developed and implemented using theories and technologies that are constantly evolving. Those working in the field require knowledge of contemporary learning environments together with the capacity to locate and evaluate information about new developments. Engagement in relevant professional communities is a powerful way of accessing and contributing to shared knowledge about emerging learning environments.
Theories, including constructivism and connectivism, associated with the design and adoption of learning environments will be reviewed with a focus on developing understanding of how theory can inform effective design and implementation of learning environments appropriate to a variety of contexts such as formal education, workplaces, and leisure. Students will be introduced to sources and communities from which they can obtain knowledge of current developments in learning environments and associated theories and technologies. They will collaborate to identify and evaluate relevant knowledge from a variety of sources and will be encouraged to participate as members of relevant professional communities. They will construct shared artefacts that contribute to the professional discourse of emerging learning environments and demonstrate appropriate design of learning environments for specific purposes. Where appropriate, students will work with emerging and experimental technologies.
The course objectives define the student learning outcomes for a course. The assessment item(s) that may be used to assess student achievement of an objective are shown in parenthesis. On successful completion of this course students will be able to:
- identify and evaluate information relevant to a range of emerging environments for learning (Assignment 1)
- critically examine the use of emerging tools in the context of technology development, educational trends, usage patterns and innovation adoption (Assignment 3)
- investigate future trends in learning technologies in various educational contexts (Assignment 2)
- apply a range of technologies to the design of learning environments (Assignment 3)
- work professionally and collaboratively on projects related to emerging learning environments. (Assignment 2)
- Demonstrate competence in and appropriate use of language and literacy, including spelling, grammar, punctuation and bibliographic referencing (Assignment 3)
|2.||Technology development trends||10.00|
|3.||Emerging technology usage patterns||10.00|
|4.||Emerging trends in education||10.00|
|5.||Innovations adoption and outcome trends||10.00|
|6.||Emerging technologies and tools||40.00|
|7.||Conclusion and future developments||10.00|
Text and materials required to be purchased or accessed
ALL textbooks and materials available to be purchased can be sourced from USQ's Online Bookshop (unless otherwise stated). (https://bookshop.usq.edu.au/bookweb/subject.cgi?year=2012&sem=03&subject1=EDU8111)
Please contact us for alternative purchase options from USQ Bookshop. (https://bookshop.usq.edu.au/contact/)
- There are no texts or materials required for this course.
Albion, P.R 2008, Virtual Worlds: Exploring Potential for Educational Interaction. In J. Luca & E.R. Weippl (Eds.), Proceedings of Ed-Media 2008: World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications (pp. 5100-5107), Association for the Advancement of Computing in Ed, Chesapeake, VA.
Brown, J. S 2006, 'New Learning Environments for the 21st Century:', Exploring the edge, vol. 38, no. 5, p. 18.
Chen, C. J 2006, 'Australian Journal of Educational Technology', The design, development and evaluation of a virtual reality based learning environment, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 39.
Hazel, P 2008, 'Toward a narrative pedagogy', for interactive learning environments, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 199.
Herrington, T,. & Herrington, J. (Eds.) 2005, Authentic learning environments in higher education, Information Science Pub, Hershey, PA.
Irlbeck, S., Kays, E., Jones, D., & Sims, R 2006, 'The Phoenix Rising:', Emergent models of instructional design, vol. 27, no. 2, p. 171.
Whether you are on, or off campus, the USQ Library is an excellent source of information http://www.usq.edu.au/library. The gateway to education resources is here ... http://www.usq.edu.au/library/help/facultyguides/education/default.htm.
Student workload requirements
|Description||Marks out of||Wtg (%)||Due Date||Notes|
|ASSIGNMENT 1||20||20||28 Nov 2012|
|ASSIGNMENT 2||30||30||02 Jan 2013|
|ASSIGNMENT 3||50||50||30 Jan 2013|
Important assessment information
There are no attendance requirements for this course. However, it is the student's responsibility to study all material provided to them or required to be accessed by them to maximise their chance of meeting the objectives of the course and to be informed of course-related activities and administration.
Requirements for students to complete each assessment item satisfactorily:
To complete each of the assessment items satisfactorily, students must obtain at least 50% of the marks available for each assessment item.
Penalties for late submission of required work:
If students submit assignments after the due date without (prior) approval of the examiner then a penalty of 5% of the total marks gained by the student for the assignment may apply for each working day late up to ten working days at which time a mark of zero may be recorded. No assignments will be accepted after model answers have been posted.
Requirements for student to be awarded a passing grade in the course:
To be assured of receiving a passing grade a student must achieve at least 50% of the total weighted marks available for the course.
Method used to combine assessment results to attain final grade:
The final grades for students will be assigned on the basis of the weighted aggregate of the marks obtained for each of the summative assessment items in the course.
There is no examination in this course.
Examination period when Deferred/Supplementary examinations will be held:
There will be no Deferred or Supplementary examinations in this course.
University Student Policies:
Students should read the USQ policies: Definitions, Assessment and Student Academic Misconduct to avoid actions which might contravene University policies and practices. These policies can be found at http://policy.usq.edu.au/portal/custom/search/category/usq_document_policy_type/Student.1.html.
APA style is the referencing system required in this course. Students should use APA style in their assignments to format details of the information sources they have cited in their work. The APA style to be used is defined by the USQ Library's referencing guide. http://www.usq.edu.au/library/help/referencing/default.htm
Students will require access to e-mail and Internet access to UConnect for this course.
Students enrolling in WEB courses MUST have ongoing convenient and reliable access to the Internet in order to access course materials and participate in activities that will affect assessment. The levels of equipment required may change from time to time, with the most recent specification listed at http://www.usq.edu.au/currentstudents/computingstandards/default.htm. You can check whether your computer system meets these requirements from USQAssist (http://usqassist.usq.edu.au/).

The Growth of Cryptography
02/08/2011 4:00 PM 10"250Ronald L. Rivest, Andrew and Erna Viterbi Professor Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS)Description: It's not every day that Euclid appears in public with "Alice and Bob," but in a lecture spanning a few thousand years, Ronald Rivest summons these and other notables in his history of cryptography. While citing milestones of code"making and breaking, Rivest also brings his audience up to date on the latest systems for securing information and communication networks, which owe much to his own research.
Rivest makes quick work of the period before mid" 20th century, but credits the ancient Greeks for prime number factorization -- essential to cryptography -- and elementary ciphers. In the 18th and 19th century, mathematicians delved into number theory and extended techniques of factoring. The twentieth century, with its two world wars and technological advances, established the significance of cryptography on and off the battlefield. Alan Turing's Enigma machine not only helped the allies win World War II, but catalyzed development of the first generation of computers. MIT professor Claude Shannon, who worked with Turing and other cryptanalysts, went on to father the field of information science, leading to the digital age.
In the 1970s came development of public data encryption methods. Academics prevailed against U.S. government efforts to conceal means for encrypting data. In 1977, Rivest's group at MIT, which included Adi Shamir and Len Adleman, came up with RSA, an elegant algorithm for public"key cryptography that "relies on the difficulty of factoring" primes and which is still widely used. The group was so confident of its encryption method that they offered $100 for breaking a cipher"text based on a 129"digit product of primes. Rivest thought it would take "40 quadrillion years" to solve the challenge. "It was a bad estimate," he admits.
In fact, a combination of new algorithms and brute computing power cracked the text in 1994 ("The Magic Words are Squeamish Ossifrage"). Technological and theoretical advances have made possible improved encryption methods, and ways of authenticating and securing data. Faster computers may someday "make factoring a million"digit number easy," says Rivest. Work is even progressing on a quantum computer (it can only factor the number 15 so far). But code"breaking is also increasingly sophisticated, Rivest warns, as the internet opens up vast new areas of data to cyber"attack.
Rivest sees cryptography blossoming into applications for anonymity, password"based keys, and crypto for smart cards. He has been looking into probabilistic micropayment systems, and techniques to enhance the security and transparency of voting. "Maybe large prime numbers have a role to play in our democracy down the road," he says.
About the Speaker(s): Ronald L. Rivest is a member of MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), a member of the lab's Theory of Computation Group and is a leader of its Cryptography and Information Security Group. He is also a founder of RSA Data Security, now known as RSA Security. Rivest is also a co"founder of Verisign and of Peppercoin.
Rivest, whose research interests include cryptography, computer and network security, voting systems, and algorithms, is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the National Academy of Sciences, and is a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery, the International Association for Cryptographic Research, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Among other honors, Rivest, with Adi Shamir and Len Adleman, has been awarded the 2000 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award and the Secure Computing Lifetime Achievement Award.
Rivest is an inventor of the RSA public"key cryptosystem. He has extensive experience in cryptographic design and cryptanalysis, and has published numerous papers in these areas. He has served as a Director of the International Association for Cryptologic Research, the organizing body for the Eurocrypt and Crypto conferences, and as a Director of the Financial Cryptography Association.
He received a B.A. in Mathematics from Yale University in 1969, and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Stanford University in 1974.
Host(s): Office of the President, Office of the President
MIT World -- special events and lectures

PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICE
JET PROPULSION LABORATORY
CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
PASADENA, CALIF. 91109. TELEPHONE (818) 354-5011
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
NASA's Magellan spacecraft mission to Venus, scheduled for launch on the space shuttle in April 1989, has completed critical test of the interface between the spacecraft and the radar that will map the cloud-covered Venusian surface.
As result of the successful tests, Magellan's prospects for meeting the scheduled launch aboard space shuttle Atlantis are excellent, according to project manager John Gerpheide of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
The radar, which consists of an integrated synthetic aperture radar and an altimeter, was shipped on schedule in mid-June by its developer, Hughes Aircraft Co., in El Segundo, Calif., for tests at Martin Marietta Corporation in Denver, Colo., where the spacecraft is being assembled.
The radar was delivered back to Hughes last month for final flight qualification tests to be conducted this fall. It will be sent to Martin Marietta early next year for final spacecraft integration and testing prior to shipment of the spacecraft to NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida in November 1988. There, the spacecraft will be integrated with an inertial upper-stage (IUS) and be placed in the payload bay of the Atlantis.
Venus is covered by dense atmosphere of sulfuric acid and carbon dioxide that hide its surface from view. The microwave radar, however, will penetrate the cloud cover to produce detailed, photograph-like images of the planet's surface.
Recent studies have indicated that Venus, where the average surface temperature is 470 degrees Celsius (900 degrees Fahrenheit), may have once had oceans of water. Topographical scars left by evaporated rivers and oceans, if they once existed on Venus, will be revealed by images returned by Magellan.

You can play a role in providing access to healthy, affordable food for youth.
Let's Read. Let's Move. encourages adults to get involved and make a commitment to help youth combat obesity and make healthy food choices. You can:
*By clicking this button, you will exit the Serve.gov site and be redirected to the
All for Good site where your search results will be displayed.
Did you know?
Nearly 19 million children depend on free and reduced-price
school meals for nine months out of the year; only 2.3 million
children participate in the Summer Food Service Program
1 in 5 children in the US are overweight
A 2009 study of 5th grade students showed positive association between overall diet quality (fruit and vegetable consumption) and academic performance. Healthy eating also improves a child’s immune system, boosts energy levels and reduces stress.
Get involved. To get started, check out the toolkits. Join thousands of people across the county in service to provide access to healthy affordable food and create a healthier generation of kids by nourishing young bodies.
The Red Cliff Band of Lake Superior Chippewa has a rich heritage in food production, but an increased reliance on processed foods has left them susceptible to America's obesity epidemic. One way to battle this problem is to increase the availability of locally grown, healthy food choices, and the Red Cliff Mino Bi Ma De Se Win (Return to the Good Life) Community Farm is tackling the problem head-on
A few weeks ago, a brand new AmeriCorps program, FoodCorps, brought together 50 newly-minted members for a week long training. While there, several of the members shared what inspired them to join a program designed to addressing our country's childhood obesity epidemic through school gardens and farm-to-school programs

What induced the Indian Ministry of External Affairs to issue a statement endorsing a plan that could result in loss of human life, and have negative economic and ecological repercussions for India?
George W Bush's plan to tackle global warming, announced on Valentine's Day, invoked anger and ridicule from governments and non-government organisations alike. It was seen, rightly enough, as sleight of hand, an attempt to fool the world. Bush rejected the Kyoto Protocol, under which the US would have to reduce aggregate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 7 per cent compared to 1990. But he offered instead to cut greenhouse gas intensity by 17.5 per cent by 2012 (see background information).
Given that the greenhouse gas intensity in the US has been falling faster than this rate anyway since the mid-1990s with no effort on part of the US government, Bush's plan promises to do precisely nothing to reduce aggregate US emissions. Instead, 2012 emissions in the US will actually be 30 per cent above 1990 level if this plan is implemented.
Even staunch US allies have smelt a fish. Japan, for example, has asked the US to set targets to actually reduce GHG emissions rather than seek intensity cuts. According to UK environment secretary Margaret Beckett, Britain has protested at "the highest level" to President George Bush about his environmental policy, [which] is "very disappointing" and will not work.
Then why did the Indian Ministry for External Affairs (MEA) issue a statement on February 18, 2002 welcoming Bush's policy statement? Particularly since India is among the nations that are likely to be worst hit by climate change unless countries like the US reign in their
GHG emissions? India stands to incur huge economic losses if the monsoon is disrupted due to climactic changes, or if climate change leads to an increased frequency of extreme events such as typhoons, floods and droughts, water scarcity, increased incidence of vector borne disease, and heat stress.
Moreover, the Indian position at the climate change negotiations has been to staunchly argue that industrialised countries should be the first to cut GHG emissions, given their higher contribution to the problem - while Bush, in his policy statement, states that countries like India and China "cannot be absolved of their responsibility". The MEA statement weakly defends this position - but only after welcoming Bush's new policy.
While the motives of the MEA are not immediately clear, there seems to be only one reason to explain this wanton act of extreme foolishness -- that the MEA came under pressure from the isolated US government to show support for a plan that everybody else was junking, and was pathetic enough to oblige (perhaps to earn brownie points over Pakistan, given the present political situation between the three countries?). The US government is not known for its subtlety while buying support, so offers to fund vague climate change related projects in India could possibly have helped oil the wheels.
A direct phone call to the MEA did not solve the mystery of why the statement was issued, and to whom, since none of the journalists we contacted had any prior knowledge of it.
For a copy of the MEA statement, Bush's policy statement, or any further information, contact Anju Sharma or Neelam Singh, at 6081110, 6083394, 6086401
Highlights of the US president George W Bush's latest plan 'Clear Skies and Global Climate Change Initiatives' announced at National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on February 14, 2002:
Recommends cuts in power plant emissions of nitrogen oxides (67 per cent), sulphur dioxide (73 per cent) and mercury (69 per cent). These cuts will be completed over two phases, with one set of emission limits for 2010 and the other for 2018. Market-based cap and trade approach will be used to achieve these cuts. Each power plant facility will get a tradable permit to emit.
The proposal falls short of imposing similar cuts on carbon dioxide emissions from power plants. Carbon dioxide is one of the main greenhouse gases (GHG) whose increasing concentrations in the atmosphere contribute to global warming and climate change.
GHG intensity to decline by 17.5 per cent by 2012. GHG intensity is a measure of GHG emissions per unit of economic output, usually expressed in terms of gross domestic product (GDP). In 1990-2000, the GHG intensity in the US fell by about 17 per cent, but the total emissions increased by 14.7 per cent. The cut in intensity proposed by Bush is almost the same as the reduction achieved in the last decade. Over the next ten years, GDP is projected to increase at approximately the same rate as in the past decade. As a result, the total emissions will increase by about 14 per cent, even as GHG intensity declines by 17.5 per cent. Bush's plan aims for nothing else but maintaining the status quo. Under the Kyoto Protocol rejected by the US in 2001, it had to bring down its emissions to 7 per cent below 1990 emission levels. - "If, however, by 2012, our progress is not sufficient and sound science justifies further action, the US will respond with additional measures that may include broad-based market programmes as well as additional incentives and voluntary measures designed to accelerate technology development and deployment," Bush while announcing the plan. The stress is on voluntary measures and there is no mention of binding, definite targets to reduce GHG emissions. - "….developing nations such as China and India already account for a majority of the world's greenhouse gas emissions, and it would be irresponsible to absolve them from shouldering some of the shared obligations."
Industrialised countries owe their present economic prosperity to years of unrestrained carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere - a global common. They are primarily responsible for the problem of global warming whose maximum adverse effects will be borne by developing countries. Since it has not been possible to delink carbon dioxide emissions from economic growth, the South needs the space to increase their emissions to further their development goals. Imposing limits on their emissions at this stage will amount to putting a freeze on the existing inequality between the North and the South.

Jan. 1, 2011 A large collaborative study has added to the growing list of genetic variants that determine how tall a person will be. The research, published on December 30 in the American Journal of Human Genetics, identifies uncommon and previously unknown variants associated with height and might provide insight into the genetic architecture of other complex traits.
Although environmental variables can impact attained adult height, it is clear that height is primarily determined by specific alleles that an individual inherits. Height is thought to be influenced by variants in a large number of genes, and each variant is thought to have only a small impact on height. However, the genetics of height are still not completely understood. "All of the variants needed to explain height have not yet been identified, and it is likely that the additional genetic variants are uncommon in the population or of very small effect, requiring extremely large samples to be confidently identified," explains Dr. Hakon Hakonarson from The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.
To search for genetic variants associated with adult height, researchers performed a complex genetic analysis of more than 100,000 individuals. "We set out to replicate previous genetic associations with height and to find relevant genomic locations not previously thought to underpin this complex trait" explains Dr. Brendan Keating, also from The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. The authors report that they identified 64 height-associated variants, two of which would not have been observed without such a large sample size and the inclusion of direct genotyping of uncommon single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A SNP is a variation in just one nucleotide of a genetic sequence; think of it as a spelling change affecting just one letter in an uncommonly long word.
These results suggest that genotyping arrays with SNPs that are relatively rare and occur in less than 5% of the population have the ability to capture new signals and disease variants that the common SNP arrays missed (i.e., 30 new signals in this study), as long as sample sizes are large enough. These low-frequency variants also confer greater effect sizes and, when associated with a disease, could be a lot closer to causative than more common variants. "The increased power to identify variants of small effect afforded by large sample size and dense genetic coverage including low-frequency SNPs within loci of interest has resulted in the identification of association between previously unreported genetic variants and height," concludes Dr. Keating.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
- Matthew B. Lanktree et al. Meta-analysis of Dense Genecentric Association Studies Reveals Common and Uncommon Variants Associated with Height. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 30 December 2010 DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.007
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Water: What You Can Do
What You Can Do
Provides information on how you can get involved including ways to protect human health and the environment by raising awareness about potential threats to your drinking water, local rivers, lakes, streams, wetlands, the fish and shellfish you eat, and aquatic ecosystems.
Adopt Your Watershed – This program challenges you to serve your community by taking part in activities to protect and restore your local watershed.
After the Storm – Weather emergencies such as flooding can introduce pollutants to your water supply. Learn how to protect your source of water and find out what to do in the event that your drinking water is compromised.
Bring Back the Water Fountain - Learn about how EPA is partnering with Mayors across the country through the U.S. Conference of Mayors to reinvigorate our nation's supply of public drinking fountains.
Clean Water Act 40th Anniversary - 2012 marked the 40th anniversary of the Clean Water Act, the nation's law for protecting our most irreplaceable resource
Emergency Preparedness – identify some of the issues you may face preparing for, during and after an event that can directly threaten your health and the health of your family.
Energy/Water - To help move toward a more sustainable energy and water future, EPA has drafted Principles for an Energy Water Future.
Good Samaritan – An Agency-wide initiative to accelerate restoration of watersheds and fisheries threatened by abandoned hard rock mine runoff. The Good Samaritan initiative encourages voluntary cleanups by parties that are not responsible for the property in question.
Importance of Water to the United States Economy - EPA is conducting a study of the importance of water in the U.S. economy. Learn more about this effort.
Nonpoint Source Toolbox - Contains a variety of resources for the development of an effective outreach campaign to educate the public on nonpoint source pollution or storm water runoff.
Pollution Prevention – Water pollution and control measures are critical to improving water quality and lessening the need for costly wastewater and drinking water treatment. Find information on a variety of water pollution prevention and control measures.
Protect Your Health – Offers information on how to protect yourself from water-related health risks such as microbes in tap water and in water bodies used for swimming, and contaminants in fish and shellfish.
Protecting Drinking Water - People who travel abroad know the familiar problem with unsafe drinking water. At home, we scarcely give it a thought. Usually, we are right. But the sources of our drinking water are constantly under siege from naturally occurring events and human activities that can pollute our sources of drinking water.
Volunteer Monitoring - EPA encourages all citizens to learn about their water resources and supports volunteer monitoring because of its many benefits.
Water Efficiency - Efficient use of water helps reduce the demands on our water supplies, as well as on both drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, as using less water means moving and treating less water.

One of the key conclusions in my book is that scientist/filmmaker collaborations work best when the scientists and entertainment professionals clearly respect each other’s expertise. This means that the scientists, in particular, need to keep in mind that they know very little about making movies. This same advice applies to scientifically literate audiences. We need to remember that just as scientists are scientific experts, filmmakers are entertainment experts who make decisions about science based on their specialist knowledge of the way film operates and what makes a film enjoyable.
What would your favorite science-fiction movie be without the costumes? Most likely it would not be your favorite movie.
Fashion and costume choices set the stage for some of cinema’s most memorable moments. But what are movie sets made out of? Where was the cotton used to make the leading lady’s pants harvested? These questions can be explained by delving into the science of biodiversity.
Chase Mendenhall is a doctoral candidate in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at Stanford University. He explores the trade-offs between the conservation of biodiversity and farming by closely monitoring bird and bat populations that inhabit farmland in Costa Rica.
He is also one of two speakers who will be attending the Science Café at 6:00 p.m. on Wednesday, October 17, 2012, at the Koshland Science Museum in Washington, DC.

Fucus vesiculosus is a brown seaweed that grows on the northern coasts of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and the North and Baltic seas. Its name is sometimes used for Ascophyllum nodosum, which is another brown seaweed that grows alongside Fucus vesiculosus. These species are often included in kelp preparations along with other types of seaweed.
The Vietnamese consume seaweed as food in various forms: raw as salad and vegetable, pickle with sauce or with vinegar, relish or sweetened jellies and also cooked for vegetable soup. As herbal medicine, seaweed is has been used for traditional cosmetics, treatments for cough, asthma, hemorrhoid, boils, goiters, stomach ailments, urinary diseases, reducing the incidence of tumors, ulcers and headaches. Although Vietnam has an abundance of algae floral with total number of species is estimated to be nearly 1,000 species of which there are 638 species of marine algae identified.
Black-tang, bladder, bladder fucus, bladderwrack, Blasen-tang, brown algae, common seawrack, cut weed, Dyers fucus, edible seaweed, fucoidan, fucoxantin, Fucus, green algae, Hai-ts'ao, kelp, kelpware, knotted wrack, Meereiche, Quercus marina, popping wrack, red algae, red fucus, rockrack, rockweed, schweintang, sea kelp, sea oak, seetang, seaware, seaweed, sea wrack, swine tang, tang, Varech vesiculeux, vraic, wrack.
These uses have been tested in humans or animals. Safety and effectiveness have not always been proven. Some of these conditions are potentially serious, and should be evaluated by a qualified healthcare provider.
Laboratory study suggests antifungal and antibacterial activity of bladderwrack. However, there are no reliable human studies to support use as an antibacterial or antifungal agent.
Laboratory study has found anticoagulant properties in fucans or fucoidans, which are components of brown algae such as bladderwrack. However, there are no high quality human studies available to support this use.
Laboratory study suggests antioxidant activity in fucoidans, which are components in some brown algae. However, there are no high quality human studies available to support use as an antioxidant.
Several brown algae, including bladderwrack (
Based on animal research, extracts of bladderwrack may lower blood sugar levels. However, there are no reliable human studies available to support a recommendation for use in diabetes.
Goiter (thyroid disease)
Bladderwrack contains variable levels of iodine. As a result, it has been used to treat thyroid disorders such as goiter. While the evidence does suggest thyroid activity, there is not enough research to support this use of bladderwrack.
Bladderwrack and other seaweed products are often marketed for weight-loss. However, safety and effectiveness have not been studied in humans.

Climate change campaigners are complaining bitterly that global warming and greenhouse gas reduction were entirely missing from the presidential and vice-presidential debates. However, it was discussed — just under a different title.
In every debate, “clean energy,” “green energy,” and solar and wind power came up at least once, in some cases repeatedly. This is indirect climate policy: the drive to enable these technologies — which happen to be supported by all four candidates — is primarily the result of the belief that it is important to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions to prevent a global climate crisis.
Without climate concerns, clean and green energy would refer only to low pollution energy sources, not to low CO2 sources (which is an essential reactant in plant photosynthesis and in no way a pollutant). Developed countries have been very successful in reducing real air pollutants, such as sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, particulates, lead, and others. With the exception of ground level ozone, which has been difficult to reduce in many metropolitan areas, even our largest cities have much cleaner skies (and waterways) than they had decades ago.
So, without the climate scare, there would be little reason for wind and solar power to have such prominence now. They would only be considered as niche applications in special circumstances.
Someday, perhaps these power sources will be reliable and efficient enough to complete with conventional fossil fuel, hydropower, and nuclear sources without heavy government subsidies. Yet we are a long way from there.
The approach of boosting low “carbon” energy sources as an alternative path to arrive at the climate movement’s goal — “de-carbonization” of humankind’s energy sources — has been planned for some time. For example, the Nathan Cummings Foundation (NCF), a $10 million-plus donor to climate change campaigns between 2005 and 2010, explained the need for a new, less direct approach in their Annual Report 2009 (see p. 16, “Ecological Innovation Program”). They expressed concern that grantees were overly emphasizing direct CO2 emission reduction and other costly measures to address climate change. NCF discussed how this left organizations they support open to damaging attacks from their opponents when promoting government and industry action on climate change. Presumably, NCF and their allies could see how the public were coming to realize that the costs of CO2 emission reduction were anything but trivial, and the raison d’être for the activities — the science — was also being increasingly questioned. So a new approach was needed.
NCF explained in their annual report that the foundation’s desired focus is on the supposed benefits of low CO2 energy sources, instead of direct CO2 restrictions on conventional power plants. The idea was to change the paradigm of the discourse in America: instead of making conventional energy sources more costly, the objective was to present low CO2 emitting energy sources as inexpensive “in order to engage many more people.”
- NCF grantees are working to make clean energy innovation a core component of the new mainstream approach to climate policy.
- Experts estimate that it will take annual investments on the order of $500 billion to $1.5 trillion globally to effect a transition to a clean energy economy. Most of that money will need to come from private investors and NCF grantees are engaged in a complimentary set of efforts to ensure that those investments will be made.
- They [NCF grantees] are working to develop a more powerful advocacy community for clean energy investments.
NCF and their allies have certainly succeeded. Media now regularly report glowingly on so-called clean energy projects, activities that have as their main objective reducing carbon dioxide emissions — or “global warming pollution,” as many journalists erroneously call it. President Barack Obama used this approach in his 2011 State of the Union address, and then in his 2012 address as well.
As a consequence, public opinion surveys now often show strong public support for “clean” energy sources such as wind turbines and solar power. By January 2011, Rasmussen, after polling in the U.S., released a document titled “Support for Renewable Energy Resources Reaches Highest Level Yet.” In July 2011, Rasmussen even found that “51% Say Government Should Force Oil Companies To Use Profits To Develop Alternative Energy.”
But alternative energy is extremely expensive and relies on huge taxpayer subsidies. To use such intermittent and diffuse power sources requires that the consumer pay between three and ten times the price of power from conventional sources.
Energy independence is not a good reason for promoting new renewable energy technologies, either. Energy independence is more easily — and much more cheaply — attained by exploiting abundant national fossil fuel reserves, and then by spending some of the wealth created on research into potential new energy technologies.
While large direct climate change programs continue across the world as well, the child of the climate scare — the drive for low carbon dioxide emitting energy sources — has grown up and now threatens our energy security. With twenty-nine American states and the District of Columbia now enforcing renewable energy mandates, hundreds of billions of dollars are being squandered on wind turbines, solar power, and most biofuels.
At the same time, conventional power supplies are often neglected, thereby threatening our energy security, triggering higher energy prices, and placing millions of jobs and the economic futures of many countries at risk. Tragically, most energy companies have totally succumbed and now are feeding the fire that threatens to burn down their industries.
We can no longer allow our politicians to promote so-called green energy solutions without holding them to account for what they actually cost and for their ineffectiveness at providing the reliable base load power needed by a modern industrial society. Unless this climate policy by stealth is recognized for what it is and halted quickly, millions of people will be left hungry and freezing in the dark.

Feb. 6, 2005 The Hubble Space Telescope's latest image of the star V838 Monocerotis (V838 Mon) reveals dramatic changes in the illumination of surrounding dusty cloud structures. The effect, called a light echo, has been unveiling never-before-seen dust patterns ever since the star suddenly brightened for several weeks in early 2002.
The illumination of interstellar dust comes from the red supergiant star at the middle of the image, which gave off a pulse of light three years ago, somewhat similar to setting off a flashbulb in a darkened room. The dust surrounding V838 Mon may have been ejected from the star during a previous explosion, similar to the 2002 event.
The echoing of light through space is similar to the echoing of sound through air. As light from the stellar explosion continues to propagate outwards, different parts of the surrounding dust are illuminated, just as a sound echo bounces off of objects near the source, and later, objects further from the source. Eventually, when light from the back side of the nebula begins to arrive, the light echo will give the illusion of contracting, and finally it will disappear.
V838 Mon is located about 20 000 light-years away from Earth in the direction of the constellation Monoceros, placing the star at the outer edge of our Milky Way galaxy. The Hubble telescope has imaged V838 Mon and its light echo several times since the star's outburst. Each time Hubble observes the event, different thin sections of the dust are seen as the pulse of illumination continues to expand away from the star at the speed of light, producing a constantly changing appearance. During the outburst event whose light reached Earth in 2002, the normally faint star suddenly brightened, becoming 600 000 times more luminous than our Sun.
The new image of V838 Mon, taken with Hubble's Advanced Camera for Surveys, was prepared from images obtained through filters that isolate blue, green, and infrared light. These images have been combined to produce a full-colour picture that approximates the true colours of the light echo and the very red star near the centre.
The Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international cooperation between ESA and NASA.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
Bön has typically been described as the shamanistic religion in Tibet before the arrival of Buddhism in the 7th century C.E. With the recent exile of many Bönpo lamas to India, however, a more complex description of Bön is emerging and is now being considered by Western scholars. ("-po" is a part of a word in Tibetan that forms an adjective or shows the relativity, can also indicate a person, thus, "Bönpo" means a person, or people, who follow(s) the path of Bön. The transcription of the Tibetan spelling is actually just "Bon", but the diaresis is sometimes added above the "o" to prompt the reader to a more nearly Tibetan pronunciation of the vowel.)
The Meaning of BönEdit
A pure mind (a mind which recognizes Existence and understands it fully in an objective and factual way) behaving accordingly, being used in utmost justice or balance, looking beyond, meditating on it, etc. comes to the point when the blindness of the mind and its attitudes, proven by verbal guidance, intellectual minds and perfect examples, clears out ignorance from the very root and can save anybody from the three stages of sadness and will come to an eternal well defined understanding. This wisdom or religion is called Bön.
Historical phases of BönEdit
According to the Bönpo themselves, the Bön religion has actually gone through three distinct phases: Animistic Bön, Yungdrung or Eternal Bön, and New Bön.
The first phase of Bön was indeed rooted in animistic and shamanistic practices, and corresponds to the characterization of Bön as previously described in the West. Initiation and rituals strongly resembled those found also in native Siberian shamanism. Individuals who could become shamans were traditionally members of a special clan from which all shamans came. Shamans could be male or female, but few modern shamans are women. One who would become a shaman was visited, and possessed by, either an ancestral shaman or one or more gods, deamons or spirits of other sorts (in contrast to non-Eastern shamans, who went seeking visions) and driven into incoherent babbling and subsequently running wildly into the forest. After the individual in question returns, they are taught how to control the spirits that visit them, as well as recitation of mantras. Article on Anamistic Bön
The second phase is the controversial phase, which rests on the claims of the Bönpo texts and traditions (which are extensive and only now being analyzed in the West). These texts assert that Yungdrung Bön can be traced back to a Buddha-like founder named Tönpa Shenrab Miwoche. He discovered the methods of attaining enlightenment and is considered to be a figure analogous to Gautama Buddha. He was said to have lived 18,000 years ago, in the land of Olmo Lungring, or Shambhala, which was a part of the so-called land of Tazig to the west of present day Tibet (which some scholars identify with the Persian Tajik). According to Buddhist legends, before Shakyamuni Buddha came there were many other Buddhas in the past. Tönpa Shenrab transmitted the faith (similar in many regards to Buddhism) to the people of the Shangshung culture of western Tibet who had previously been practicing animistic Bön, thus establishing Yungdrung ("eternal") Bön.
The most tantalizing claim (which, on balance, is not endorsed by most scholars) is that Buddhism may have arrived in Tibet by some other path than directly from northwest India. A transmission through Persia prior to the 7th century is not impossible. Alexander the Great had connected Greece with India almost a millennium earlier, resulting in a flourishing Greco-Buddhist art style in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The 6th century Khosrau I of Persia is known to have ordered the translation of the Buddhist jataka tales into the Persian language. The Silk Road, the path by which Buddhism traveled to China in 67 C.E., lies entirely to the west of Tibet and passed through the Persian city of Hamadan. Recently, Buddhist structures have been discovered in far western Tibet that have been dated to the third century C.E. Bönpo stupas have also been discovered as far west as Afghanistan. Nonetheless, no scholars have yet identified a major center of Buddhist learning in Persia which corresponds to the Bönpos' land of Tazig. Alternative proposed sites have included the ancient cities of Merv, Khotan, or Balkh, all of which had thriving Buddhist communities active in the correct timeframe and are located to the west of Tibet.
Leaving aside the speculation on Tazig, what can we say about the other Bön claims? The existence of the Shangshung culture is supported by many lines of evidence, including the existence of a remnant of living Shangshung speakers still found in Himachal Pradesh. The claim that Lord Shenrab was born 180 centuries ago is generally not taken literally, but understood as an allusion to a master born in the very distant past. One interesting question relating to the history of Bön is: when did Bön really enter the Yungdrung phase, that is, when did elements strongly resembling Buddhism become important? These elements became apparent with the codification of the Yungdrung Bön canon by the first abbot of Menri, Nyame Sherab Gyaltsen, in the 14th century, but this trend probably began earlier. At the same time, the Nyingma, Kagyu, and Sakya orders of Buddhism were also reorganizing themselves in order to be able to compete effectively with the dominant, Gelug order.
Even if we do not accept the Bön claim that Bön's Buddhist elements are older than the (Indian, historical) Buddha, we may consider some other milestones in Tibetan history which may mark points at which Buddhist ideas became integrated into Bön.
- In the first half of the 7th century, the Tibetan King Songtsen Gampo assassinates King Ligmicha of the Shangshung and annexes the Shangshung kingdom. The same Songtsen Gampo is also the first Tibetan king to marry a Buddhist (or, in his case, two): in 632, Nepalese princess Bhrikuti, and in 641, Princess Wencheng, daughter of Emperor Tang Taizong of Tang Dynasty China (where Buddhism is approaching its zenith). Both Tibetan and Bön history agree that King Songtsen Gampo decides to follow Bön, despite his marriages. The nature of the Bön practiced by him and his court is not very clear.
- Approximately 130 years later, King Trisong Detsen (742-797) holds a debate contest between Bön priests and Buddhists, and decides to convert to Buddhism; in 779, he invites the great Indian saint Padmasambhava to bring Tantric Buddhism to Tibet. According to Tibetan Buddhist tradition, the arrival of Padmasambhava represents the First Transmission of the faith. Tantric Buddhism becomes important in Tibet, at this point.
- As Tantric Buddhism becomes the state religion of Tibet, Bön faces persecution, forcing Bönpo masters such as Drenpa Namkha underground. It is, however, possible that several decades later, with the collapse of the Tibetan Empire into civil war in 842, Bön may have experienced a partial revival in some districts, especially in western Tibet.
- In the 11th century, approximately coincident with the Second Transmission of Tantric Buddhism into Tibet associated with Indian saints such as Atisha and Naropa, we start to find more Bönpo texts, discovered as terma.
The "New Bön" phase emerges in the 14th century, when some Bön teachers discovered termas related to Padmasambhava. New Bön is primarily practiced in the eastern regions of Amdo and Kham. Although the practices of New Bön vary to some extent from Yungdrung Bön, the practitioners of New Bön still honor the Abbot of Menri Monastery as the leader of their tradition.
According to a recent Chinese census, presently about 10 percent of Tibetans are estimated to follow Bön. At the time of the communist takeover in Tibet, there were approximately 300 Bön monasteries in Tibet and western China. According to a recent survey, there are 264 active Bön monasteries, convents, and hermitages.
The present spiritual head of the Bön is Lungtok Tenpa'i Nyima (b. 1929), the thirty-third Abbot of Menri Monastery (destroyed in the Cultural Revolution, but now being rebuilt), who now presides over Pal Shen-ten Menri Ling in Dolanji in Himachal Pradesh, India, for the abbacy of which monastery he was selected in 1969.
A number of Bön establishments also exist in Nepal; the most accessible is probably Triten Norbutse Bönpo Monastery, on the Western outskirts of Kathmandu. In Kathmandu, go to the bus stop on the Ring Road nearest Swayambhu (downhill just behind the great stupa.) Follow the Ring Road about 500 meters northeast in the direction of Balaju. Turn left at the small village called Baraing, and follow the dirt road through the rice fields to the red colored monastery, situated on the side of the mountain, a little lower than the Swayambhu Stupa. (It is not the monastery on the top of the mountain.) The Monastery is clearly visible from the Ring Road. Visitors are welcome.
Bön spiritual practicesEdit
Bön, while now very similar to schools of Tibetan Buddhism, may be distinguished by certain characteristics:
- The origin of the Bönpo lineage is traced to Buddha Tönpa Shenrab (sTon pa gShen rab), rather than to Buddha Shakyamuni.
- Bönpo circumambulate chortens or other venerated structures counter-clockwise (i.e., with the left shoulder toward the object), rather than clockwise (as Buddhists do).
- Bönpos use the yungdrung (g.yung drung, swastika) instead of the dorje (rdo rje, vajra) as a symbol
- Instead of a bell, Bönpos use the shang, a cymbal-like instrument with a "clapper" usually made of animal horn, in their rituals.
- A nine-way path is described in Bön, which is distinct from the nine-yana (-vehicle) system of the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism. Bönpo consider Bön to be a superset of Buddhist paths. (The Bönpo divide their teachings in a mostly familiar way: Causal Vehicle, Sutra, Tantra and Dzogchen).
- The Bönpo textual canon includes rites to pacify spirits, influence the weather, heal people through spiritual means, and other "shamanic" practices. While many of these practices are also common in some form in Tibetan Buddhism (and mark a distinction between Tibetan and other forms of Buddhism), they are actually included within the recognized Bön canon (under the causal vehicle), rather than in Buddhist texts.
- Bönpo have some sacred texts, of neither Sanskrit nor Tibetan origin, which include some sections written in the ancient Shangshung language.
- The Bönpo mythic universe includes the Mountain of Nine Swastikas and the Olmo Lungring paradise.
The Bönpo school is said to resemble most closely the Nyingma school, the oldest school of Tibetan Buddhism, which traces its lineage to the First Transmission of Buddhism into Tibet.
Reality and chakras in BönEdit
Chakras, as pranic centers of the body, according the Tibetan Bön tradition, influence the quality of experience, because movement of prana can not be separated from experience. Each of six major chakras are linked to experiential qualities of one of the six realms of existence.
A modern teacher, Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche uses a computer analogy: main chakras are like hard drives. Each hard drive has many files. One of the files is always open in each of the chakras, no matter how "closed" that particular chakra may be. What is displayed by the file shapes experience.
The tsa lung practices open channels so prana could move without obstruction. Yogi opens chakras and evokes positive qualities associated with a particular chakra. In the hard drive analogy, the screen is cleared and a file is called up that contains positive, supportive qualities. A seed syllable (Sanskr. bija) is used both as a password that evokes the positive quality and the armor that sustains the quality.
Tantric practice eventually transforms all experience into bliss. The practice liberates from negative conditioning and leads to control over perception and cognition.
- See also: Reality in Buddhism
- ↑ Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche, Healing with Form, Energy, and Light. Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 2002. ISBN 1559391766, p. 84
- ↑ Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche, Healing with Form, Energy, and Light. Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 2002. ISBN 1559391766, p. 85
- Norbu, Namkhai. 1995. Drung, Deu and Bön: Narrations, Symbolic languages and the Bön tradition in ancient Tibet. Translated from Tibetan into Italian edited and annotated by Adriano Clemente. Translated fom Italian into English by Andrew Lukianowicz. Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, Dharamsala, H.P., India. ISBN 81-85102-93-7.
- Ligmincha Institute
- Bon Foundation
- Tibetan Yungdrung Bön Arts - Collection of rare artefacts of the Bön religion
- Garuda Switzerland
- interview with Lopon Tenzin Namdak Rinpoche, the most senior teacher of the Bönpo tradition
- Picture of Bön inscription
- John Reynolds' web site, including his Bonpo translation projectda:Bön-religionen
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|

Gears are mechanical parts with cut teeth designed to fit with teeth on another part so as to transmit or receive force and motion. Gears are also sometimes called toothed wheels or cogged wheels or cogs. The cut teeth are also sometimes called cogs.
Gear materials [change]
Numerous nonferrous alloys, cast irons, powder-metallurgy and even plastics are used in the manufacture of gears. However steels are most commonly used because of their high strength to weight ratio and low cost.

DefinitionHyperventilation is rapid or deep breathing that can occur with anxiety or panic. It is also called overbreathing, and may leave you feeling breathless.See also: Rapid shallow breathing
Alternative NamesRapid deep breathing; Breathing - rapid and deep; Overbreathing; Fast deep breathing; Respiratory rate - rapid and deep
ConsiderationsWhen you breathe, you inhale oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide. Excessive breathing leads to low levels of carbon dioxide in your blood. This causes many of the symptoms you may feel if you hyperventilate.Feeling very anxious or having a panic attack are the usual reasons that you may hyperventilate. However, rapid breathing may be a symptom of a disease, such as:BleedingHeart or lung disorderInfectionYour doctor will determine the cause of your hyperventilation. Rapid breathing may be a medical emergency -- unless you have experienced this before and have been reassured by your doctor that your hyperventilation can be self treated.Often, panic and hyperventilation become a vicious cycle. Panic leads to rapid breathing, and breathing rapidly can make you feel panicked.If you frequently overbreathe, you may have hyperventilation syndrome that is triggered by emotions of stress, anxiety, depression, or anger. Occasional hyperventilation from panic is generally related to a specific fear or phobia, such as a fear of heights, dying, or closed-in spaces (claustrophobia).If you have hyperventilation syndrome, you might not be aware you are breathing fast. However, you will be aware of having many of the other symptoms, including:BelchingBloatingChest painConfusionDizzinessDry mouthLightheadednessMuscle spasms in hands and feetNumbness and tingling in the arms or around the mouthPalpitationsShortness of breathSleep disturbancesWeakness
Common CausesAnxiety and nervousnessBleedingCardiac disease, such as congestive heart failure or heart attackDrugs (such as an aspirin overdose)Infection such as pneumonia or sepsisKetoacidosis and similar medical conditions Lung disease such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or pulmonary embolismPanic attackPregnancySevere painSituations where there is a psychological advantage in having a sudden, dramatic illness (for example, somatization disorder)Stimulant useStress
Home CareYour doctor will look for other medical illnesses before diagnosing hyperventilation syndrome.If your doctor has explained that you hyperventilate from anxiety, stress, or panic, there are steps you can take at home. You, your friends, and family can learn techniques to stop you from hyperventilating when it happens and to prevent future attacks.If you start hyperventilating, the goal is to raise the carbon dioxide level in your blood, which will put an end to most of your symptoms. There are several ways to do this:Get reassurance from a friend or family member to help relax your breathing. Words like "you are doing fine," "you are not having a heart attack," and "you are not going to die" are very helpful. It is extremely important that the person helping you remain calm and deliver these messages with a soft, relaxed tone.To increase your carbon dioxide, you need to take in less oxygen. To accomplish this, you can breathe through pursed lips (as if you are blowing out a candle) or you can cover your mouth and one nostril, and breathe through the other nostril.Over the long term, there are several important steps to help you stop overbreathing:If you have been diagnosed with anxiety or panic, see a psychologist or psychiatrist to help you understand and treat your condition.Learn breathing exercises that help you relax and breathe from your diaphragm and abdomen, rather than your chest wall.Practice relaxation techniques regularly, such as progressive muscle relaxation or meditation.Exercise regularly.If these methods alone are not preventing your overbreathing, your doctor may recommend a beta blocker medication.
Call your health care provider ifCall your health care provider if:You are experiencing rapid breathing for the first time. (This is a medical emergency and you should be taken to the emergency room right away.)You are in pain, have a fever, or notice any bleeding.Your hyperventilation continues or gets worse, even with home treatment.You also have other symptoms.
What to expect at your health care provider's officeYour doctor will perform a careful physical examination.To get your medical history, your doctor will ask questions about your symptoms, such as:Do you feel short of breath?What other symptoms do you have when you are breathing rapidly? Do these symptoms start at any other time (for example, when you are walking or exercising)?Do you have any medical conditions, such as high blood pressure, diabetes, or high cholesterol?What medications do you take?What is happening in your life in general? Has it been a particularly stressful time?Do you feel anxious or stressed, especially before you start breathing rapidly?Are you in pain? What does the pain feel like? How intense is the pain? Where is it located?What other symptoms do you have (for example, have you had any bleeding? Are you dizzy?)The doctor will assess how rapidly you are breathing at the time of the visit. If you are not breathing quickly, the physician may try to induce hyperventilation by instructing you to breathe a certain way.While you hyperventilate, the doctor will ask how you feel and watch how you breathe -- including what muscles you are using in your chest wall and surrounding areas.Tests that may be performed include:Blood tests for the oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in your bloodChest CT scanECGVentilation/perfusion scan of your lungsX-rays of the chest
ReferencesDuffin J, Phillipson EA. Hypoventilation and hyperventilation syndromes. In: Mason RJ, Broaddus CV, Martin TR, et al. Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2010:chap 78.Winter AO, Purcell TB. Somatoform disorders. In: Marx JA, ed. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Mosby Elsevier; 2009:chap 111.

"A sad soul can kill you quicker, far quicker, than a germ," John Steinbeck once wrote. Now we are closer to understanding why.
A disease like cancer can be a mortal battle, often fraught with overwhelming stress. Given that stress management can be difficult even under ordinary circumstances, elevated feelings of anxiety and depression in cancer patients are certainly understandable.
Yet, several recent studies underscore how critically important it is for those fighting illness to learn how to combat stress.
A team of researchers led by Lorenzo Cohen, professor of general oncology and director of the Integrative Medicine Program at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, found that symptoms of depression among a group of patients with late-stage renal cell carcinoma were associated with an increased risk of death. The study was published in the journal PLOS ONE in August.
The chief suspects in Cohen's study: cortisol -- also known as the "stress hormone" -- and inflammatory pathways.
"This study is the next step in the process of understanding that emotional factors have an impact on biology, which can, in turn, influence outcomes in cancer," says Cohen.
Cortisol is the hormone produced by the adrenal gland in response to stress. It helps regulate the inflammatory response in the body.
According to Cohen, under normal circumstances cortisol levels should be high in the morning and drop throughout the course of the day. But among patients experiencing chronic stress or depressive symptoms, cortisol levels can remain sustained throughout the day, with less of a decrease in the evening.
In the study, those patients with sustained cortisol levels throughout the day had an increased risk of mortality. Through gene profile analyses of patients, the researchers documented that the association between patient psychological condition and survival time may stem from a dysregulation in inflammatory biology.
Two other studies on how stress influences other illnesses shed further light on this process.

Vernon British Columbia
Two local artists, Molly March and Cathy Stubington, from the Calendario
Art Project, ad Bill Darnell and Mary Stockdale, from the Vernon Climate
Action Network, organized a 350.org Climate Impacts Day event on 5/5/2012.
Since the devastating pine bark beetle outbreak that has turned BC's
forests red and then grey is a proven local example of climate impact, the
main activity was to make a beautiful Ponderosa Pine drawing on a large
banner, at the Bean Scene, with public input in creating the art. WE also
created a 'dot' banner and two smaller banners dotted with CO2 molecules.
Then, a group of about 25 people held a parade to Spirit Square near City
Hall where there are 4 magnificent specimens of these pines.
Here there was a short celebration of the Ponderosa pine that included
songs, poetry readings and speeches. Speakers handed around specimens of
pine bark beetles as well as the puzzle-shaped bark pieces that fall to
the ground whenever there is a beetle attack. Poems and songs celebrated
the beauty, mystery and generosity of the pine tree, and grieved the loss
of trees, jobs and sawmill workers' lives due to the beetle outbreak.

Are we at last one nation, with liberty and justice for all? In this ebook, we reflect on the life and legacy of Martin Luther King Jr. and the Civil Rights Movement, and assess their efforts to overcome racial discrimination and to promote racial equality and integration. The first chapter explores the origins and traditions of the Martin Luther King Jr. birthday celebration, with particular attention to the American character of the holiday. The second chapter presents powerful accounts of the black American experience during the era of racial segregation—from Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, and Zora Neale Hurston, to Langston Hughes, Ralph Ellison, and James Baldwin—with a focus on showing the need for civil rights. The third chapter brings us to the Civil Rights Movement itself, evaluating the goals, strategies, and tactics of the Movement's various leaders. The final chapter raises questions about the challenging and vexed issues left open in the wake of the successes of the Civil Rights Movement: equality; family, religion, and culture; and identity. For more stories, speeches, and songs, or to learn more about the What So Proudly We Hail project, head to www.WhatSoProudlyWeHail.org.
Martin Luther King Jr. Day: An American Holiday
The Origins and Traditions of Martin Luther King Jr. Day
A Brief History of the Civil Rights Movement
Dwight D. Eisenhower, "On the Situation in Little Rock: A Radio and Television Address to the American People"
Lyndon B. Johnson, "To Fulfill These Rights: Commencement Address at Howard University"
Stevie Wonder, "Happy Birthday"
Ronald Reagan, Remarks on Signing the Bill Making the Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. a National Holiday
William Jefferson Clinton, Remarks on Signing the King Holiday and Service Act
Barack Obama, Remarks at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Dedication
The African American Experience and the Need for Civil Rights
Frederick Douglass, "The Civil Rights Cases"
W. E. B. Du Bois, "On Being Crazy"
Booker T. Washington, "My View of Segregation Laws"
W. E. B. Du Bois, "Of the Coming of John," from The Souls of Black Folk
James Baldwin, "Stranger in the Village," from Notes of a Native Son
Ralph Ellison, "The Battle Royal," from Invisible Man
Zora Neale Hurston, "How It Feels to Be Colored Me"
James Baldwin, From Notes of a Native Son
Langston Hughes, "One Friday Morning"
John O. Killens, "God Bless America"
Junius Edwards, "Liars Don't Qualify"
The Civil Rights Movement
The Movement and Its Goals
"Lift Every Voice and Sing"
"Onward, Christian Soldiers"
"We Shall Overcome"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
Martin Luther King Jr., "I Have a Dream"
Diane Oliver, "Neighbors"
Zora Neale Hurston, Letter to the Orlando Sentinel
Martin Luther King Jr., "Eulogy for the Martyred Children"
Leon R. Kass, Letter on the Civil Rights Movement
Martin Luther King Jr., "I've Been to the Mountaintop"
Movement Tactics and Strategy
Martin Luther King Jr., "The Power of Nonviolence"
Appendix: "Commitment Card," Alabama Christian Movement for Civil Rights
Lee Martin, "The Welcome Table"
Anthony Grooms, "Food That Pleases, Food to Take Home"
A Group of Clergymen, "A Call for Unity"
Martin Luther King Jr., "Letter from Birmingham Jail"
Joseph H. Jackson, Address to the 1964 National Baptist Convention
Malcolm X, "The Ballot or The Bullet"
Diana Schaub, "Solve for X"
Civil Rights, Race, and the American Republic: Today and Tomorrow
Racial Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Earl Warren, Brown v. Board of Education
John G. Roberts, Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District
Shelby Steele, "Affirmative Action," from The Content of Our Character
The Pursuit of Equality
Kurt Vonnegut Jr., "Harrison Bergeron"
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, "The Negro Family: The Case for National Action"
Thomas Sowell, "The Mirage of Equality," from The Quest for Cosmic Justice
Family, Religion, and Culture
Juan Williams, From Enough
Cornel West, "The Moral Obligations of Living in a Democratic Society"
Gerald Early, "Dreaming of a Black Christmas"
Alice Walker, "Everyday Use"
Henry Louis Gates Jr., "Growing Up Colored"
John McWhorter, "How Can We Save the African-American Race?," from Losing the Race
Stephen L. Carter, "The Black Table, the Empty Suit, and the Tie"
Shelby Steele, "Race-Holding," from The Content of Our Character

Have you ever been talking to a creationist, who knows that agriculture only began about 10,000 years ago, say something like, "What were we doing for all those tens of thousands of years before then? Why didn't we settle down sooner?"
I did not know the answer to this, until now. Via ScienceDaily:
Until recently researchers say the story of the origin of agriculture was one of a relatively sudden appearance of plant cultivation in the Near East around 10,000 years ago spreading quickly into Europe and dovetailing conveniently with ideas about how quickly language and population genes spread from the Near East to Europe. Initially, genetics appeared to support this idea but now cracks are beginning to appear in the evidence underpinning that model
Now a team led by Dr Robin Allaby from the University of Warwick have developed a new mathematical model that shows how plant agriculture actually began much earlier than first thought, well before the Younger Dryas (the last “big freeze” with glacial conditions in the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere). It also shows that useful gene types could have actually taken thousands of years to become stable.
Up till now researchers believed in a rapid establishment of efficient agriculture which came about as artificial selection was easily able to dominate natural plant selection, and, crucially, as a consequence they thought most crops came from a single location and single domestication event.
However recent archaeological evidence has already begun to undermine this model pushing back the date of the first appearance of plant agriculture. The best example of this being the archaeological site Ohalo II in Syria where more than 90,000 plant fragments from 23,000 years ago show that wild cereals were being gathered over 10,000 years earlier than previously thought, and before the last glacial maximum (18,000-15,000 years ago).
The field of Archaeobotany is also producing further evidence to undermine the quick development model. The tough rachis mutant is caused by a single recessive allele (one gene on a pair or group of genes) , and this mutant is easily identifiable in the archaeological specimens as a jagged scar on the chaff of the plant noting an abscission (shedding of a body part) as opposed to the smooth abscission scar associated with the wild type brittle rachis.

A young girl, Ayala Yona, is bullied by girls in school. Through her friends’ advice and her own courage, she was able to stop the bullying.
This book demonstrates the now widely discussed problem of bullying through one child’s experience so that other young children might be educated on how to manage a similar situation. I believe this book’s combination of facts, the easily related to story, and the discussion at the end make it a great guide to combating bullying. I especially enjoyed the lovely illustrations set against the brown background. It was very artistic.

Duck numbers down, but similar to last year
MEMPHIS, Tenn. - July 7, 2008 - The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service released its preliminary report today on mid-continent breeding ducks and habitats, based on surveys conducted in May and early June. Total duck populations were estimated at 37.3 million breeding ducks on the surveyed area. This estimate represents a 9 percent decline over last year's estimate of 41.2 million birds, but remains 11 percent above the 1955-2007 long-term average.
One of the most important elements in duck breeding success is the amount of water present in portions of prairie and parkland Canada and north central United States. Total pond counts for the United States and Canada combined showed 4.4 million ponds, a 37 percent decrease from last year’s estimate, and 10 percent below the long-term average. Habitat conditions in 2008 were a good news / bad news scenario. Drought in many parts of the traditional survey area including the prairie pothole region contrasted sharply with record amounts of snow and rainfall in the eastern survey area.
The FWS spring surveys provide the scientific basis for many management programs across the continent including the setting of hunting regulations. The Flyway Councils and the FWS Regulations Committee will meet in July and early August to recommend and adopt the season structure and bag limits for 2008-09. Individual states will make their selections following these meetings. Hunters should check their state's rules for final dates.
“The decline in breeding habitat conditions is consistent with what Ducks Unlimited’s field biologists have reported across much of the U.S. and Canadian breeding grounds this spring,” said Ducks Unlimited’s Chief Biologist, Dale Humburg. “While late rains may have improved habitat for late nesting species, and for renesting and brood rearing, poor production will likely occur over key productions areas, particularly the prairie grasslands of the U.S. and Canada.”
The mallard population was 7 percent below last year. An estimated 7.7 million mallards were on traditionally surveyed areas this spring, compared to last year’s estimate of 8.3 million birds. However, mallard numbers were similar to the long-term average.
“The lack of an increase in mallard populations is consistent with a delayed spring and decreasing ponds in key mallard nesting areas; however, mallards remain at levels above the long-term average and near the North American Waterfowl Management Plan goal,” said Humburg.
The most positive news coming out of this year’s survey continues to be for redheads, green-winged teal and scaup. For the second straight year, redheads remained above 1 million birds (66 percent above the long-term average). Green-winged teal populations remained similar to the level in 2007 and were 57 percent above the long-term average.
Scaup numbers appear to have stabilized at similar levels for the last 8 years remaining at 3.7 million in 2008, similar to the 3.5 million surveyed in 2007. Breeding scaup numbers remain 27 percent below their long-term average, however.
As expected, some breeding populations declined as habitat conditions deteriorated from 2007 to 2008. Although 6 of the 10 commonly surveyed species showed no significant change, 4 species declined appreciably. Notable declines were in numbers of breeding canvasbacks (-44 percent from 2007), northern pintails (-22 percent), gadwalls (-19 percent), and northern shovelers (-23 percent). Canvasbacks were at an estimated 489,000 breeding birds in the survey area 14 percent below their long-term average. Pintail numbers declined to 2.6 million, 36 percent below the long-term average. Despite declines from 2007 in numbers of gadwalls and shovelers, populations remain well above long-term averages (both +56 percent).
“Severe drought occurred across much of the northcental U.S. and Prairie Canada - much of the core pintail breeding area,” said Humburg. “The poor habitat conditions likely will lead to limited pintail production and recruitment into the fall flight.”
American wigeon numbers, at 2.5 million, remained similar to 2007 levels and the long-term.Although blue-winged teal populations did not change significantly from 2007, they remain well above the long-term average (+45).
“Pintails and scaup continue to be well below their long-term averages and remain a significant concern,” said Humburg. “Habitat changes are believed to be the primary causes of decline for both these species. DU and partners continue targeted research programs on scaup and pintails that we hope will improve our understanding of the conservation actions that will help these species recover.”
Since 1990, surveys have been conducted in eastern North America. In contrast to the western surveys most of the eastern survey area experienced record or near-record winter snowfall and spring precipitation accompanied by average to below-average temperatures. Population estimates for the 10 most abundant species surveyed were similar to last year and to the 1990-2007 averages.
Wet and dry cycles, where water levels fluctuate over time, are vital components of maintaining wetland productivity. This is true for all wetlands, but is especially important for the prairie potholes of the northern plains. Although the short-term effect may be fewer breeding ducks, wetlands are rejuvenated during severe droughts.
It’s important to note that droughts are temporary. If we can keep grassland and wetland habitats intact, when the water returns, prairie wetlands will again teem with breeding waterfowl and other wildlife. Equally important to note is that more stable wetland areas such as the boreal forest provide critical nesting habitat, particularly during drought years on the prairies. In 2008, these areas where rated as fair to excellent although in most places spring was delayed by 1-2 weeks.
“Habitat is the core factor driving the health of duck populations and the size of the fall flight,” said Humburg. “Habitat also is a key for waterfowl in migration and for hunters. This year, spring and early summer flooding in the Midwest and South, drought in the Prairies, and extremely dry conditions in parts of the west coast, could affect migration and hunting habitat.”
As painful as the current drought is, waterfowl and prairie habitats are facing even greater long-term threats. Grassland habitat is under siege on many fronts and is being lost at alarming rates. The U.S. Prairie Pothole Region lost more than 800,000 Conservation Reserve Program acres last year, and more than 3.3 million acres of native prairie are projected to be lost during the next five years unless governors in affected states opt into Sodsaver. There has never been a time more important than today to maintain our focus on restoring and protecting these habitats, so when wet conditions return they can continue to produce ducks for future generations.
Related: Early Summer Habitat Conditions in Canada
Mike Checkett(901) 758-3793 email@example.com
Dale Humburg(901) 758-3786 firstname.lastname@example.org
With more than a million supporters, Ducks Unlimited is the world’s largest and most effective wetland and waterfowl conservation organization with more than 12 million acres conserved. The United States alone has lost more than half of its original wetlands - nature’s most productive ecosystem - and continues to lose more than 80,000 acres of wetlands important to waterfowl each year.

The Mississippi Delta is famous for more than floods; it's the birthplace of uniquely American music. As the flood waters rose, many blues artists were inspired to write songs about the disaster and describe the experience of being in a flood. Mai Cramer, who has hosted her "Blues After Hours" radio show for over two decades, and Prof. David Evans, an ethnomusicologist at the University of Memphis, explain some of the history behind blues music, especially the stripped-down, raw style of music called Delta blues.
Blues is very visceral. For the most part it's narrative. It tells a story out of people's lives. Compared to other types of music, it's very authentic -- there aren't a lot of frills. What we usually think of as Delta blues is one person with a guitar, typically a slide guitar, and that real raw kind of singing. Delta blues grew up into modern Chicago blues. If you listen to Muddy Waters, for example, he's basically singing Delta blues that are citified and electrified. Delta blues is the foundation for that.
When we listen to blues music of the 1920s, it's like looking through a window at the experience people are having at the time. Typically, blues artists write out of their own experience. A lot of blues is about men and women, and relationships. Blues was sung at rent parties, where you'd play music and pass the hat to pay your rent. Or they'd be in shacks behind the fields, "juke joints" where people would drink, dance, and hear music. It's the music you'd play when you were relaxing or partying. Initially it was black music played by black people for black people. Only a few early performers, like Bessie Smith, who sold a lot of records, sold to white people. The blues were mostly only in the black community until large numbers of whites discovered the music in the 1950s and especially in the 1960s.
We always think of blues as being intense, as having an emotional intensity. Floods are natural disasters that overwhelm you the way emotions can overwhelm you, and so the flood is an important image for the blues, a metaphor for an experience that's too much, that's just impossible to handle.
Two artists who are still alive today have connections to the very earliest Delta blues. They're in their 80s. These two artists are not the only ones who play Delta blues, but they're among the last who were there when it started. Robert Junior Lockwood was up for a Grammy this year with traditional Delta blues, and he's a link to the Delta because his mother had a relationship with Robert Johnson, who was known as the King of the Delta Blues. Robert Junior learned from Robert Johnson. David "Honey Boy" Edwards is also still alive, and he's another important musician. He lived the life of an itinerant blues singer and wrote about it in his autobiography, The World Don't Owe Me Nothing. A lot of Delta blues appears on the Yazoo label.
Most blues songs are about personal experiences and personal feelings and they tend to concentrate on themes of man-woman relationships and the related emotions -- the whole range of emotions, happy and sad. Travel is another theme. Movement. Work and other social conditions. Social problems. Luck. Magic. More or less, the ups and downs of daily life. There are some that deal with themes of broader interest: current events, political events, commentary, and so on. These are still often tied to personal reactions and personal feelings. The flood was both a public event, a news story, and something that hundreds of thousands of African Americans experienced directly.
The Delta itself has throughout blues history been a stronghold of blues music. It was very intensely developed there, stylistically and creatively. It has been central to African American cultural life in the Delta, particularly in the first half of the 20th century. It's characterized stylistically by a very intense type of performance, a minimalist style that squeezes the maximum feeling and emotion out of each note. The perfomers typically sing and play very hard, and often explore very deep themes philosophically. In other words, it tends not to be superficial music, but a very deep expression of a personal, and a collective, feeling.
The music started around the beginning of the 20th century and it seems to have reached a creative peak in the 1920s that's captured in phonograph records of that era, starting in the year 1920. A number of Mississippi Delta artists recorded in that decade. This was really a golden age, particularly of the country blues. The first flowering of country blues on records happened in 1926.
It seems there were 25 or 30 records by blues artists on or related to the 1927 flood. The songs present a variety of commentary on the flood. The ones by the few artists that were from the area, who might have actually experienced the flood (like Charlie Patton or Alice Pearson) tend to be the most realistic in their descriptions, the most accurate in their details. Some of the others are inaccurate, based on hearsay, some sentimentalize the flood, some even trivialize it, or find some way to connect it to the man-woman theme, or sexual double entendre, getting back to more standard blues themes. A song by Atlanta artist Barbecue Bob, "Mississippi Heavy Water Blues," describes losing his woman, who's washed away in the flood. They range over quite a bit of emotional territory.
Blind Lemon Jefferson, from Texas, recorded a flood song, and frequently performed in the Delta, in small theaters in towns like Greenwood and Greenville. Sometimes he would just come into town and set up in a park, and draw a crowd. Lonnie Johnson, who was based in St. Louis, recorded a flood song also. There were artists in other styles, too, the vaudeville blues singers, who also recorded flood songs. Bessie Smith had probably the most famous song on the flood, but there's a peculiarity to it. It was recorded before the flood. "Back Water Blues" was recorded in February 1927, before the great disaster of April. Perhaps the buildup of rain made her anticipate the flood; it was released just as the flood came, and as a result, it became a big hit. It's a description of one woman's experience of a flood. There had been a lot of rain for weeks prior to the flood so she might have in some way anticipated the flood, or it might have been a coincidence.
There had been generic flood songs in the 1920s. There was a piece called "Muddy Water" which was a pop song of 1926. Bessie Smith also recorded this song. There were certainly enough floods in all parts of the lowland South so that flood themes would be taken up often. On the religious side, in gospel music, there were some recordings that saw greater significance in this flood. One in particular, "The1927 Flood," by Elders McIntorsh and Edwards (recorded in December 1928), saw the hand of God in the flood, as a punishment for wickedness. A black preacher in Memphis, the Reverend Sutton E. Griggs, saw the flood as a metaphor of black-white cooperation, the people trying to shore up the levees, something that led to better race relations, although the historical fact about it was that there were some major race-related problems related to the relief effort.
The whites in charge of the relief effort thought that the blacks would just pitch in after the flood to restore the old order, and give volunteer labor so they could go back to being sharecroppers. The blacks tended to view the flood as wiping the slate clean, wiping out the old order. The flood wiped out the crops in the areas it devastated, so any black sharecroppers in that area knew they weren't going to get a crop, with the water and mud staying up until June. It was impossible to get a good crop. So they had to go somewhere and find some work. A lot of people headed North.
Charlie Patton's great two-part song, "High Water Everywhere," was recorded in December 1929, two and a half years after the flood. Patton was from the Delta. He had probably composed it earlier; his recording career didn't start until 1929. But he and his record company thought the song still had relevance.
In the early 1920s virtually all American record companies were recording blues material, and they had developed the concept of race records along with other specialized genres of music: hillbilly music, various non-English language ethnic series for immigrant communities, etc. It was a marketing strategy the record companies had, to direct their promotional efforts in these communities. Unfortunately it had the effect of isolating these American musical traditions and keping them out of the mainstream of American music, so that they didn't come to the attention of most Americans, but remained on the periphery. There were a few African American artists who had mainstream appeal: Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, and people like that. But the vast majority of African American recording artists, especially blues and gospel singers, sold almost entirely within the black community. If there hadn't been race records, much of this music might not have been recorded at all. It was recorded, but it didn't reach a bigger audience.
Some artists, like Louis Armstrong, were heard on the radio, but blues was hardly broadcast at all. Some stations in the South started barn dance programs, like the Grand Ole Opry, which had a black harmonica player, but it was pretty unusual. Record players would have been one of the few luxuries, one of the few pieces of furniture, poor people might have had, more so even than radios. They were very important cultural items, even among people who were relatively poor. And in the cities you'd have people who had come from the country, listening to the blues.
Blues is a music that's highly personalized, that deals with fairly intimate personal relationships, so you have to read through the songs to see broader social issues. But the personal relationships described in the blues are affected by social conditions of poverty, racism, the nature of work, rural life, and so on, and these shape how people relate to each other. You have to do a little bit of projection from those lyrics; blues are not usually songs of ideology or protest. But you can detect an overriding aura of dissatisfaction in the blues. They deal with the changes and fluctuations of life, and the possibilities of change, too, on a very personal level.
My American Experience
We invite you to tell us your own stories - whether you lived through a tumultuous time period or learned about it from a relative, a book or a movie.

Views From Your Muse
WHO ARE YOU WRITNG FOR?
By David Trottier
In an article from a previous edition of my newsletter, another writer challenged my notion of writing lean description. The example of lean description that I used was from the spec script Rocky. It reads as follows:
The gym looks like a garbage can turned inside out.
I like it because it says a lot with just a few words plus a reader could easily visualize it. He preferred the following version (below) because it would better help the actors, the director, the set decorator, and the art director. “After all,” he said, “that is who we are writing for.” It contains more details, even though it is not as readable.
The gym was littered with food wrappers, leftover hot dogs and tacos, gym clothes, and other debris. It looked like no one had cleaned it in over a month. It was truly a mess.
It’s important to use concrete language and provide specific details, but choose only those details that help the reader visualize the action. The essence of spec writing is to say as much as possible with as few words as possible.
When writing description, try using specific verbs to describe actions without relying on adverbs, and choose specific nouns without using adjectives. Am I saying that adjectives and adverbs should be avoided?
No, I’m saying that you should focus on verbs and nouns first. You won’t need to use as many adjectives and adverbs if you use specific, concrete nouns and verbs.
For example, here’s a sentence containing an adverb and a couple of adjectives: He is walking slowly to the big, yellow boat. Notice that the adjectives and adverb provide little help because the verb and noun are not specific in the first place.
Now, here is the same sentence, using a specific, active verb and a concrete noun: He staggers to the yacht.
Because I use concrete, specific language, I do not need the adverb and adjective, at least in this particular case. And notice how the verb staggered characterizes my character better than the weaker verb walked. Finally, do you see that the active verb staggers is stronger than the passive form is staggering? Specific language can help you bring characters and action to life.
Even when you use concrete nouns and verbs, you still may see a need for concrete adjectives and adverbs. In the following sentence, I use a couple of adjectives for visual clarification: She sashays to the pink brick bungalow. Thus, my real point is this: Use concrete, visual language in your narrative description. Adjectives and adverbs are helping words, so first make sure your verbs and nouns are strong and then look for helping words if you need them.
The late, great Paddy Cheyvsky (Marty, Network), once said, “I have two rules. First, cut out all the wisdom; then, cut out all the adjectives.”
I don’t think he meant he actually went through the script and omitted every adjective; I believe he is referring to lean, concrete and specific language. The “cutting out all the wisdom” alludes to the tendency of some writers to sound preachy, or overstate their theme, or write pretentious, unnatural dialogue.

The United States has become accustomed to its hegemonic military presence in the greater Middle East. The U.S.-led international coalition against Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait in August, 1990 led to a massive increase in America's direct military presence in the Gulf. Its military presence accelerated after the 9/11 attacks and the subsequent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Today, U.S. forces are deployed all the way from the Sinai desert through the Arabian Peninsula, Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean, as well as Afghanistan. While the U.S. has come to take its unchallenged military primacy in the Middle East for granted, key Asian countries -- especially India, China, Japan and South Korea -- have also increased their Middle East presence. The U.S. shouldn't view this as a threat but rather an opportunity for greater cooperation on a wide spectrum of growing security concerns.
The signs of Asia's push into the Gulf can be seen everywhere. All around the Arabian Gulf, hotels, banks, schools, and shopping centers are managed by Asian expatriate workers, who also provide most of the region's manual labor. Without Asian labor, the oil-rich economies of the Gulf would collapse. Many of the vast construction projects in Doha, Abu Dhabi, Dubai and other city-states are supervised by South Korean companies. Most of the automobiles and trucks on the street are Japanese or Korean. The endless procession of tankers that sail from the huge ports of the Gulf carrying oil and liquefied natural gas is destined increasingly for the Asian market. Infrastructure projects, including new roads, railways, seaports, airports, gas and oil pipelines, and undersea communication lines, are expanding in both the Middle East and Central Asia, making access between the two regions easier and cheaper. These trends suggest that, absent a protracted global recession, the Asian presence in the Middle East will continue to grow significantly over the coming decade.
Over the next 30 years, the economies of India and China are expected to surpass that of the United States in size (although as a result of population growth, their per capita GDP will remain relatively low), giving their governments increased regional and global clout. As India and China grow, Japan will be left behind. Nonetheless, Japan is likely to remain a key Asian power, given its close ties to the United States. Moreover, Japan's energy needs will keep it tied to the Gulf. Similarly, South Korea, while smaller than Japan, is already deeply engaged in the Middle East, especially in the energy sphere. Lacking domestic oil reserves, South Korea is the world's fifth-largest importer of oil and the eleventh-largest importer of liquefied natural gas. In addition, South Korean construction companies have been hired to build oil refineries, petrochemical plants, offices, and infrastructure across the Middle East.
India is an under-appreciated player in this new Asian Middle East. The Indian subcontinent has had close commercial ties with the Gulf for centuries, and India today has managed to cultivate good working relationships with all the countries in the Middle East, including Israel. While economic interests have provided the basis for many of those relationships, India has also taken on a modest military role. The Indian government has participated in Middle East peacekeeping operations since 1956. In addition, India has been increasing its bilateral military ties with all of the small countries in the Gulf. India is likely to establish a stronger, more assertive presence in the Gulf over the coming decades.
It is China, of course, which gets most of the attention. For a short period in the fifteenth century, China was the dominant power in the Indian Ocean, but over the centuries that followed, it had little to do with the Middle East. After the Communist Revolution in 1949, China tried to cultivate close relationships with revolutionary groups in the Arab world, but its efforts were violently opposed by Arab nationalists. In the wake of the Sino-Soviet split and China's eventual rapprochement with the United States in 1972, China changed course and sought instead to establish cordial relations with Middle Eastern governments. In particular, it became more directly involved in the geopolitics of the region through arms sales, notably to Saudi Arabia, Iran and Iraq, during the 1980s. More recently China has followed India's example by becoming engaged in Mideast peacekeeping. China's participation in United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) began officially on April 9, 2006.
Considerable uncertainty remains regarding China's future presence in the region, particularly in the military arena. China is a long way from the Gulf, but if its permanent maritime reach eventually expands into the Indian Ocean and its overland reach grows through Central Asia and Pakistan, it, too, could become a major strategic player in the Middle East. The attention paid to China's voice in the debate over sanctions on Iran offers a stark contrast to its limited role in the debate over sanctions on Iraq in the 1990s.
It is easy to see the growing doubts about how long the United States can sustain its presence in the region and remain the policeman of the Gulf and the Indian Ocean. Two wars have drained American resources. The financial crisis also diminished U.S. prestige by calling into question the validity of its economic model, which had been eagerly pursued on the Arabian Peninsula, the richest part of the Middle East. If all these factors coalesced to bring about a slow U.S. retreat from the region, would any Asian powers fill the vacuum?
On this point, there is no consensus. Some acknowledge the importance of Asia's economic and cultural expansion into the Middle East but argue that domestic factors in India and China will limit their ability to play the role now held by the United States. Others maintain that, to the contrary, China is likely to take a more aggressive approach to the Middle East and develop close relationships with countries like Syria and Iran. Still others focus on the growing relationship between India and the United States, arguing that it may serve to counterbalance Chinese ambitions. The new dynamics must take into account not only growing ideological challenges to the West, but also the reemergence of more traditional balance-of-power politics as the Asian nations become world players and the sense that Americans may eventually grow tired of protecting the assets of "free loaders."
In many ways an increased growing Asian presence in the Middle East will bring a breath of fresh air to a region left with the bitter historic legacies of European dominance and characterized by contemporary antagonism toward the hegemonic role of the United States. The major Asian players in the Middle East have not been colonizers or occupiers and they have far less of an emotional stake in the Arab-Israeli conflict. On the one hand, that means that they approach political issues and unresolved conflicts with what some would argue is a cynical, laissez-faire attitude, perhaps exemplified by China's initial indifference to human rights abuses in Sudan. However, the upside is that the Asians do not interfere directly in Middle East politics and therefore enjoy good relations with most states. How long they can sustain their hands-off approach is questionable if, by virtue of their economic dominance and their own strategic stakes in the region, they get drawn into the messiness of Middle East politics at a time when the United States becomes disillusioned by the burdens of hegemony.
In the meantime, it is very much in the interests of both the U.S. and the Asian countries to reach common agreements on the importance of preventing further conflict in the region and jointly assuring the security of the increased maritime traffic across the Indian Ocean. Cooperation on meeting the piracy challenge off the coast of Somalia is an early test of this new strategic reality.
Geoffrey Kemp is the Director of Regional Strategic Programs at the Nixon Center. This article summarizes some of the key themes in his latest book The East Moves West: India, China, and Asia's Growing Presence in the Middle East (Brookings Institution Press 2010).
The Middle East Channel offers unique analysis and insights on this diverse and vital region of more than 400 million.

May 18, 2008 Before West Nile virus arrived in this country, we had (and still have) a home-grown relative of this pathogen. An epidemic of unknown origin exploded around St. Louis, Missouri in the autumn of 1933, a disease that is now known to be transmitted by mosquitoes from birds to people. Now, a new analysis of the genome of St. Louis encephalitis completed at the Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) is shedding light on the evolution of this virus.
Under the direction of Susan Perkins, Assistant Curator of Microbial Genomics, postdoctoral fellows Gregory Baillie, Sergios-Orestis Kolokotronis, and Eric Waltari sequenced the entire genetic code of 23 strains of the virus that cause St. Louis encephalitis, all from the genus Flavivirus. Previous research had found that recombination (the cutting and pasting of strands of genetic material, in this case RNA) explained the evolution of this virus, but these studies sequenced just a single gene of the virus.
Because the whole-genome approach turned a microscope on the entire set of instructions for St. Louis encephalitis, the AMNH researchers were able to determine that a single mutation in the coding for an envelope protein rather than recombination most likely caused changes that made the virus pathogenic to humans. "Recombination is important for disease; it makes novel proteins or genes that the immune system has never seen before," explains Perkins. "But in this case, it was population dynamics combined with slight changes in the form of point mutations that have been important in the evolution of this virus."
Genetic analysis also allowed Perkins and colleagues to trace the evolutionary path of the Flavivirus virus. They determined that the older, less derived strains, or more ancestral strains, are from South America. The North American and Haitian strains were passed from common bird hosts such as finches, robins, blue jays, and doves into humans by the Culex mosquito after the virus exploded into a new continent. To time this event, researchers again turned to the genomic code: by determining the rate of mutation in the virus, Perkins found that the division between the South and North American strains happened about 116 years ago. "St. Louis encephalitis is a perfect storm between infected bird hosts coming into a new area and the mosquito vectors transferring the virus to humans," says Perkins. "It is the North American version of West Nile."
St. Louis encephalitis is currently found throughout the United States, and, according to the Centers for Disease Control, there were 4,651 cases between 1964 and 2005. Symptoms range from a mild headache to high fever and tremors. Mortality is between 5 and 30% and is higher among the elderly.
This research was published in the May issue of the journal Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. Additional coauthors are Joseph Maffei and Laura Kramer from Arbovirus Laboratories of the New York State Department of Health. The research was made possible by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Army Research Office, the Wadsworth Center Media and Tissue Culture facility, and the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses through the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, the Computational Biology Service Unit from Cornell University, and CamGrid at the University of Cambridge.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Recently-leaked DNA test results prove ancient Egyptian royal Pharaoh Tutankhamen, aka King Tut, is 99.6% Western European.
The results were mistakenly leaked in the American cable television show Royal Blood: King Tut Unwrapped. The tests were conducted to find out if a newly-discovered mummy was the boy king’s father.
The Secretary General of the Egyptian Supreme Council of Antiquities, Zahi Hawass, had previously stated that he would never reveal the DNA results of King Tut, whose racial make-up has been a source of dispute for many.
The above video shows a series of Short Tandem Repeats (STRs), repeated DNA sequences whose characteristics are used to identify humans.
Racial historian Arthur Kemp took the above STR results and put them into a Haplogroup Predictor created by retired physicist and professor Whit Athey. The resulting haplogroup, which gives insight into the ancestral background of an individual going back thousands of years, came back with a 99.6% match with the R1b haplogroup.
The R1b haplogroup “is the most common Y-chromosome haplogroup in Europe reaching its highest concentrations in Ireland, Scotland, western England and the European Atlantic seaboard — in other words, European through and through,” writes Kemp.

The climate-controlled vaults in the George Eastman House archive and the Louis B. Mayer Conservation Center are home to the Motion Picture Department’s collection of over 24,000 films.
But there is one shelving unit that holds important moving images in a non-film format: analog tape.
The department holds over 200 videocassettes in varying standards, with most of them in the obsolete three-quarter-inch (or “U-Matic”) format. The tapes contain things such as television recordings from the 1970s to the 1980s, interviews with filmmakers and actors, archival footage, and early video transfers of films from the collection. While not ultimately as critical to the collection as film material, there is still an urgent need to examine the content on these tapes and digitally preserve what is deemed important.
This urgency stems largely from risks to the physical materials themselves; most of the tapes are at least twenty years old and suffer from increasing levels of decay due to the shedding of the magnetic oxide recording layer on the surface of the tapes over time. Also, the obsolete broadcast-quality decks required to play the cassettes are becoming scarce and more difficult to properly maintain. Time, technology, and the looming potential for a zombie apocalypse are therefore driving the need to preserve the analog tapes.
The students of the L. Jeffrey Selznick School of Film Preservation are assisting with this ongoing project. As part of their training in digital preservation, students are using the video capture equipment in the department’s digital lab to convert many of these tapes into lossless digital video files. These “digital masters” will then be tagged with metadata, cataloged, and stored in the vaults on archival-quality LTO-5 tapes.
One interesting subset of tapes – the original BetaMax cassettes of Raiders of the Lost Ark: The Adaptation raw footage – are on extended loan to George Eastman House by the filmmakers and have recently been digitally preserved. This process will be examined more in an upcoming post by the Selznick students who preserved the materials.

Whitaker J. S., and T. M. Hamill, 2002: Ensemble data assimilation without perturbed observations. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 1913-1924.
The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) is a data assimilation scheme based on the traditional Kalman-filter update equation. An ensemble of forecasts are to estimate the background-error covariances needed to compute the Kalman gain. It has been shown that if the same observations and the same gain are used to update each member of the ensemble, the ensemble will systematically underestimate analysis-error covariances. This will cause a degradation of subsequent analyses and may lead to filter divergence. For large ensembles, it has been shown that this problem can be alleviated by treating the observations as random variables, adding random perturbations to them with the correct statistics.
Two important consequences of sampling error in the estimate of analysis-error covariances in the EnKF are discussed here. The first results from the analysis-error covariance being a nonlinear function of the background-error covariance in the Kalman filter. Due to this nonlinearity, if the background-error covariance calculated from the ensemble is overestimated, there is a larger reduction in variance during the analysis than if it is underestimated. Hence, even if the ensemble background-error covariance estimates are unbiased, the analysis-error covariance estimates will negatively biased. This problem must be dealt with in any Kalman-filter based ensemble data assimilation scheme.
A second consequence of sampling error is particular to schemes like the EnKF that use perturbed observations. While this procedure gives asymptotically correct analysis-error covariance estimates for large ensembles, the addition of perturbed observations adds an additional source of sampling error related to the estimation of the observation-error covariances. In addition to reducing the accuracy of the analysis-error covariance estimate, this extra source of sampling error increases the probability that the analysis-error covariance will be underestimated. Because of this, ensemble data assimilation methods which use perturbed observations are expected to be less accurate than those which do not. Several ensemble filter formulations have recently been proposed which do not require perturbed observations.
Here we examine a particularly simple implementation which we call the "ensemble square-root filter", or EnSRF. The EnSRF uses the traditional Kalman gain for updating the ensemble mean but uses a "reduced" Kalman gain to update deviations from the ensemble mean. There is no additional computational cost incurred by the EnSRF relative to the EnKF when observations are processed serially. Using a hierarchy of perfect model assimilation experiments, we demonstrate that the elimination of the sampling error associated with the perturbed observations makes the EnSRF more accurate than the EnKF for the same ensemble size.

What is HIPAA?
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 is set of statutes designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the US health care system:
Title I: Title I of HIPAA provides rules to
"improve the portability and continuity of health insurance coverage"
for workers when they change employers.
- Title II: Title II of HIPAA provides rules for controlling health care fraud and abuse, and includes an "Administrative Simplification" section that sets standards for enabling the electronic exchange of health information.
Provisions in the "Administrative Simplification" section of Title II include rules protecting the privacy and security of health data. These rules are enforced by the US Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights (OCR):
- The Privacy Rule protects the privacy of individually identifiable
health information. For more, see Privacy
Rule on the OCR web site.
- The Security Rule sets national standards for the security of electronic protected health information (ePHI). For more, see Security Rule on the OCR web site.
In 2009, HIPAA enforcement rules were strengthened by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act. Subtitle D of the HITECH Act improved privacy and security provisions found in the original HIPAA privacy and security rules.
At Indiana University, compliance with the HIPAA privacy and security rules is coordinated through the Office for Clinical Affairs, with the interim HIPAA Privacy Officer and interim HIPAA Security Officer. For more about HIPAA compliance at IU, see the HIPAA Compliance page.
For more about HIPAA and the HITECH Act, see these US Health and Human Services pages:
- HIPAA Administrative Simplification Statute and Rules
- Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule
- Summary of the HIPAA Security Rule
- HITECH Act Enforcement Interim Final Rule
Last modified on December 07, 2012.

After reading elsewhere that DJNZ decrements the b register and jumps if b>0 then would this have the effect that I was after initially (filling the screen with a single character '@') ? If this is incorrect and it should be 'c' then swap b and c over in the below.
I'm not sure I understand the ldir command, what happens when the screen is full ? what stops the loop ?
djnz operates on c - hence the "c" being thought of as the "counter" register. This is carried through to the 8086 where cx is called "counter" (ax,bx,cx,dx = Accumulator, Base, Counter, Data).
As you noted in your later post, ldir stops when bc = 0, and it decrements bc after each copy. It's best to think of it as "copies bc bytes from hl to de, going up in memory" compare with lddr which copies bc bytes from hl to de, but does so going down, i.e. the first copy is from hl + (bc -1) to de + (bc -1).
Your code won't fill the screen with characters, only attributes. The Spectrum memory map has two parts:
1) The bitmap display at 16384, consisting of 24 rows of 32 columns with 8 pixel columns and 8 pixel rows per character. A 1 bit indicates the pixel is INK, a 0 bit indicates paper.
2) The attribute map at 22528. This holds one byte for each 8 pixel by 8 pixel character cell. The rightmost 3 bits are the INK colour (0-7), the next 3 bits (to the left) are the PAPER colour (0-7), then the next bit is the BRIGHT attribute, and the leftmost bit is the FLASH attribute.
So all your code will do is make the screen brighter
For reference, the screen address works as follows 16-bit address, add 16384 to result:
Bits 0-4: Text column, or leftmost 3 bits of graphics x coordinate
Bits 5-7: rightmost 3 bits of text row, or rightmost 3 bits of graphics y-coordinate
Bits 8-10: remaining 3 bits of text row, or next 3 bits of graphics y co-ordinate
Bits 11-12: remaining 2 bits of graphics y-coordinate (11 is not valid).
So you'll need to fill this with data to put characters on screen.

Library of Congress preservation program works with millions of items, terabytes of data in a full spectrum of formats
We are warned to be careful about what we put online because data on the Internet lives forever. But keeping random copies of files on servers, routers and databases is not the same as preservation, said Martha Anderson, director of program management for the Library of Congress’ National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation program. Digital data can be ephemeral. “That is the paradox,” she said.
Web sites can disappear in a matter of days or change repeatedly in a matter of hours. Files can become lost or corrupted, formats and hardware change, and physical media such as tapes and disks deteriorate far more quickly than anticipated.
So Congress charged the LOC in 2000 with preserving the nation’s digital heritage and at the same time making sure that its collection of 29 million books and 105 million other items gathered over the last 200 years remains available for the next 200 years. Toward that end, NDIIP has developed specifications and tools for the transfer of large digital files; worked with government, academia and industry on best practices for digitizing and preserving data; established programs to use delivery platforms such as Flickr to make LOC content available; and partnered with the private sector to harvest content from the Web for archiving.
Across the board: The LOC’s Office of Strategic Initiatives is preserving everything from books to Dictabelt recordings.
The library now has three broad initiatives under NDIIP: working with universities and libraries to understand the nature of digital content, working with state consortiums to help in the preservation of state government records, and working with commercial content providers to develop standards for digital preservation.
The challenges of wedding a physical past to a digital future are varied.
“The biggest difference is the element of time,” Anderson said. “Some physical artifacts can be put on a shelf and left for many years. Books from the 18th century are fine, for example. This is not so much the case with sound recordings and film.”
The technology changes and the media deteriorate. Finding playback equipment for a wax cylinder, an old movie or a Dictabelt can be difficult. And when they are available, the cylinder, film or belt might not be playable.
“The whole domain is looking to digital to carry this forward,” Anderson said.
But digital conversion is time-consuming, and each type of material requires its own technology and special handling. Although the library has been working since the 1990s on digitizing its collections and has made millions of files available online, Anderson estimates that only about 1 percent of the library’s holdings have been digitized.
And digital data can be tricky to handle. “Some formats are fairly stable,” Anderson said. Text and image files have not changed a lot in recent years, and there are plenty of PDF, TIFF and JPEG files that can be easily opened today. But sound and video formats tend to change more quickly. And the physical environment for storing and accessing files changes rapidly. “Servers and digital storage are a challenge. These turn over every three to five years and everything is moved off to another server.”
To accomplish its digital mission, the library takes advantage of work being done in industry and academia to establish standardized environments and tools rather than developing everything itself. Among the initiatives NDIIP is participating in are:
- Development of the BagIt protocol for large data transfers.
- A collaborative Web site for federal partners developing guidelines for digitizing records.
- The National Digital Newspaper Program, in collaboration with the National Endowment for the Humanities, to digitize and preserve regional newspapers.
- State-of-the-art facilities at the library’s Packard Campus for preserving the world’s largest collection of audiovisual works.
- Partnering with universities and the Internet Archive to harvest and preserve more than 69 terabytes of content from the Web.
- Supporting standards development for digital content, including Office Open XML, PDF/A and JPEG2000.
- Development of open-source tools for receiving, archiving and accessing data in digital repositories.
It is not the technology that poses the greatest challenge to digital preservation, Anderson said. “The biggest challenge is social, getting organizations to understand the value of digital materials.”
Most organizations focus on day-to-day operations without concern for preservation. “We would like to make preservation a part of regular operations and workflow,” she said. Part of the problem is the complexity of the tasks. “It is very complicated even to archive your own e-mail at home,” so preservation has not yet become a part of everyone’s digital environment.
Another challenge in establishing long-term programs for digital preservation is the speed of change in the digital environment. “Our job as we saw it in 2001 was much simpler than we see it today,” Anderson said.
When Congress gave the library the job of digital preservation, there was no Wikipedia, Google Maps, Flickr or Facebook. Today, those tools and others like them have changed the way digital content is created and distributed.
“We worked for nine months to gather video from the Internet,” Anderson said. “During that nine months, YouTube came onto the scene and changed everything.”

Who Made God?
A basic principle of physics is the law of conservation of matter. That has me wondering: If God created the world, then where did God come from?
The Aish Rabbi Replies:
Maimonides deals with this question at length. He answers that God is beyond our comprehension, and it is absurd to apply our realm of experience to His. Therefore it is inappropriate to discuss God in terms of past, future or being created, etc.
To explain: Everything that is finite has to have been created, but God is infinite and therefore He did not have to be created.
Everything in the physical world had a beginning at some point in the past. If you cut down a tree we can see how old it is by counting rings. As a person ages, i.e. he is now 20 years old, that means he had to be one year old at some time.
Since everything in this world gets older, it means that everything was created at some point.
How was it created?
There are only two options: Either it made itself, or it was made by something else. Now, it couldn't make itself, because it did not yet exist. So it had to have been made by something else.
Eventually, one must arrive at the conclusion that the world and all it contains was started by something that was not time-bound and therefore did not have a beginning. Since it did not have a beginning, it was not “created.”
A being that exists beyond time doesn't come from anywhere. He has always existed. If something created God, God would have a beginning and be finite, not infinite. Beyond time means having no beginning and no end, eternal. It means there is nothing that exists before God. “Before” is a time-bound quality that applies only to finite entities. Therefore God is called the “First Cause" - or the Prime Mover - the dimension that has no other dimension preceding it.

HEB 385 • Ecclesiastes: Scroll of Qohelet
3:30 PM-6:30 PM
Ecclesiastes (Hebrew: Scroll of Qohelet) is one of the five scrolls (Megillot). The author of this scroll is referred to as "Qohelet, or Ha-Qohelet, designating himself as "Qohelet son of David, King of Jerusalem," hence his traditional identification with King Solomon. The name Ecclesiastes is derived from the Septuagint, meaning "Convoker" in Greek. Scholars find a problem with the attributed authorship to King Solomon, since the language of Qohelet reflects later phases of Hebrew. (e.g., Borrowings from Persian). We will read the text in Hebrew and interpret it and discuss it in English, along with references to traditional Hebrew commentaries.
Grading will be based mainly on assigned readings, class discussion, reports and a term paper. In addition to regular class assignments throughout the semester, undergraduate students' final requirement will be a written project based on the texts that we are studying (8-10 pages); Graduate students need to submit in addition to that a term paper.

Crossed Signals Lead to War
If the United States ever entered into a war that could have been prevented, it was the War of 1812. While the lure of land in Florida and Canada was the driving force behind the war hawks, the excuse put forth was “impressment and the rights of a neutral nation to free trade.” These slogans were a result of England and France being locked in a death struggle.
Each country had blockaded the other, and the British Navy was “impressing” Americans to serve on its ships. These rules of economic warfare became known as “Orders in Council.” For years, America had fought back against the practice by limiting sales and purchases from Great Britain, but in the spring of 1812, the war hawks beat the drum of patriotism. Military historian Robert Lackie explained.
“Ironically, American boycott of Britain had also produced economic distress in England. Receipts of American food crops had fallen to a trickle, exports to America had dried up, and the harsh winter of 1811-12 was made more unbearable by the failure of English crops. Starved and jobless English workmen began to riot while merchants and manufacturers beseeched the government to rescind the Orders in Council and reopen American trade.
“It took that event unique in British history – the assassination of a prime minister, Spencer Perceval – to place in power a ministry willing to make the change. On June 16, 1812, London announced that the Orders in Council had been suspended.”
The irony was it was too late. Two days later, before the news arrived in the United States, the Senate voted 19 to 13 to make the declaration of war official. The confusion of the times can be seen in the British Gentleman’s Magazine of July 1812, describing the action of New Jersey’s governor, Joseph Bloomfield.
“Intelligence has been received by a pilot-boat arrived at Liverpool, that the American senate had determined on war with this country by a majority of six; the pilot-boat left New York the 23d ult; previous to her departure, an express had been received at that place by Gen. Bloomfield, which he read at the head of his whole army, formally announcing that war against Great Britain had been declared by the United States. Whether these measures received the final sanction of the American government previous to the arrival of the intelligence of the death of Mr. Perceval, and the revocation of the Orders in Council, is not yet known.”
It would be the end of July before news of the repeal reached America, and events had already taken place. The secretary of the Navy sent orders to his top commanders on May 21.
“As war appears now inevitable, I request you state to me, a plan of operations, which, in your judgment, will enable our little navy to annoy in the utmost extent, the trade of Gt Britain while it least exposes it to the immense naval force of that government. State also, the Ports of the US which you think safest as asylums for our Navy, in time of war.”
An antiwar movement had already been dividing the country. As Congress debated, the citizens of Boston formed a committee.
“While the temper and views of the national administration are intent upon war, an expression of the sense of this Town, will, of itself, be quite ineffectual, either to avert this deplorable calamity, or to accelerate a return of peace. But believing, as we do, that an immense majority of the people are invincibly averse from a conflict equally unnecessary and menacing ruin to themselves and their posterity; convinced, as we are, that the event will overwhelm them with astonishment and dismay, we cannot but trust that a general expression of the voice of the people would satisfy Congress that those of their Representatives who have voted in favor of war, have not truly represented the wishes of their constituents; and thus arrest the tendency of their measures to this extremity.”
Finally, Boston, the hot bed of the American Revolution declared, “Therefore Resolved, That under existing circumstances, the inhabitants of this Town most sincerely deprecate a war with Great Britain as extremely injurious to the interests and happiness of the people, and peculiarly so, as it necessarily tends to an alliance with France, thereby threatening the subversion of their liberties and independence. That an offensive war against Great Britain alone would be manifestly unjust; and that a war against both the belligerent powers would be an extravagant undertaking, which is not required by the honour or interest of the nation.”
The 34 members of the House of Representatives who opposed the war published, “The undersigned cannot refrain from asking, what are the United States to gain by this war? Will the gratification of some privateersmen compensate the nation for that sweep of our legitimate commerce by the extended marine of our enemy which this desperate act invites? Will Canada compensate the Middle states for New York; or the Western states for New Orleans?
“Let us not be deceived. A war of invasion may invite a retort of invasion. When we visit the peaceable, and as to us innocent, colonies of Great Britain with the horrors of war, can we be assured that our own coast will not be visited with like horrors? At a crisis of the world such as the present, and under impressions such as these, the undersigned could not consider the war, in which the United States have in secret been precipitated, as necessary or required by any moral duty, or any political expediency.”
There were those who supported the war. The logbook of the USS Constitution, then at Annapolis, Md., recorded, “JUNE 20. (1812) At 5 P. M. the Commanding Officer, Lieutenant Read, had the crew turned up, and read to them the declaration of war between the United States and the United Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, that had passed the Senate and authorizing the president James Madison to employ the Armies and navy of the United States against the above written powers. The Crew manifested their Zeal in Support of the Honor of the United States Flagg by requesting of leave to Cheer on the occasion (granted them). Crew returned to their duty, light airs from the Southward and Eastward.”
Supporters of President James Madison and the war held a rally in Trenton on July 10 and sent their own letter to him.
“Sir – Believing it would be pleasing to you, at this crisis to be acquainted with sentiments and views of your constituents in every part of the Union, the convention of Republican delegates from the several counties of the state of New Jersey take the liberty of addressing you on behalf of their constituents and themselves.
“They have seen with approbation the long continued and often repeated efforts of the government of the United States to preserve to the country the blessings of peace, and at the same time to maintain the honor and independence of the nation. Negotiation has at length been abandoned as hopeless; Resistance has been commenced as the last resort.”
Finally, Madison’s New Jersey supporters promised, “On behalf of the republican citizens of this state, and of ourselves, we, therefore, sir, assure you, we are now as much in favor of a vigorous prosecution of the war until our wrongs are redressed and our rights respected, as we have heretofore been of the preservation of peace, while it could be maintained without a surrender of our rights and interests. And we are fully of opinion that the confidence of the friends of government in New Jersey will be increased rather than diminished, by the measures adopted by the general government for the support of our unquestionable inalienable rights.”
As the loyal citizens met in Trenton, the ship carrying word that the grievances had been in fact redressed was still in mid-Atlantic. Closer to the Jersey Shore, British and American warships had met, and once the bullets started flying, there would be no turning back.
Next Week: Who fired the first shot?

Canadian fifty-dollar note
|This article relies on references to primary sources. (September 2011)|
|Value:||50 Canadian dollars|
|Security Features:||Transparent windows, metallic portrait, Watermark, EURion constellation, Tactile marks, Registration device, Raised printing, UV printing|
|Design:||William Lyon Mackenzie King|
|Design:||CCGS Amundsen; "Arctic" in Inuktitut; map of the northern regions of Canada|
From the Frontier (2011-present) series. The current 50-dollar note is predominantly red in colour and is printed on polymer (plastic), not paper. In addition to being more durable than the cotton-based paper they replaced, the new notes are also more secure. It was introduced into circulation on March 26, 2012 and is part of the new Polymer Series (2011). The front features a portrait of William Lyon Mackenzie King. A large clear window runs vertically on the right hand side of the face of the note. There is a second metallic hologram image of King on the top of the window, and a hologram image of the Peace Tower of Canada's Parliament buildings on the bottom of the window. A ribbon made of multiple number 50s weaves between the duplicate King portrait and the Centre Block. The top left corner of the note's face has a metallic maple leaf surrounded by a transparent border. The reverse side depicts the Canadian Coast Guard Ship (CCGS) Amundsen, a research icebreaker. Because the note is plastic, the same clear windows and metallic images that are seen on the front are seen on the reverse. As well as textured printing, this design incorporates a special tactile feature similar to Braille dots for the blind indicating the denomination.
From the Canadian Journey (2004) series. It features, on the front, a portrait of William Lyon Mackenzie King, the coat of arms, and a picture of the Peace Tower of the Parliament buildings. Security features visible from the front include a hologram strip along the left side, depicting the number 50 alternated with maple leaves; a watermark of King's portrait; and a broken-up number 50, which resolves itself when backlit. The reverse side depicts themes in Canadian human rights history, such as the Famous Five celebrating the Persons case, and a volunteer medal commemorating Thérèse Casgrain; it also has a quotation from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The reverse also has a visible security feature: an interleaved metallic strip, reading '50 CAN' repeatedly along its length.
From the Birds of Canada (1988) series. It features, on the front, a portrait of William Lyon Mackenzie King, the coat of arms, and a picture of the Centre Block of Parliament. On the reverse side is a wilderness scene with a Snowy Owl. It also had a holographic sticker showing the amount in the top left side, which changes from gold to green when tilted. The front has a wavy background of extremely small but still clear numeral 50s. This "micro-printed" background is very hard to copy. Some of the printing is textured, and the raised ink can be felt.
All Canadian banknotes underwent a major redesign, beginning in 1986, partially to incorporate some of the latest anti-forgery methods. Notes continued to be improved, with the design placed into circulation on November 17, 2004. Notes were printed on paper composed of pure cotton at two Ottawa companies contracted for the purpose: the Canadian Bank Note Company and BA International Inc., a part of the Giesecke & Devrient GmbH group of companies.
Each $50 banknote in the 1988 series was sprinkled with special green ink dots that glow when exposed to ultraviolet light. The ink can be scraped off, so worn notes tend to have fewer, if any, glowing dots. These were replaced with more permanent ultraviolet-detected threads in the new notes, as well as an ink imprint of the coat of arms.
As with all modern Canadian banknotes, all text is in both English and French.

Some sample questions from this category:
* What is the name of the first explorer in 1540 to visit the area later known as Tennessee?
* Which country controlled the Tennessee land after the conclusion of the French and Indian wars in 1763?
* The term 'Tennessee' is derived from what Cherokee word?
* The Tennessee State flag is colored red (crimson), white, and blue, with three stars encircled in the center of the flag. What do the three stars symbolize?
* Which of the following is NOT one of Tennessee's official state songs?

Federal Employment Discrimination Laws
Specific acts that established Federal employment discrimination laws are linked below. Federal discrimination laws are also called anti-discrimination laws or equal employment opportunity laws.
Acts that are not Federal discrimination laws per se, but still have provisions that prohibit prejudice in employment, are also included, as are resources to learn about discrimination laws.
About Federal Discrimination Laws
As indicated above, Federal discrimination laws are established by acts of congress. Laws are also called statutes and are enforced by regulations.
Federal discrimination laws make it illegal for employers to discriminate against employees and job applicants in any aspect of employment based on age, disability, national origin, race, religion, genetics or sex (gender).
The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) enforces the most significant ("landmark") Federal discrimination laws related to employment. But states are permitted to enact and enforce their own employment discrimination laws that include or expand the minimum protections afforded by the Federal laws.
Some states refer to discrimination laws as fair employment practices (FEP) laws. To research either on the Web, start with the resources listed in State Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or State Labor Laws.
Federal Discrimination Law Links
Affirmative Action under Title VII
Title 29, Chapter XIV, Part 1608 is a labor law enforced by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, that establishes guidelines for developing appropriate affirmative action programs under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (see below).
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
Considered to be among the landmark, Federal discrimination laws, it prohibits age discrimination in any aspect of employment against individuals who are 40 years old or older. Amended by the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act of 1990 (below), which makes it unlawful to discriminate on the basis of age against individuals who are 40 or older, for employment benefit programs.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
The ADA too is considered to be among the landmark, Federal employment discrimination laws. It prohibits discrimination in any aspect of employment against qualified disabled individuals, because of their disabilities. Requires employers to provide reasonable accommodations for disabled workers. Effective January 1, 2009, the ADA was strengthened by the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAA or ADA Amendments Act for short) to better protect disabled workers from employment discrimination.
Not a discrimination law per se, but it has provisions that make it unlawful for employers to discriminate against incumbent employees and public-sector job applicants because of bankruptcy or the bad debts they had before filing for bankruptcy. According to precedential court decisions, the wording does not specifically prohibit private-sector employers from discriminatorily refusing to hire job applicants based on bankruptcy or prior debt, but it does prohibit them from wrongfully terminating and otherwise discriminating against their current employees.
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Title VII of this Act is the landmark, Federal employment discrimination law. It prohibits discrimination in any aspect of employment on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex (gender). (See also Sexual Harassment in the Workplace below.) This Act also established the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
Civil Rights Act of 1991
Amends the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to strengthen and improve Federal civil rights laws, provide for damages in cases of intentional employment discrimination, clarify provisions regarding disparate impact actions, and for other purposes.
Equal Pay Act of 1963
One of the landmark, Federal discrimination laws for employment, it disallows wage discrimination based on gender for all jobs that require equal skill, effort and responsibility under similar working conditions at the same employer. Part of the Fair Labor Standards Act, which also has provisions for overtime pay, minimum wage and child labor (see Federal Labor Laws).
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008
GINA prohibits genetic discrimination in employment and health insurance. Title I, which applies to health insurers, took effect in phases up to May 21, 2010. Title II, which applies to employers, became effective on November 21, 2009. Title III amended the Fair Labor Standards Act to stiffen penalties for violating its child labor provisions.
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
Not a Federal employment discrimination law per se. Rather it amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to prohibit employment discrimination against individuals other than illegal aliens, based on citizenship status or national origin.
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009
Changed the statue of limitations for filing a wage discrimination charge with the EEOC, from 180 days after the first incident of wage discrimination to 180 days after each incident (or 300 days after each incident if a state law comes into play). Amends Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 listed elsewhere on this page. See the blog post Obama Signs Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act for more information. For an example, see Compensation Discrimination published by the EEOC.
Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (No Fear Act)
The No Fear Act makes Federal government employers more accountable than ever before, for violating antidiscrimination and whistleblower protection laws in the Federal government workplace. "No Fear" is not just a clever acronym, as it also means that Federal employees may report such violations without fearing retaliation.
Older Workers Benefit Protection Act of 1990
OWBPA amended the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (above), by clarifying protections for workers of age 40 and older regarding employee benefit plans.
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978
Another of the landmark, Federal discrimination laws protecting employment, it prohibits sex discrimination on the basis of pregnancy and childbirth, and related medical conditions. An amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 listed above.
Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Section 503 prohibits discrimination by Federal government employers and other employers that receive financial assistance from any Federal department or agency, against workers who have qualified disabilities. It also prohibits employment discrimination against workers who have qualified disabilities, by contractors and subcontractors working on contracts with the Federal government of over $10,000, including state and local governments. AIDS discrimination is prohibited under Section 504 of this Act. See also Sections 501 and 505 and Section 508.
Section 1981(a) was originally enacted as the first section of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, which protected the rights of freed slaves. The Civil Rights Act of 1991 amended it, by adding Section 1981(b). Since then, the Supreme Court has affirmed that employees may sue their employers under Section 1981 for employment discrimination on the basis of race and for race-based retaliation, which has several advantages verses suing under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Sexual Harassment in the Workplace
There is no standalone, Federal employment discrimination law per se, that prohibits sexual harassment in the workplace. Rather sexual harassment in the workplace is a form of sex discrimination that is prohibited under the Civil Rights Act of 1964 listed above. However, your state might have its own workplace sexual harassment law that includes or expands the minimum Federal protections.
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
Not a Federal employment discrimination law per se. But among other provisions that protect the jobs and employer-provided benefits of service members returning to the civilian workforce, USERRA also has provisions that prohibit job discrimination against veterans on the basis of their military service. The VOW to Hire Heroes Act of 2011 (see TITLE II) amended USERRA to strengthen its discrimination provisions. See also Employment Discrimination for Military Service and Veterans' Preference.
Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974
Prohibits employment discrimination by employers with Federal contracts or subcontracts of $25,000 or more and provides affirmative-action programs for Vietnam-era veterans, special disabled veterans, and veterans who served on active duty during any war, campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge was authorized. See also Employment Discrimination for Military Service and Veterans' Preference.
Youth at Work
A special site by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, that explains employment discrimination for young employees and supervisory personnel. Also provides examples and answers to frequently-asked questions (FAQs).
Consult an attorney for legal advice regarding a Federal employment discrimination law or a related lawsuit.

WARNING: This post contains images of dead birds. I encourage you to read on. I feel showing these images is very important to the issue at hand. If you just can't look at that, here's a link to some Sharp-tailed Grouse I saw on Manitoulin Island.
Tomorrow, I'm making what could be called a pilgrimage for Ontario birders. It's the best place to see birds at the best time of year to see them. In North-West Ohio, Kenn Kaufman takes part in a very large birding week. In fact, it's The Biggest Week in American Birding. Ours happens in and around Point Pelee and Pelee Island (home to the Pelee Island Bird Observatory). That's very close to North-West Ohio. Only a few miles apart actually, separated by lake Erie, these two places make two of the most significant stops for migrating birds in north America. They are located where parts of both the Mississippi and the Atlantic Flyways come together.
Note: I know cats kill MANY birds a year. We don't usually let our cat outside.
She must have escaped an open window. Hence the fact that she's on the roof.
So why is this post called, "Hoping for a not-so-big day?" Well because today I did a different kind of birding. It still involved waking before the sun rose, heading to a specific 'hotspot', and searching for birds. The difference was that most of the birds we'd be seeing would be dying, injured or dead. Today, I am volunteering with an organization called FLAP. That stands for Fatal Light Awareness Program. Their full name can be a bit misleading. I'll explain that subtlety later. What FLAP does every morning during spring and fall migration is head downtown Toronto before the throngs of people arrive and collect dead and injured birds.
|Blue-Gray Gnatcatcher with a really bad looking eye.|
Why are there enough dead and injured birds to warrant an organization to collect them? The reason is two fold. Firstly, at night, birds use the constellations to help them navigate as they migrate and tall buildings with lights on all night confuse them (hence the name Fatal Light Awareness Program). They get lost in the maze of skyscrapers. Secondly, during the day, reflective glass buildings basically make the buildings invisible to birds. For example, when a bird is in a tree or garden near a glass building and they see another tree next to them, they fly over to it, expecting to find more shelter and food. Instead, it was only a reflection of the tree they were already in and they strike the glass, often killing them. When the glass is transparent, they see 'decorative' foliage inside as another safe place to be. You might think they wouldn't fly fast enough to kill themselves when just hopping from tree to tree. Think about the last time you banged your shin on a coffee table. You didn't expect it to be there so you walked pretty swiftly into it. Or, think of the last time you bit your tongue. Through the searing pain, you might wonder, "Why the hell was I biting a French Fry so effing hard that I made my tongue bleed for ten minutes?" My point is, you aren't aware of how much force is involved in even the smallest thing. So I'd guess bird aren't either. They just do things.
If they do survive a strike, they aren't in the clear yet. A stunned bird will just lie there and wait out the dizziness. That's all well and good except for the gulls. Gulls are smart birds. They actually sit around waiting in areas they know birds hit windows. I witnessed this behavior this morning. As the sun rose, gulls stated appearing out of nowhere. All around me I could hear and see White-throated Sparrows. So when a small bird hits the glass, gulls are there to eat them alive. Now don't get me wrong, I have nothing against nature running it's course, but when a building is involved, we altered that course beyond what's fair to the songbirds. So in this case, I think it's OK to intervene and save them.
|A bag of dead Brown Creepers.|
|American Woodcock with various others including a few Canada Warblers.|
Canada Warblers are listed as Threatened.
My favorite bird, a Brown Thrasher. This one really put a lump in my throat.
I named my son after this bird, that's how much I love it.
|Close-up of a Sharp-shinned Hawk.|
|The worst kind of life list...|

The Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 requires the Environmental Protection Agency to establish an Office of Pollution Prevention, develop and coordinate a pollution prevention strategy, and develop source reduction models. The act requires owners and operators of manufacturing facilities to report annually on source reduction and recycling activities, and authorizes EPA to collect data collection on pollution prevention.
Enactment of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 marked a turning point in the direction of U.S. environmental protection policy. From an earlier focus on the need to reduce or repair environmental damage by controlling pollutants at the point where they are released to the environment — i.e., at the “end of the pipe” or smokestack, at the boundary of a polluter’s private property, in transit over public highways and waterways, or after disposal — Congress turned to pollution prevention through reduced generation of pollutants at their point of origin. Broad support for this policy change was based on the notion that traditional approaches to pollution control had achieved progress, but may in the future be supplemented with new approaches that might better address cross-media pollution transfers, the need for cost-effective alternatives, and methods of controlling pollution from dispersed or nonpoint sources of pollution.
Pollution prevention, also referred to as “source reduction,” is viewed by its advocates as the first in a hierarchy of options to reduce risks to human health and the environment. Where prevention is not possible or may not be cost-effective, other options would include recycling, followed next by waste treatment according to environmental standards, and as a last resort, safe disposal of waste residues. Source reduction is the preferred strategy for environmental protection because it often: is cost-effective; offers industry substantial savings in reduced raw materials, pollution control costs, and liability costs; reduces risks to workers; and reduces risk to the environment and public health.
In 1990, opportunities for source reduction appeared to be plentiful, but often were unrealized or rejected by industries without adequate consideration. The act was meant to increase interest in source reduction and encourage adoption of costeffective source reduction practices. The law was enacted as Title VI of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, P.L. 101-508, and is codified as 42 U.S.C. 13101-13109.
Section 6602(b) of the Pollution Prevention Act states that it is the policy of the United States that “pollution should be prevented or reduced at the source whenever feasible; pollution that cannot be prevented should be recycled in an environmentally safe manner, whenever feasible; pollution that cannot be prevented or recycled should be treated in an environmentally safe manner whenever feasible; and disposal or other release into the environment should be employed only as a last resort and should be conducted in an environmentally safe manner.”
Section 6603(5) defines source reduction as any practice which —
- reduces the amount of any hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant entering any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment (including fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment, or disposal; and
- reduces the hazards to public health and the environment associated with the release of such substances, pollutants, or contaminants."
Section 6604 of the act required EPA to establish an Office of Pollution Prevention. The office must be independent of the “single-medium program offices,” but was given authority to review and advise those offices to promote an integrated, multi-media (i.e., air, land, and water) approach to source reduction. EPA was directed to develop and implement a detailed and coordinated strategy to promote source reduction, to consider the effect on source reduction of all EPA programs and regulations, and to identify and make recommendations to Congress to eliminate barriers to source reduction. EPA also must conduct workshops and produce and disseminate guidance documents as part of a training program on source reduction opportunities for state and federal enforcement officers of environmental regulations. EPA’s strategy, issued in 1991, identifies goals, tasks, target dates, resources required, organizational responsibilities, and criteria to evaluate program progress. In addition, the act requires EPA to promote source reduction practices in other federal agencies and to identify opportunities to use federal procurement to encourage source reduction.
To facilitate source reduction by industry, EPA is required under Section 6604 to develop, test, and disseminate model source reduction auditing procedures to highlight opportunities; promote research and development of source reduction techniques and processes with broad applicability; establish an annual award program to recognize innovative programs; establish a program under Section 6605 of state matching grants for programs to provide technical assistance to business; and disseminate information about source reduction techniques through a clearinghouse established in Section 6606.
The act also includes provisions to improve data collection and public access to environmental data. Section 6604(b) directs EPA to develop improved methods of coordinating, streamlining and assuring access to data collected under all federal environmental statutes. An advisory panel of technical experts is established to advise the Administrator on ways to improve collection and dissemination of data. With respect to data collected under federal environmental statutes, Section 6608 directs EPA to evaluate data gaps and data duplication as well as methods of coordinating, streamlining, and improving public access.
Section 6607 requires owners and operators of many industrial facilities to report annually on their releases of toxic chemicals to the environment (under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, Section 313). The Pollution Prevention Act requires these reports to include information about the facility’s efforts in source reduction and recycling. Specifically, reports must include:
- the quantity of the toxic chemical entering any waste stream (or released to the environment) prior to recycling, treatment, or disposal;
- the quantity of toxic substance recycled (on- or off-site);
- the source reduction practices used;
- quantities of toxic chemical expected to enter waste streams and to be recycled in the two years following the year for which the report is prepared;
- ratio of production in the reporting year to production in the previous year;
- techniques used to identify opportunities for source reduction;
- amount of toxic chemical released in a catastrophic event, remedial action, or other one-time event; and
- amount of toxic chemical treated on- or off-site.
All collected information is to be made available to the general public.
Section 6607(c) of the Pollution Prevention Act provides enforcement authority under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (also known as the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act). Civil, administrative, and criminal penalties are authorized for non-compliance with mandatory provisions. Citizens are given the authority to bring civil action for noncompliance against a facility, EPA, a governor, or a State Emergency Response Commission.
Section 6608(a) requires EPA to file a report on implementation of its Pollution Prevention Strategy biennially. The required contents of the reports are specified in the statute.
Authorization for appropriations under the Pollution Prevention Act expired September 30, 1993, but appropriations have continued.
- National Pollution Prevention Roundtable. An Ounce of Pollution Prevention is Worth Over 167 Billion Pounds of Cure: A Decade of Pollution Prevention Results 1990 - 2000. Washington, DC, 2003. 53 pp.
- U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics. Program Accomplishments: Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 2000 - 2002. Washington, DC, 2002. 40 pp.
Note: This article was extracted from from the Congressional Research Service Report RL30798, Environmental Laws: Summaries of Major Statutes Administered by the Environmental Protection Agency by David M. Bearden, Claudia Copeland, Linda Luther, James E. McCarthy, Linda-Jo Schierow, and Mary Tiemann (October 8, 2010).
Disclaimer: This article is taken wholly from, or contains information that was originally published by, the Congressional Research Service. Topic editors and authors for the Encyclopedia of Earth may have edited its content or added new information. The use of information from the Congressional Research Service should not be construed as support for or endorsement by that organization for any new information added by EoE personnel, or for any editing of the original content.
Note: The first version of this article was drawn from material prepared for the Congressional Research Service by Linda Schierow.

To help you out Hannah, i believe the "LXX" is also called the Septuagint:
Septuagint - Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaThe Septuagint derives its name from Latin versio septuaginta interpretum,"translation of the seventy interpreters," (Greek: ἡ μετάφρασις τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα, hē metáphrasis tōn hebdomēkonta), "translation of the seventy ". The title refers to a legendary account in the pseudepigraphic Letter of Aristeas of how seventy-two Jewish scholars were asked by the Greek King of Egypt Ptolemy II Philadelphus in the 3rd century BCE to translate the Torah (or Pentateuch) from Biblical Hebrew into Greek for inclusion in the Library of Alexandria.
As narrated by Philo of Alexandria, 72 Jewish translators were enlisted to complete the translation while kept in separate chambers. They all produced identical versions of the text in seventy-two days. This story underlines the fact that some Jews in antiquity wished to present the translation as authoritative. A version of this legend is found in the Tractate Megillah of the Babylonian Talmud (pages 9a-9b), which identifies fifteen specific unusual translations made by the scholars. Only two of these translations are found in the extant LXX.

“What are your opinions about running and pregnancy. Does it affect it does it hurt the baby in the beginning trimester? Does it affect trying to get pregnant? There are so many myths out there. I have been training for a half marathon for the past year and have a good base of ten miles and have run 3 half marathons, everyone tells me to stop if I want to get pregnant, but I feel like I already have a good base so its not like I am overworking myself to the point of exhaustion. Any tips you have I’d love them.”
As a rule, pregnant women are encouraged to engage in regular, moderate intensity physical activity. You are correct, however, in that there are many myths surrounding exercise and pregnancy. This is partly due to the scarcity of data on the subject and the ever changing positions from the American Academy of Obstetrics and Gynecology over the years. Some of the original concerns were theoretical. These included a fear that rising a woman’s body temperature, as occurs with exercise, can cause birth defects in the developing baby particularly in the first 3 months (first trimester). This concern was based on studies done in mice in which increases in body temperature resulted in deformed or miscarried babies. This has never been proven in humans although, as you can imagine, such a study would be difficult to find volunteers. Body temperatures between 102 and 103 degrees Fahrenheit can be reached in normal modest to intense exercise under normal conditions without harm to a developing baby. Another myth associated with exercise was the fear that active muscles demand increased blood flow, blood flow that could be taken away from or stolen from the baby and placenta. This also has never been proven under typical exercise conditions. Lastly, is the fear that the excess jostling that occurs with exercise could be harmful to the baby. This may be true for situations in which the mother is exposed to major trauma e.g. motor vehicle accidents or falls, but is not true for typical non-contact exercise in an otherwise normal and uncomplicated pregnancy.

This brochure is courtesy of the Renal Resource Centre.
If you have a relative whose kidneys have failed and who needs a kidney transplant, you may be thinking of giving one of your kidneys to help save his/her life and to overcome the long-term problems of artificial kidney treatment.
Transplant results are best when the donor and the recipient are identical on the white blood cell HLA antigen series. Because of inherited genes this can only happen between brothers and sisters where there is a 1 in 4 chance of a perfect match. Parents and children have only a 50% match because only half of the genes in a child come from each parent.
Although this is usually acceptable, occasionally there are problems with red cell (ordinary blood group) typing. Transplants with living related donors are more likely to be successful than with unrelated, or recently deceased donors because the body tissues are more likely to be closely matched. For this reason, the recipients require less immunosuppressive drugs and therefore have fewer side effects, especially if the donor and recipient are fully matched.

Guugu Yimithirr language
|Native speakers||200–300 (1991)|
Guugu Yimithirr, also rendered Guguyimidjir / / and many other spellings, is an Australian Aboriginal language, the traditional language of the Guugu Yimithirr people of Far North Queensland. It belongs to the Pama-Nyungan language family. Most of the speakers today live at the community of Hopevale, about 46 km from Cooktown. Guugu Yimithirr is one of the more famous Aboriginal, or otherwise non-English, Australian languages because it is the source language of the word "kangaroo."
The word guugu means "speech, language", while yimithirr (or yumuthirr) means yimi-having, yimi being the word for "this". The use of the word yi(mi), rather than some other word for "this", was seen as a distinctive feature of Guugu Yimithirr. The element guugu and the practice of naming based on some distinctive word is found in many other languages.
The name has many spelling variants, including Gogo-Yimidjir, Gugu-Yimidhirr, Gugu Yimithirr, Guugu Yimidhirr, Guguyimidjir (used by Ethnologue), Gugu Yimijir, Kukuyimidir, Koko Imudji, Koko Yimidir, Kuku Jimidir, Kuku Yimithirr, and Kuku Yimidhirr.
Location of the Guugu Yimithirr people
The original territory of the Guugu Yimithirr tribe extended northwards to the mouth of the Jeannie River, where it was bordered by speakers of Guugu Nyiguudji; southwards to the Annan River, where it was bordered by speakers of Guugu Yalandji; to the west, it was bordered by speakers of a language called Guugu Warra (literally "bad talk") or Lama-Lama. The modern town of Cooktown is located within Guugu Yimithirr territory.
Guugu Yimithirr originally consisted of several dialects, although even the names of most have now been forgotten. Today two main dialects are distinguished: the coastal dialect, called dhalundirr "with the sea", and the inland dialect, called waguurrga "of the outside". Missionaries used the coastal dialect to translate hymns and Bible stories, so some of its words now have religious associations that the inland equivalents lack.
In 1770, Guugu Yimithirr became the first Australian Aboriginal language to be written down when Lieutenant (later Captain) James Cook and his crew recorded words while their ship, the HM Bark Endeavour, was being repaired after having run aground on a shoal of the Great Barrier Reef. Joseph Banks described the language as totally different from that of the Islanders; it sounded more like English in its degree of harshness tho it could not be calld [sic] harsh neither.
Among the words recorded were kangooroo or kanguru (IPA: /ɡaŋuru/), meaning a large black or grey kangaroo, which would become the general English term for all kangaroos, and dhigul (transcribed by Banks as Je-Quoll), the name of the quoll.
|High||i iː||u uː|
Short /u/ may be realized as unrounded [ɯ], and unstressed /a/ may be reduced to [ə].
The stops are usually voiceless and unaspirated initially and after short vowels, and voiced after consonants and long vowels.
The retroflexes [ɖ ɳ] may not be single phonemes, but clusters of /ɻd ɻn/. However, there is at least one word which, for older speakers, is pronounced with a word-initial retroflex: "run", which is [ɖudaː] or [ɖuɖaː].
All words, with the exception of a couple of interjections, begin with one consonant. The consonant can be a stop, nasal, or semivowel (that is, /l r ɻ/ do not occur initially).
Words can end in either a vowel or a consonant. The allowed word-final consonants are /l r ɻ j n n̪/.
Within words, any consonant can occur, as well as clusters of up to three consonants, which cannot occur initially or finally.
Like many Australian languages, Guugu Yimithirr pronouns have accusative morphology while nouns have ergative morphology. That is, the subject of an intransitive verb has the same form as the subject of a transitive verb if the subject is a pronoun, but the same form as the object of a transitive verb otherwise.
Regardless of whether nouns or pronouns are used, the usual sentence order is subject–object–verb, although other word orders are possible.
The language is notable for its use of pure geographic directions (north, south, east, west) rather than egocentric directions (left, right, forward, backward)., though such "purity" is disputed
- Guugu Yimithirr at Ethnologue (16th ed., 2009)
- Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Student’s Handbook, Edinburgh
- , and following pages.
- Deutscher, Guy (26 August 2010). "Does Your Language Shape How You Think?". The New York Times.
- Haviland, John B. (March 1998). "Guugu Yimithirr Cardinal Directions". Ethos 26 (1): 25–47. Retrieved 7 January 2013.
- Banks, Joseph (1962). J. C. Beaglehole, ed. The Endeavour journal of Joseph Banks, 1768-1771.
- Breen, Gavan (1970). "A re-examination of Cook's Gogo-Yimidjir word list". Oceania 41 (1): 28–38.
- Cook, James (1955). The Journals of Captain James Cook. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-665-35756-7.
- Dixon, R. M. W. (2002). Australian Languages: Their Nature and Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-47378-0.
- Haviland, John B. (1974). "A last look at Cook's Guugu-Yimidhirr wordlist". Oceania 44 (3): 216–232.
- Haviland, John B. (1979). "Guugu Yimidhirr Sketch Grammar". In R. M. W. Dixon and B. Blake. Handbook of Australian Languages Vol I. pp. 26–180.
- Haviland, John B. (1985). "The life history of a speech community: Guugu Yimidhirr at Hopevale". Aboriginal History 8 (7): 170–204.
- Richard Phillips; Sidney H. Ray (1898). "Vocabulary of Australian Aborigines in the neighbourhood of Cooktown, North Queensland". The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland (Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland) 27: 144–147. doi:10.2307/2842861. JSTOR 2842861.
- Roth, Walter E. (1901). The structure of the Koko-Yimidir language. Brisbane: Government Printer.
- Schwarz, G. H. (1946). Order of service and hymns. Brisbane: Watson, Ferguson.
- de Zwaan, Jan Daniel (1969). A preliminary analysis of Gogo-Yimidjir. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
- de Zwaan, Jan Daniel (1969). "Two studies in Gogo-Yimidjir". Oceania 39 (3): 198–217.

12-13 year old boys plan their own workshop where they meet with 12 senior citizens from the local area.
Charlotte Berry, Assistant Headteacher, Billericay School, explains what they did at their school.
“The Historypin workshop came about as part of our work with a group of twelve boys (aged 12-13) and their mentors (aged 16-17). We’ve been working with them to help them explore their individual skills and abilities and to develop positive behavior, particularly in group work.
I needed an activity that they could plan themselves where they could demonstrate motivation, responsibility and a degree of altruism. I wanted something that would involve them with the local community as part of the school’s Community Cohesion work.
I showed Historypin.com to the boys and we explored the site, discussed photos we’d brought in, scanned them and pinned them to the site. The boys then had to plan an entire workshop themselves to which we’d invite 12 senior citizens from the local area.
On the day of the workshop, we provided tea and coffee for the senior citizens and the boys ran some warm-up and ‘getting to know you’ activities. All of our guests had brought in photos and willingly discussed their memories and the stories behind them. The boys were totally engaged and absolutely fascinated. I was incredibly proud of how easily they chatted with the senior citizens because of their genuine interest in the photos they had brought in.
I’ve never seen them write as much as they wrote on the Historypin prompt sheet
They then scanned and uploaded photos, pinning them onto Historypin.com and adding information. The site is designed so that this is very straightforward to do this. They also explored other photos on the site and travelled all over Historypin using the Google Street View feature.
Initial evaluations of the Historypin sessions show that everyone thoroughly enjoyed the experience. The project completely fulfilled some of the key aims of the We Are What We Do’s inter-generational work - the sharing of knowledge and skills, breaking down barriers and over-turning misconceptions between generations.
We will definitely run these sessions again. Historypin has so much potential to be used across the curriculum, especially in History and English, and is perfect for designing community projects. We also intend to work with our feeder primary schools to help them run Historypin workshops with their children, parents and grandparents.”

International Labour Organisation
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) is the United Nations' specialised agency for labour issues.
ILO seeks to promote human and labour rights by establishing international standards of basic labour rights: freedom of association, the right to organize, collective bargaining, abolition of forced labour, equality of opportunity and treatment, and other standards regulating conditions across the entire spectrum of work related issues.
The International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC) works towards the progressive elimination of child labour by strengthening national capacities to address child labour problems, and by creating a worldwide movement to combat it. Founded by ILO in 1992, IPEC's work is considered especially important in contributing to ILO's Decent Work Agenda.
The impetus of World Scouting's involvement with ILO-IPEC is its interest in youth rights and protection. This interest was formally recognized with the Memorandum of Understanding on Child Labour in 2004.
In terms of advocacy, much of World Scouting's work with ILO-IPEC has been through YEN. Regarding child rights and protection, since 1992 World Scouting and ILO-IPEC have carried out the Extension Programme in Kenya. The Extension Program targets marginalized young people and helps them reintegrate into society by teaching them life and vocational skills.
12th June - World Day Against Child Labour 2009
Theme: Give girls a chance, end child labour
The World Day Against Child Labour will be celebrated on 12 June 2009. The World Day this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark ILO Convention No. 182, which addresses the need for action to tackle the worst forms of child labour.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) and World Organization of the Scout Movement (WOSM) share a common commitment to pursuing social justice and peace, empowering young people through human rights-based educational programmes and promoting the social dimension of globalisation. This long-standing partnership was recently strengthened through a renewed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) extending our cooperation in the fight against child labour, earlier this year.
Ms. Michele Jankanish, Director of the ILO’s International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC ) and Mr. Luc Panissod, Acting Secretary-General of the World Organization of the Scout Movement (WOSM), signed a new Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) today, to extend their cooperation in the fight against child labour for a further 3 years.
The cooperation between the two organizations will be based on a shared vision in pursuing social justice and peace, the empowerment of young people, and promoting the social dimensions of globalization.
The ILO has estimated that some 165 million children between the ages of 5 and 14 are involved in child labour. Many of these children work long hours, often in dangerous conditions. This year the World Day against Child Labour will be marked around the world with activities to raise awareness that Education is the right response to child labour. World Scouting, as the largest global youth movement which prides itself on its strong history of non-formal education, is encouraged to get involved and draw attention to the key issues related to Child Labour.
In view of the common commitment to defending and promoting the rights of children and young people, the partnership between the International Labour Organization (ILO) and World Scouting has continued to grow. An increasing number of joint initiatives between Scouts Organizations and ILO Field and Branch Offices are being developed at the local level, in particular in the framework of the SCREAM – Supporting Children’s Rights through Education, the Arts and the Media – programme ( www.ilo.org/scream).
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) is working with World Scouting to address the issue of child labour. This is mainly done through the International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC).

We are at a stage in time where we desperately need to find a viable alternative source of energy to replace our dependence on fossil fuel.
We always read articles regarding the major problems we are facing because of global warming. Many think that alternative energy should be focused on the development of wind and solar energy but when it comes to cold fusion most people and even some scientists think that it is just a waste of time.
Yes, a lot of people do not take cold fusion seriously. They think it is just a fraud or it is impossible to achieve and only the sun can replicate its process. But imagine having limitless sources of energy. Cold fusion will rely on our ocean because the process involves heavy hydrogen, found in oceans, being fused with precious metals and coupled with a jolt of electricity. The result of this combination would be an intense amount of energy that could forever provide us all the energy we need. It is our hope that one day cold fusion will become a reality and replace all the planet’s oil reserves. Scientists and engineers continue harnessing and discovering the missing steps in making this dream a reality.

Daylight Saving Time 2012: When Do We Set the Clocks Back?
"Spring forward, fall back," is the mantra you need to remember on Nov 4.
Daylight Saving Time ends on Sunday, Nov. 4, at 2 a.m., right before the Presidential election on Nov. 6.
You will be setting your clock back one hour, following the adage of “spring forward, fall back.” The “extra” hour gives you a chance to catch up on the sleep you lost in March when the clocks moved forward and Daylight Saving Time began.
The federal government doesn’t require states to adopt Daylight Saving Time, so Arizona doesn’t. Indiana used to ignore Daylight Savings, but now observes it. Indiana is the only state, however, with counties in two time zones. Ones snuggled up close to Lake Michigan and Chicago are on Central Time, but the rest of the state is on Eastern Standard Time.
In an effort to save resources during World War II, the U.S. made daylight saving time mandatory for the whole country. And it was observed the entire year.
Some studies have shown that extending Daylight Saving Time results in a reduction in energy consumption; other studies suggest just the opposite.

Q:Dr Norman, what is the specific biomedical research area in which you have been labelled a groundbreaking pioneer?
A:It has to do with vitamin B12. Along with co-workers at the University of Cincinnati, I developed a highly accurate, simple urine test for identifying an early deficiency in this vitamin.
Why is B12 deficiency serious?
It can lead to anemia (called 'pernicious anemia'). It can also cause problems with the nervous system. These include walking difficulties due to spinal cord degeneration, and memory loss which is indistinguishable from early Alzheimer's. The person can become confined to a wheelchair or permanently demented. However, if it is treated early with B12 injections, these conditions can reverse. If not treated in time, the changes can be permanent.
What causes B12 deficiency?
Usually it is not from a poor diet. As a person ages, the stomach produces less of the protein which carries B12 into the body. Thus, even though a person eats a perfectly normal diet, the vitamin B12 cannot be absorbed. Of course, since B12 is found only in foods from animals, strict vegetarians are also at risk. It has been known that vitamin B12 is needed to change methylmalonic acid (MMA) to succinic acid. With low B12 levels, this conversion is blocked, so MMA builds up in the body. Testing for MMA in a urine sample using gas chromatography mass spectrometry is the best way to detect vitamin B12 deficiency.
Is there evidence that this problem has been seriously overlooked? For instance, that people in nursing homes labelled as having the untreatable Alzheimer's brain degeneration actually had this treatable B12 deficiency?
Yes. Traditionally doctors have looked for anemia; when there was none, they did not suspect B12 deficiency. However, research shows people can have neurologic and psychologic problems without having anemia. In my studies of hospital patients with diagnosed B12 deficiency, 20 per cent had no anemia. Many had severe neurologic problems; they just had not been diagnosed correctly because they did not have anemia.
Has there been any testing on the general population?
As part of my research, hundreds of people over age 65 were tested. I found that about five out of every 100 had a B12 deficiency without any evidence of anemia. This research was partly funded with a grant from the National Institutes of Health. This work also showed that about 49 per cent of the people identified as having a definite B12 deficiency with the MMA test had a normal or low-normal blood test for B12. This means that blood tests for vitamin B12 are not accurate enough for screening.
It seems that with proper screening in that age group, many thousands of people can be rescued from being demented, crippled, or both. Are others beginning to pick up on this?
Yes, a number of other researchers have now reproduced what I have done. Some have measured MMA in the blood and are coming up with the same pattern of results. At a recent national convention on the subject, MMA testing was mentioned as the biggest advance in this area in recent years. Now some doctors are screening their patients to identify B12 deficiency early, when it can be corrected.
That's wonderful. How did your belief in Jesus Christ as your Saviour and Lord influence your research?
I received Jesus as my Lord and Saviour when I was 11. However, in my late twenties I began to really study the Bible and realized that God's entire Word was trustworthy. I believe as I have followed Christ, He has guided my life, including my research. One of my favourite Bible verses is Proverbs 3:6. ['In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.']
What about evolution?
In graduate school, I had an open mind about it. People presented evolution as fact, and I thought, 'Can you show me? Not just statements, but from real evidence?' As I studied the complexity of life processes and biomolecules, I saw there were really no facts at all for evolution.
Dr Norman, didn't you work on DNA for your Master's degree?
Yes, I did chemical synthesis on parts of the DNA molecule. These sub-units, the nucleotides and nucleosides, have bases out the side that act like 'letters' carrying genetic information. I worked many long months connecting just three of these bases.
But everyone is told that this complex molecule needed for life, with millions of bases in the proper order, just 'happened'.
Actually, I found that to connect these DNA 'letters' together correctly, a protective group must be attached on parts of the molecule to prevent wrong connections. A catalyst is also needed as a condensing agent, and the chemical reaction must take place in a completely water-free environment. If the flask is left open even momentarily, the humidity in the air would prevent the reaction. So I thought, I am connecting only three bases together. How could DNA randomly form out in an ocean or pond? What about all the proteins, sugars, and lipids also needed for life? The DNA in a 'simple' bacterium carries so many 'letters' in sequence that, if you typed it out, it would fill about 2,000 ordinary pages. One human cell would take about a million pages.
So you came to your creation belief experimentally, in a sense?
Yes. I did not read any specific creation literature. Evolution is just unscientific. It violates the laws of chemistry including the Second Law of Thermodynamics, the laws of probability, and information theory.
Anti-creationists commonly charge creationists with misusing the Second Law of Thermodynamics, saying that an 'open system' solves the problem.
Well, if you put a drop of dye in a swimming pool, that's pretty open, but the molecules are going to diffuse out, not collect together. Systems tend to move into states of greater disorganization. The complex DNA molecules I was working with have a tendency to break down into less complex forms. Very hard, directed work is required to get even the simple parts to form in a particular order. Random processes just won't do it. Chemical synthesis is a very exact science. Living things make these chemicals because they carry intelligently designed programs which direct all the complicated machinery needed.
So an open system and energy doesn't solve the problem for the evolutionist? You need to have all this programmed machinery already there?
In fact, a number of scientists are now acknowledging this and admitting that there must be an undiscovered scientific law that caused simple molecules to organize themselves into life. But they don't know how.
What about six-day creation versus long-age creation like Rossism?
Hebrew professors say the word 'day' in its context in Genesis can mean only a 24-hour day. Also, the Genesis account is in harmony with other Bible passages. I believe what God tells me and there is nothing in my understanding of science that convinces me otherwise. In evaluating all the models, the six-day, global-flood model, which is what the Bible plainly teaches, is the only one that really holds up.
Some would be surprised that scientists like yourself who have made a name in their field can believe in creation and the Bible.
Actually, I know of quite a number of scientists in various fields who are solidly creationist, although they are not out there giving talks at seminars or submitting papers on it. I think it is important to get it into the open and rationally discuss the existence of a creation model. I think that if the facts are brought out, more and more people will fall into the creation camp because that is where the evidence lies.
Why do most educated people believe in evolution?
I think it is because they have been told that 'most educated people believe in evolution'. They have rarely investigated the facts. That is why I think the Creation Science Foundation, the Answers in Genesis ministry, and Creationmagazine are so beneficial and important.
Help keep these daily articles coming. Support AiG.
“Now that I have updated, revised, and expanded The Lie, I believe it’s an even more powerful, eyeopening book for the church—an essential resource to help all of us to understand the great delusion that permeates our world! The message of The Lie IS the message of AiG and why we even exist! It IS the message God has laid on our hearts to bring before the church! It IS a vital message for our time.”
– Ken Ham, president and founder of AiG–U.S.
Answers magazine is the Bible-affirming, creation-based magazine from Answers in Genesis. In it you will find fascinating content and stunning photographs that present creation and worldview articles along with relevant cultural topics. Each quarterly issue includes a detachable chart, a pullout children’s magazine, a unique animal highlight, excellent layman and semi-technical articles, plus bonus content. Why wait? Subscribe today and get a FREE DVD download!

The Dark Side
In its broadest sense, culture is the sum total of our beliefs, our fears, our behavior patterns, our institutions, our common values, as well as our art, music, and literature. But the arts often neglect or omit reference to the Cold War. In fact, most of us who lived through those times have scant visual knowledge of what may be fairly called the dark side of our culture. We were immersed in the myopic soup of getting an education, finding a job, marrying, and having children. Meanwhile, far from our thoughts, bright and earnest young men were spending 24-hour duties behind 7-ft thick steel doors. There they drilled constantly the procedures to launch missiles with a 30-minute trip to the Soviet Union. The nuclear warhead on the Titan II missile shown here packed nearly three times the explosive power of all the bombs dropped by the Allies in WWII. And there were 54 of these missiles on alert for 25 years.
Most of us remember periods in our lives most vividly in terms of the popular music of the time. This project depicts some of the objects from the dark side of our culture during the Cold War and links them with popular music of the era. As surreal as the images are by themselves, their juxtaposition with the music magnifies the dreamlike quality of what was really at stake and how little the existence of these doomsday machines seemed to touch our lives. By the way, bright and earnest young men (and now women) still pull 24-hour duty in launch-control bunkers every day. (Make sure your speakers are on and don't forget to come back from Youtube :-)

Malay Peninsula, Sumatra and Borneo
In and near large bodies of fresh or possibly slightly brackish water
Adults grow 28-32 inches. Carapace is low, smooth, oval and uniformly dark gray, brown or black. The pale buff colored plastron is long and narrow and the side margins may be keeled. The head is relatively large and broad. The snout with a slightly hooked upper jaw projects a bit. Large scales run in a strip between the tympanum and eye and there are granular scales on the back of the uniformly brown-black head. Forelegs also have scales on the front. Toes are webbed. Males tails are longer and thicker then females. The young have a white line extending from the corner of the mouth down the neck. With age the develop white random, spider-web-like markings on the central scutes.
Behavior: They spend much time basking in the sun near the waters edge and eat in both water and on land.
Reproduction: This turtle nests in piles of debris. Eggs are brittle and ellipsoidal, about 80 x 40 mm. Hatchlings are about 60 mm long with very rugose carapaces and sharply serrated posterior marginals.
Did You Know?
The emydidae family of turtles is the largest family of living turtles
Where in the Zoo?
I can be found in the Gharial Crocodile Exhibit at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo.

Besides adding beauty to the landscape, gardens that are creatively designed and well-tended can increase the value of property. Some gardens provide food for the table and others furnish cut flowers for indoor enjoyment. On larger properties these special feature gardens break up the monotony of lawn and reduce mowing time. Blending your garden into the surrounding landscape will also help to minimize habitat fragmentation effects.
If you do not own property, you can still enjoy a small-scale garden by arranging planters and potted flowers on the balcony or deck of your apartment, townhouse, or condominium. Specialty gardens attract certain kinds of wildlife, which serve to enhance viewing pleasure. Butterfly, hummingbird, and native prairie gardens are well suited to this purpose. This chapter will offer suggestions on how to create them.
North America is home to more than 700 species of butterflies. At least 200 of them occur in Michigan and the Midwest including swallowtails, skippers, satyrs, sulphurs, and cabbage butterflies along with the monarch, painted lady, comma, red-spotted purple, and red admiral. Adult butterflies are most attracted to red, yellow, orange, pink, and purple flowers that grow in sunny locations and that offer an easy source of nectar. Butterfly caterpillars will use at least 175 kinds of Midwest plants, nearly 50 of which are also excellent for attracting bees. Several kinds of moths, including hummingbird clearwings, night- and day-flying sphinx species, prometheas, and cecropias, are also regularly attracted to butterfly gardens.
A butterfly garden can quickly become the prize feature of your yard. Options include developing the garden around a theme like native prairie wildflowers or native woodland wildflowers. There are four key factors to creating a successful butterfly garden: (1) location, (2) plant composition/nectar sources for adult butterflies, (3) caterpillar habitat, and (4) avoiding insecticide use.
Hummingbirds pollinate more than 160 native North American plants. Because of their extremely high metabolism, hummingbirds consume daily up to one-half their body weight in food and as much as eight times their body weight in fluids. Besides feeding on flower nectar, the ruby-throated hummingbird (the only hummingbird species found in Michigan) also eats small insects. Usually attracted to red, tubular flowers, hummingbirds also use a wide variety of other flowers. Thus, you can add both diversity and color to your yard while providing excellent sources of nectar and small insects for hummingbirds. Incidentally, because orioles use many of the same plants as hummingbirds, your hummingbird garden may provide additional habitat for them and increase your viewing pleasure.
Unlike butterflies, hummingbirds find sources of food regardless of sun or shade. However, the plants themselves can have specific sunlight requirements. So, when planning the location of your hummingbird garden, consider the sunlight requirements or limitations of the plants you wish to highlight there. You may also want to consider visibillity. Because hummingbirds are highly territorial, you might want to locate plants throughout your yard, in addition to the specialized garden.
You may also want to supplement natural nectar with hummingbird feeders near the garden and around the house. Place feeders in the shade and change the mixture of one part sugar (do not use honey) to four parts boiling water every three to five days. Cool the mixture before filling the feeder, and store the excess in the refrigerator. If the mixture in the feeder has spoiled (a black fungus or very cloudy water are clues), clean it with a small amount of vinegar mixed with water, then allow to dry thoroughly before refilling. Because they are migratory species, you only have to keep the sugar solution available from April to September.
In addition to sunlight requirements, be aware of other characteristics of your plant choices. Trumpet creeper, for example, is an attractive plant to hummingbirds, but it requires a fence or other structure on which to climb. Place vines and shrubs to the back, working down in height toward the front of the garden. Spread your blooming season as much as possible. Adding a few annuals to the variety of early- to late-blooming perennials will give the garden a head start. Refer to the accompanying list of plants that will provide both nectar and insects for hummingbirds. Also, realize insecticides not only kill the small insects that hummingbirds use for food, but large doses of insecticides can be directly lethal to the birds themselves.
Native Prairie Gardens
Native prairie grasses and wildflowers are a shrinking resource in Michigan, and they attract a large number of wildlife species. In fact, there are many species that can only survive on native grasses and wildflowers. Wildlife benefit most when the mixture of warm season grasses and wildflowers occurs in stands of 40 acres or more. However, even small plantings in backyard gardens can help wildlife and are also attractive. Native prairie gardens, as well as the other gardens mentioned above, reduce mowing time and add visual enjoyment, even in winter as the grasses stand up to snow. Some wildflowers, such as coreopsis, provide winter seed for goldfinches and other birds.
Because most native grasses and wildflowers do best on upland sites, locate this garden in a sunny to partly shaded, well-drained location. The accompanying panel is a list of good plants to consider. If the site you have in mind is moist, big bluestem and switchgrass will likely establish without problems but you might also want to add prairie and curly dock, swamp milkweed, native impatiens, sedges, and mints. A nursery expert should be able to help you with your plant selections.
For more information available on the World Wide Web about "Special Feature Gardens," please see our Resource Links.
Last Revised: May 5, 2000

Flag of India
|Population (In Millions)||1,241.49|
|Human Development Index||134/169|
|Gross Domestic Product (In USD Billions - World Bank)||1,872.84|
|Global Peace Index||135/153|
|Happy Planet Index||35/143|
|Social Institutions and Gender Index||57/86|
|Environmental Performance Index||123/163|
|Child Mortality Rate||47.2|
|More information on variables|
Main Progress Initiatives
The ICSD is an advisory organization to the Government of India on subjects of sustainable development and environmental issues within the spectrum of the country's social development challenges. It places specific emphasis on ensuring equitable growth, weath and income and the alleviation of poverty in India.
The India Council for Sustainable Development is co-chaired by Prof. Jeffrey Sachs, Director- Earth Institute & Special Advisor to the Secretary- General of the United Nations and Dr R. K. Pachauri, Director-General, TERI & Chairman, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
This demonstration site shows selected eduction, demographic and economic indicators for India. Running on the DataPlace platform, the initiative is a joint project between CDF@IMFR and KnowledgePlex Inc. The site currently has national, state and district level data available and will soon incorporate village level data.
The Sustainable Development Society (Sundesh) of India is an organization engaged in carrying out welfare activities with the aim of improving sustainability for people in rural areas. It carries out activities related to health care, education and it integrates corporate social responsibility into its approach.
The Planning Commission was set up by a Resolution of the Government of India in March 1950 in pursuance of declared objectives of the Government "to promote a rapid rise in the standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing production and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the community." The Planning Commission was tasked with the responsibility of assessing all national resources and increasing deficient resources, formulating plans for the purpose of achieving sustainability in resource use and to better prioritise. Ex Indian Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru was the first Chairman of the Planning Commission.
In its 10th quinquennal plan (2002-2007), the Planning Commission of India sought to ensure a sustainable India through:
- Reduction of poverty ratio by 5 percentage points by 2007 and 15 percentage points by 2012
- All children in school by 2003; all children to complete 5 Years in school by 2007
- Reduction in gender gaps in literacy and wage rates by at least 50 % by 2007
- Reduction in population growth between 2001 and 2011 to 16.2 %
- Increase in literacy rate to 75 % by 2007
- Reduction of Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) to 45 per 1000 live births by 2007 and to 28 by 2012
- Reduction of Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) to 2 per 1000 live births by 2007 and to 1 by 2012
- Increase in forest cover to 25 % by 2007 and 33 % by 2012
- All villages to have sustained access to potable drinking water by 2007
- Cleaning of major polluted rivers by 2007 and other notified stretches by 2012
Multidimensional Poverty Index
The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) for India is 0.283. The MPI is an international measure of acute poverty covering 109 countries. The MPI reflects the multiple deprivations that poor people face at the same time in three dimensions: health, education and living standards. The MPI reflects both the incidence or headcount ratio (H) of poverty – the proportion of the population that is multidimensionally poor – and the average intensity (A) of their poverty – the average proportion of indicators in which poor people are deprived. More information on the MPI in India is available here.
Development Progress Story: India's progress in providing employment for the poor
India's progress in providing employment for the poor has been highlighted as a part the Overseas Development Institute's Development Progress Stories, an initiative looking at what is working in development and why. Key messages from the research include:
- The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) is the largest rights-based employment guarantee programme in the world, reaching over 40 million households across India, with a strong focus on social equity through the participation of the poorest and most excluded in India.
- The programme is contributing to reduced vulnerability to seasonal and household shocks, as well as improved food security and use of basic services.
- Among the key factors driving MGNREGA’s success are: high levels of national ownership and commitment to pro-poor policies; a vibrant civil society at national and local level; and an existing decentralised government system.
Full report and summary case study can be viewed and downloaded here
Happiness in IndiaThis is an overview of findings on Happiness in India.The available findings are presented in the latest ‘Nation Report’ on India. This report is ordered by type of happiness questions and within these types by year. This ordering is to facilitate the assessment of progress, comparison over time being most fruitful using the same questions.
The report presents means and standard deviations, both on the original scale range and transformed to a common range 0-10. The means inform about the level of happiness in the country and the standard deviations about inequality of happiness.
Links provide more detail about the precise text of the question, the full distribution of responses and technical details of the survey. The report is continuously updated.
Child Well-being in India
The Young Lives study is conducted in India as well as in three other developing countries from 2001 to 2015. It is an international study of childhood poverty that is coordinated by a team in the Department of International Development at the University of Oxford.
Progress Papers and Publications
- 11th Five-Year Plan 2007-2012. Volume III: Agriculture, Rural Development, Industry, Services and Physical Infrastructure National Planning Commission, India.
- 11th Five-Year Plan 2007-2012. Volume II:Social Sector National Planning Commission, India.
- http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/11th/11_v1/11th_vol1.pdf 11th Five-Year Plan 2007-2012. Volume I: Inclusive Growth. National Planning Commission, India.
- Empowering People for Sustainable Development, 2002, Ministry of Environment and Forests, India.
- The State of the Environment, 2001, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), India.
Child Well-being Papers and Publications
Measuring Deprivation Due to Child Work and Child Labour: A Study for Indian Children, 2011, S. Das and D. Mukherjee.
- Event:15th Conference of the International Association for Ladakh Studies
- Event:Second Global Summit on Sustainable Development and Biodiversity (GLOSS 2011)
- Event:Global Algae Biodiesel World India Programme 2011
- Event:8th Conference of Indian Association for Social Sciences and Health

|http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/ A service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine®|
The official name of this gene is “receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 2.”
ROR2 is the gene's official symbol. The ROR2 gene is also known by other names, listed below.
The ROR2 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood. The ROR2 protein is part of a family of proteins known as receptor protein kinases (RTKs), which play a role in chemical signaling within cells. Receptor protein kinases are involved in many cell functions, including cell growth and division (proliferation), the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation), cell survival, and cell movement (motility).
Researchers believe that the ROR2 protein plays an essential role in development before birth. It is involved in a chemical signaling pathway called WNT signaling, which affects many aspects of embryonic development. This pathway controls the activity of genes needed at specific times during development, and it regulates the interactions between cells as organs and tissues are forming. Based on studies in animals, the ROR2 protein appears to be critical for the normal formation of the skeleton, heart, and genitals.
At least 12 mutations in the ROR2 gene have been found to cause the autosomal recessive form of Robinow syndrome. Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Some of these mutations change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the ROR2 protein, while others lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of the protein. Because these genetic changes prevent any functional ROR2 protein from being made, they are described as "loss-of-function" mutations. A shortage of ROR2 protein disrupts embryonic development, particularly the formation of bones in the face, spine, and limbs, which leads to the skeletal abnormalities characteristic of Robinow syndrome. A lack of this protein during early development also underlies the other features of Robinow syndrome, including genital abnormalities and heart defects.
Several mutations in the ROR2 gene have been identified in people with a disorder called brachydactyly type B1. This condition is characterized by abnormally short fingers and toes, particularly the fourth and fifth digits, and malformed or absent fingernails and toenails. Brachydactyly type B1 has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Unlike the mutations that cause Robinow syndrome, the ROR2 mutations responsible for brachydactyly type B1 are described as "gain-of-function" mutations. These genetic changes probably cause the ROR2 protein to be continuously active. It is unclear how the overactive protein disrupts the formation of bones in the hands and feet.
Cytogenetic Location: 9q22
Molecular Location on chromosome 9: base pairs 94,484,877 to 94,712,443
The ROR2 gene is located on the long (q) arm of chromosome 9 at position 22.
More precisely, the ROR2 gene is located from base pair 94,484,877 to base pair 94,712,443 on chromosome 9.
See How do geneticists indicate the location of a gene? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/howgeneswork/genelocation) in the Handbook.
You and your healthcare professional may find the following resources about ROR2 helpful.
You may also be interested in these resources, which are designed for genetics professionals and researchers.
See How are genetic conditions and genes named? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/mutationsanddisorders/naming) in the Handbook.
acids ; autosomal ; autosomal dominant ; autosomal recessive ; brachydactyly ; cell ; differentiation ; embryonic ; gene ; genitals ; inheritance ; kinase ; pattern of inheritance ; proliferation ; protein ; receptor ; recessive ; syndrome ; tyrosine
You may find definitions for these and many other terms in the Genetics Home Reference Glossary (http://www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov/glossary).
The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users seeking information about a personal genetic disease, syndrome, or condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional. See How can I find a genetics professional in my area? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/consult/findingprofessional) in the Handbook.

New Technology Uses Nanotransistors
By Edwin L. Aguirre
As smartphones, tablets and other mobile devices become increasingly popular, finding ways to make them even smaller in size, run a lot faster and consume far less power has become the holy grail for semiconductor researchers worldwide.
Electrical engineering Prof. Martin Margala
, together with his former graduate student Vikas Kaushal and collaborators from the Universidad de Salamanca in Spain and North Carolina State University, are moving one step closer to achieving that goal with their work on “ballistic deflection transistors
,” or BDTs. These unique, super-fast nanochips will form the building blocks for the next-generation ultrahigh-speed computers and electronic circuits.
“Such a nanotransistor would operate a thousand times faster — in the terahertz range — and consume extremely low power and generate far less heat compared to conventional transistors,” says Margala, a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and chair of UMass Lowell’s Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
Instead of starting and stopping the flow of electrons the way standard transistors do, the BDT design uses electrical fields to “steer” individual electrons and bounce them off deflectors, in a form of atomic billiards or pinball arcade game.
“Ballistic deflection transistors should be easy to mass-produce using current technologies,” says Margala. “They have the potential to revolutionize modern electronics.”
Enhancing the Nanotransistors’ Performance
Margala and his co-researchers were able to make the nanotransistors perform even better by depositing an ultrathin, uniform layer of aluminum oxide, Al2O3, to the walls of the etched trenches in BDTs.
“By using the Al2O3 as an insulator instead of just air as before, we significantly improved the nanotransistor’s gate-control sensitivity,” explains Margala. “This means the nanotransistor could achieve peak performance at much lower power.”
Margala says ultimately, they will be able to reduce power consumption even further and operate the BDT at very low voltages.
“This will make our nanotransistor unique for commercial applications that operate with very limited power sources yet require very high performance,” he says. “This includes all mobile devices, portable medical sensors, implants and other devices, as well as various electronics for deep-space missions.”
Margala’s research on BDTs actually began in 2005, while he was with the University of Rochester. Since he joined UMass Lowell in early 2007, he has continued his work in this field, receiving funding mainly from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. In 2009, he received a $101,000 grant from the National Science Foundation (along with $40,000 from UMass Lowell) to purchase a multi-probe, wide-temperature parameter analysis system for measuring low voltages and low noises.
Margala received his master’s degree in microelectronics from Slovak Technical University in Bratislava, Slovakia, in 1990, and his Ph.D. in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Alberta in Edmonton in 1998. Kaushal graduated from UMass Lowell in 2011 with a doctorate in electrical engineering and now works at IBM in Burlington, Vt.

Language is a major tool for communication in academia. Use the writing guides below to formulate your best research papers and lab reports.
General Paper Format
The following are format expectations for general papers:
Use standard white paper, 8.5 x 11 inches.
Use black ink for the text of the paper.
Set margins to at least one-inch wide.
Use size 12 font, unless other specifications are given.
Double space your papers, unless other specifications are given.
Paginate papers longer than one page. Place page numbers in the upper right-hand corner. Type your last name before each page number (e.g., Jones 2).
For short papers (one to two pages in length), place a heading in the upper right-hand corner containing your name, course, date, professor's name and nature of the assignment. Center the title of the paper below the heading.
For longer papers (three or more pages), attach a title page with the following information centered on the page: title of paper, student name, course name and section, date, professor name.
Cite research for papers in in-text citations and list sources in a bibliography at the end of the paper. Use MLA format unless another documentation style has been specified.
English-speaking readers expect documents with the following organization:
Your introduction may be one or more paragraphs. You should give your readers background information (including definitions) about your subject. You should also state your thesis (your controlling idea) clearly. You might also give an overview of the main parts of the paper.
The body of the paper contains your basic information and the points of your argument. Each paragraph in the body develops a single point in detail. Each paragraph is connected to the one before it and the one to follow it.
Your conclusion restates the point of the paper using the insight that your reader has gained from having read the paper. Do not simply summarize, but offer the reader an answer to the question: So what? Now what?
The organization of a paragraph reflects the organization of the essay: All paragraphs have a beginning, middle, and an end. Begin with a clear statement of the idea of the paragraph (and make it clear that this idea is connected to the thesis of the paper). Develop the pieces of the idea in logical order with the sort of information that your reader will need in order to understand your point. Then, finish the paragraph with a sense of ending and a sense of connection to the next idea. Write in complete sentences. Avoid sentence fragments. All sentences consist of at least a subject and verb combination.
Lab Report Format
Write a neat report. You should ensure that all sentences are grammatically correct and that there are no mistakes in spelling.
Organize your data in a data table.
Carry units in all calculations.
Reports should be typewritten.
The cover page of your lab report should include:
the name and number of the experiment;
your instructor's name;
your lab partner's name;
the date the lab was performed; and
the lab due date.
Sections of the Lab Report
Objective - the objective is the reason you are doing the experiment. Before you write the objective, you need to know why you are doing the experiment. The objective should be stated clearly and concisely in your own words.
Apparatus - this section contains a list of the equipment that you used to perform the experiment. When possible, draw a diagram to illustrate the apparatus. Give the make and model number of the equipment where possible.
Method - this section includes a description of what you did. This should not be a verbatim copy of the instructions in the lab manual. You do not report any results in this section. Explain what you did clearly enough for other people to follow your directions to repeat the experiment. A step-by-step format is the best approach.
Data - this section is where measurements taken during the experiment are reported. Data should be reported in a clear and organized way. You may want to use Microsoft Excel to organize and analyze your data in a table.
Results and Analysis - calculations based on the data are presented in this section. You need to report all the calculations that you did. You need to provide the formulas used to compute your results. Be sure to compute the percent error. Be sure to provide a reference to any appendix used. Be sure to identify any possible sources of error, and provide a discussion of whether or not you feel the errors are reasonable.
Conclusion - in this section, present your results and discuss your conclusions. Be sure to go back and reread your objective before writing your conclusion. This section should be short, concise and to the point. Your conclusion should be tied to the objective. Was the objective for the experiment met? State whether or not you achieved your objective.
Data Sheets - your stamped data sheets from the physics/chemistry lab should be attached to the report as an appendix.
All work handed in for a grade must be your own. Proper credit must be given to the author of any writing if its inclusion in your submitted work is appropriate. This includes information on the Internet as well as in books, magazines and other published sources. At no time should you copy and paste information from a published source (including the Internet) into your work.
But you must go further than this. Avoid situations that could compromise your integrity. For example, do not allow others to copy your work, and do not leave your work on the public computers in the library or the laboratories.

When it comes to eating “right”, there is a lot more than just nutrition to think about. One must also consider the process behind food production and what it takes to get food to the plate. Meat, in particular, has a pretty troubling back story.
Not only does meat raise questions of ethical and moral standing, but it also has creates problems environmentally – not to mention the strong arguments against its use as a regular food group. Because of these things, many people have found it healthy, ethically appealing, and environmentally wise to quit meat or limit the consumption of meat.
Anyone who has grown up with the food knows that’s no easy task. Here are a few strategies that help you along the way!
Ease off Gradually
Just like anything, don’t expect to quit cold turkey (no pun intended). Quitting meat can start by choosing just one day out of the week not to eat meat. Easing off gradually is especially useful if those you regularly dine with are big meat eaters – it gives you a chance to test out your new commitment and discuss it with those who will see the change.
At first, start out small – perhaps just with certain meals. Lunch is an especially easy meal to turn vegetarian (or vegan) because many people are looking for something lighter, refreshing, and energizing to get them through the rest of the day – a salad packed with healthy vegetables will do just that.
As you progress, aim for 4 out of 7 days without meat. Go up to the point of you goal, and even consider going past it.
Move Type by Type
Another good tip is to quit meat by meat. That is, first quit pork, then beef, then chicken, etc. By knocking out particular ‘meat groups’, you allow yourself some foot room in the fight against meat. You may have been off beef and pork for 2 weeks, but are craving something meaty – grab an free range, organic chicken leg! Just be prepared to eventually switch that out with something if you are planning on going completely meat-free!
Keep Yourself Healthy
Above all, be sure you are still getting the proper nutrients with every meal. By far, not being healthy and not eating a well rounded meal will negatively affect changing your diet more than anything else. Besides, what’s the use of quitting meat if you’re not conscious enough to see the health benefits. Work vigilantly at making sure you have all you macronutirents covered – legumes, dark leafy greens, and hearty vegetables can help fill the void of meat, making them staples of the healthy meal.
Develop a healthy meal plan to ensure you’re getting the vitamins and minerals your body needs to keep going!
Living Meat Free
After taking steps like these, you’ll be well on your way to living meat free (or meat limited). From that, less pollution will be spilled into water supplies and released into air, fewer animals will suffer through the behemoth that is industrial food processing, and your body will begin to operate more efficiently, leading to better health. Just remember – it doesn’t happen overnight and it will require real commitment out of you!

Manga At The Royal Academy:
The Making Of Manga Mania
Between March 21 and June 7, 2009, The Royal Academy of Arts presents an exhibition on one of the greatest Japanese print artists, Utagawa Kuniyoshi (1797-1861). Featuring over 150 works, the exhibition presents Kuniyoshi as a master of imaginative design, revealing the graphic power and beauty of his prints.
The modern Japanese comic owes much to the masters of the Japanese woodblock print. In the article below, reprinted from the Spring Edition of the RA Magazine, I assesses its debt to the past. Additionally, on May 29, I will present an evening lecture at The Royal Academy titled Mangaisme - The New Japonisme? Comics As Cultural Heritage And Global Phenomenon, exploring the evolution of modern manga and its connections and contrasts with Japanese artistic traditions.
It’s hard to believe how astonishingly modern Utagawa Kuniyoshi’s warrior print from circa 1848 looks to 21st-century Western eyes. The startling way in which the artist has riven its flat plane with five diagonal radiating shafts to symbolise the plunging trajectory of the sword and the sheer unleashed power of an exploding mine looks like a climactic full-page panel from a Japanese comic or manga. In fact, the common use by manga artists of such explosions or swathes of lines to represent their protagonists’ force or speed offers a fine example of how the lessons of Kuniyoshi and his contemporaries live on through Japan’s vibrant comics culture. Furthermore, as manga has spread internationally, its motifs, techniques and theories, much of them rooted in the ukiyo-e (pictures of the floating world) print form, are affecting the graphic novel movement worldwide and the reappraisal of manga in Japan itself.
Utagawa Kuniyoshi’s warrior print (circa 1848)
Officially at least, manga has been considered quintessentially Japanese. As part of the national art curriculum, since 2000 the Ministry of Culture and Education has issued junior high schools with an textbook including a three-page history of manga illustrated with an ancient scroll, a print and other examples to confirm the links between Japan’s graphic traditions and today’s manga, represented by Toriyama Akira’s Dragon Ball. While these connections are strong, to insist that there has been an exclusively Japanese unbroken continuity from past to present overlooks the considerable effects upon manga’s ongoing evolution of successive Western products. These began at the dawn of Meiji period in the 1880s when Japan became open to the outside world again. This resulted in the influx of satirical British Punch cartoons and early 20th-century arrival of American and British newspaper strips. For example, in 1923 came the earliest Japanese version of these strips to employ speech balloons, Shôchan no bôken (The Adventures of Shôchan). As Brigitte Koyama-Richard states in her richly-illustrated survey One Thousand Years Of Manga (Flammarion, 2008), for this critical innovation, its creator, Kabashima Kaksuichi, took inspiration from the British strip Pip, Squeak and Wilfred by Bertram Lamb and Austin Lamb which had begun in 1919 in the Daily Mirror. There is also no avoiding the impact of American comic books brought over by the G.I.‘s occupying the country after World War Two, nor the appreciation of Western innovators such as America’s Neal Adams or France’s Moebius. That said, ever since the Meiji period, the tides of artistic influences have ebbed and flowed almost constantly between Japan and the West and in both directions.
Path Of The Assassin (Dark Horse)
art by Kojima Goseki
Through all this, Kuniyoshi’s prints have remained familiar in Japan, iconic and embedded in the national visual lexicon. Many mangaka seeking to make their historical stories authentic refer to his vivid portrayals of people and settings. They range from the late Sugiura Hinako’s subtle, meticulously researched tales of the Edo era to Lone Wolf and Cub, Koike Kazuo and Kojima Goseki’s warrior tragedy of over 8,000 pages. In Japan’s top-selling shonen (boys) weeklies, even the most populist and mainstream of current serials, such as Naruto or One Piece, will happily acknowledge these sources. In these pulpy newsprint pages, one can re-enter the world of yôkai, the monsters of Japanese folklore as visualised in woodblock prints, through another genre of manga pioneered by Mizuki Shigeru in his series Ge-ge-ge no Kitaro.
One Piece colour title spread by Eiichiro Oda
from a recent episode in Shonen Jump
Similarly, Kuniyoshi’s playful ways of anthropomorphising real creatures relate clearly to the "funny animal" genre in comics. His print of octopuses in training, for example, is echoed in Takono Hatchan (Octopus Hatchan), created by Tagawa Suiho in 1931, in which the cartoonist gives an octopus clothes and shoes to fit in with human society. In one propaganda tale, he trains other octopuses to become naval officers.
Takono Hatchan (Octopus Hatchan) by Tagawa Suiho
In more recent manga hits starring comedy felines such as Fujiko F. Fujio’s robot cat Doraemon or Mikan Enikki (Mikan Picture Diary) by Miwa Abiko featuring a walking, talking ginger tomcat, there are also plenty of present-day equivalents to Kuniyoshi’s humanised cats dressed in the clothes of his era. More bizarre is the unlikely recent success Moyashimon (Tales of Agriculture), in which Masayuki Ishikawa has transformed bacteria into cute cartoonish characters. His configuration on a poster for the animated spin-off clearly recalls Kuniyoshi’s print of 53 Cats.
A triptych by Kuniyoshi of cats
Moyashimon (Tales of Agriculture) by Masayuki Ishikawa
Outside Japan, it may be surprising to find Kuniyoshi’s sensitive faces of women resurfacing in one of the finest North American graphic novels of last year. Skim is the intimate diary of a troubled Canadian-Japanese high-school student crafted by two Canadian-Japanese cousins, Mariko and Jillian Tamaki. According to Jillian, the artist, she never intended her character to reflect Japanese prints, but, "It seems the ukiyo-e influence is deeper in my subconscious that I gave it credit for. What has always attracted me to Japanese art is the strong design underpinning it, the balance in the pictures. The best of ukiyo-e is perfectly composed, but not boring. In fact, I often find the compositions surprising, even amusing, in their counterpointing of broad strokes and thin strokes, white space and areas of high detail. There is an economy and clarity that I really admire."
More than the quotations or appropriations of specific imagery, there are profound, underlying resonances between these prints and modern manga. To design her comics, the London-based mangaka Inko, pen-name of Ai Takita-Lucas, studies prints for the way their compositions advance a story through one scene without subdividing it into panels, directing the reader-viewer powerfully right-to-left across the image. In Inko’s view, "The beauty of asymmetry is much admired in Japanese artistic traditions, so ukiyo-e compositions create various ‘eye streams’ to avoid a symmetrical layout." Inko sees parallels here with kabuki theatre. "Two actors position themselves and move in an asymmetric way as they do their kata (special posing). First, one crouches down and pushes his arm or sword towards the other. Then the other actor, who has been ‘pushed’ and so receives an ‘eye stream’, pulls his arms back to make an asymmetric final pose. Kuniyoshi’s theatrical portraits depict this ‘power flow’ amazingly well and Japanese comics have a similar sense of asymmetrical beauty." This "eye stream" is the push-and-pull flow of action and reaction, which is central to the dynamics of reading a manga page.
There are other evident graphic similarities between Japan’s woodblock prints and comics, such as their use of precise outlines, caricatured faces and unmodulated patterning of textiles and textures, which in manga are applied by rubbing down flat sheets of tonal effects or digitally by dropping in their computer counterpart. But more importantly, both media are cheap, mass-produced, visually-led entertainments, spotlighting characters and stories and enjoying huge popularity and print-runs. And niether genre has been highly regarded by cultural arbiters of their day. Ukiyo-e prints were so undervalued in Japan that they were used as wrapping paper for shipments of crockery. However, these throwaway exports captivated Europeans, leading to the mania for things Japanese known as Japonisme and having a profound effect on the development of European art and design. As Ukiyo-e prints went on to inform French Impressionism, Art Nouveau and Cubism, the Japanese establishment came to appreciate their country’s remarkable inspirational prints more fully.
A century later, a similar fin-de-siècle transition seems to be underway. A wave of international acclaim and imitation of manga outside Japan, which might be classified as "Mangaisme", has heralded more serious acceptance in their homeland. So in 2006, the first manga museum was opened in Kyoto, while in 2007, the Japanese government created the International Manga Award to recognise non-Japanese creators. It was unveiled by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Aso Taro, a politician whose enthusiasm for comics has not prevented him from being elected Prime Minister. Also in 2007, The Embassy of Japan in London launched its own contest for British artists called Manga Jiman, meaning Manga Pride. All of this suggests a change in the official attitude towards manga as both a significant part of the nation’s heritage and creative future and a cool, positive ambassador for Japan around the world. As Aso Taro declared in 2007, "Manga is about everything - it knows absolutely no boundaries."Posted: March 22, 2009
An edited version of this article originally appeared in the Spring 2009 edition, No. 102, of the Royal Academy Magazine.

Water Thermometer - Sick Science!
Watch the temperature rise with this homemade thermometer
Is it possible to make a thermometer out of water? Absolutely! The best part about our Water Thermometer experiment is that you have all the materials you need in your own home. That's right, you'll be measuring temperature with this amazing homemade tool in no time.
- Glass bottle
- Modeling clay
- Food coloring
- Container of hot water
- Container of cold water
- Heavy glove
- Fill the glass bottle up to the bottom of its neck with cold water.
- Add a few drops of food coloring to the water in the bottle. You pick the color!
- Place a straw (make sure it's long enough) into the bottle. Pack clay around the straw and bottle neck. Make as tight of a seal as possible.
- Now that you've made your thermometer, set the bottom of the bottle into the container of hot water. What happens to the water inside the bottle?
- Make sure you are wearing a heavy glove and remove your water thermometer from the hot water.
- Put the water thermometer into the container of cold water. What happens to the water inside the bottle this time?
- Try experimenting with other water temperatures.
How does it work?
June 8th, 2011
Click the thumbnail below to see the video.
nandini - September 27, 2012
i have never thought that theres a water therometer.by this i came to know so thanks a lot

which eastern empire had an unusually successful frontier state on the border of the christian world ...
The Byzantine Empire (or Byzantium) was the Eastern Roman Empire during the periods of Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, centred on the capital of ...
which eastern empire had an unusually successful frontier state on the border of the christian worldNote:
... with the first Christian emperor of the eastern Roman empire ... giving the empire a period of splendor and power (867-1025). The eastern frontier was ... in the ancient world, had ... [www.answers.com/topic/byzantine-empire
]Auto answered|Score .6479Note:
I'm sorry that that wasn't a good answer. Please hold on while I contact an expert.
View and rate new answers
There are no new answers.

Greenest Park Initiative
Centennial Goal: By 2016, Yellowstone National Park will reduce its fossil fuel consumption by 18%.
Yellowstone uses 350,000 gallons of fuel a year, costing the Park Service $1.4 million.
Through the Greenest Park Initiative, the Park will reduce its consumption of fuel by increasing the use of renewable fuels, expanding the use of hybrid vehicles, introducing high-efficiency tire technology, expanding an employee rideshare program, and incorporating employee protocols to minimize inter-Park travel.
The Park has set ambitious goals to reduce the number of vehicles in its fleet and incorporate hybrid technology. To date, Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A. has donated eight hybrid vehicles to Yellowstone—including one of the very first hybrid Camry models manufactured in the United States—and one hybrid SUV to the Yellowstone Park Foundation.
With the Yellowstone Park Foundation's support, Yellowstone will purchase additional hybrid vehicles to replace older vehicles.
Yellowstone has more than 450 miles of road, and Park vehicles logged more than 3.75 million miles traveling on them in 2007.
With the Yellowstone Park Foundation's support, the Park will install high-efficiency tires on all Park vehicles. Michelin North America and Alcoa Wheel Products have donated tires and wheels for heavy trucks. Using these high-efficiency tires creates almost 10% in fuel savings, more than eight metric tons of CO2 in gas emission savings, and 38 gallons of oil savings in the production of each tire, per year, per truck.
Since 1998, the Park has provided a biodiesel-powered bus for Park employees that live 50 miles away in Livingston, Montana. On average, 40 Park and concessions staff participate in the program daily, collectively saving thousands of gallons of fuel a year and reducing pollution.
With the Yellowstone Park Foundation's support, Yellowstone will explore the expansion of its rideshare program to additional routes. The program will also incorporate a car-sharing program for staff traveling to and from work, within the Park, or away from the Park on official business.
With the Yellowstone Park Foundation's support, the Park will reduce the number of miles driven by staff through the use of a video-conferencing system that will be available Park-wide.

Cacti and succulents, Perennials
Small, rosette-forming succulents from South Africa. Many types produce offsets to form dense, spreading colonies. Fleshy leaves may be slender and rough textured or pillowlike and smooth; some have small white bumps or ridges. Tiny flowers are held on long, whip-like stems from spring to fall; these may be clipped off as they fade to keep plants tidy.
Haworthias are well suited to containers, and their small size and tolerance of low humidity make them good houseplants. In pots or in the ground, provide sandy, fast-draining soil that is allowed to dry between waterings. Protect from frost and hot sun. Acclimate nursery plants to the garden gradually or leaves may sunburn. Numerousspecies and hybrids make these variable plants popular with collectors.Haworthia fasciata
To 6 in. high. Rigid, dark green leaves up to 3 in. long are slender and triangular; each leaf is smooth on the inner surface and banded with raised white horizontal ridges on the outside. Give just enough sun to make outer leaves blush red-orange.
Numerous kinds of large, cyclindrical cacti with prominent ribs and stout thorns. Many are native to t...
Grown for striking form and flower clusters. All do well in dry, poor soil but need good drainage. All...
Daisy relatives, typically with blue flowers; native to South Africa. Though more than 80 species are ...

Morris's Disappearing Bag
Author: Rosemary Wells
Last updated Sunday, October 23, 2005
Illustrator: Rosemary Wells
Date of Publication: 1999
Grade Level: Kindergarten (GLCs: Click here for grade level guidelines.)
Date(s) Used: Dec. 2002
On Christmas morning, Morris's brother Victor gets a hockey outfit. Morris's sister Rose gets a beauty kit. Morris's other sister Betty gets a chemistry set. And Morris gets a teddy bear. His siblings all tell him he's too little to play with their gifts. Then Morris finds one last present under the tree and discovers just the diversion he needs to keep the others busy--while he enjoys their toys!
Discussion topics: To be posted soon ...
|Craft ideas: |
Make Bunny ears and act out the story.
Make finger puppets for each character.
Make a bag, and put items into the bag to make them disappear.
*Note: These craft ideas are just suggestions.
You can use them, but you dont have to use them.
You can expand upon them, or add your own twist.
Remember, though, that the focus of your time should
not be on the development and execution of a craft;
the focus should be on the read-aloud and the
enjoyment of the book!

Geometrical Optics Study Guide
This lesson introduces you to the concept of optics and the geometrical analysis of optical phenomena. We will study the concept of light rays, the laws of reflection, the laws of refraction, and the total internal reflection.
The study of light encompasses many fields of physics, from mechanics to quantum mechanics and from classical to modern physics. Isaac Newton explained reflection and refraction phenomena based on particle motion, and Max Planck's particle theory explained radiation. On the other hand, the theories of electricity, magnetism, and waves explained light behavior as a wave, as Christian Huygens and James Maxwell did in their theories. A dual explanation of the properties and processes in which light is involved emerged through history. In this lesson, we will address the particle explanation of light.
The geometrical analysis of light propagation assumes that light travels in a straight line through a medium and between two points. If the optical properties of the medium change, light changes the path of propagation. This is called geometrical optics and the propagation of light in a straight line is called ray approximation.
Reflection of Light
At the boundary between two media, the light ray will change its direction of propagation depending on the properties of the second medium and on the relative position of the light with respect to the surface of the interface. The light propagating from a source toward a smooth surface will bounce from the surface and return to the medium that contains the source. This phenomenon is called reflection of light, the incoming light ray is called the incident ray, and the returning light ray is called the reflected ray. A diagram of the propagation of light at the interface between two media also defines the important angles we will use to set the laws of reflection: the incident and reflection angles. Both angles are defined relative to the perpendicular to the interface called the normal. The two media are shown differently in Figure 18.1 to enhance the surface of separation where reflection occurs.
Experimental work shows that reflection is governed by the following laws:
- The incident, reflected ray, and the normal are in the same plane.
- The angle of incidence and the angle of reflection are equal:
θi = θr
If several rays of light are parallel and are traveling toward a smooth surface, after reflection, they will be once again propagating in parallel directions, as in Figure 18.2. This is called specular reflection and the reason is that each of the beams will reflect from the same plane surface.
If the surface is not smooth, the outgoing set of rays will no longer be parallel because the roughness of the surface means that different rays have different incident and respective reflection angles. This is called a diffuse reflection, and the way light is reflected at different angles from the rough surface is shown in Figure 18.3.
The rays represented by thicker lines represent the reflected rays and one can see that their direction is dictated by the normal to the surface, which differs between the three cases (the normal is perpendicular on the tangent to the curve at a certain position) .
Add your own comment
Today on Education.com
SUMMER LEARNINGJune Workbooks Are Here!
TECHNOLOGYAre Cell Phones Dangerous for Kids?
Local SAT & ACT Classes
- Kindergarten Sight Words List
- The Five Warning Signs of Asperger's Syndrome
- First Grade Sight Words List
- Graduation Inspiration: Top 10 Graduation Quotes
- 10 Fun Activities for Children with Autism
- What Makes a School Effective?
- Child Development Theories
- Should Your Child Be Held Back a Grade? Know Your Rights
- Why is Play Important? Social and Emotional Development, Physical Development, Creative Development
- Smart Parenting During and After Divorce: Introducing Your Child to Your New Partner

There are few people who look to swamps as great places for island hopping. However, you can do just that within the 22,000 acre Otter Creek swamp complex in western Vermont.
Local topography creates small islands of rich organic soils which peak above their marshy surroundings. These islands have both archaeological and ecology significance and provide solid footing for a suite of species.
The Conservancy recently acquired a significant portion of one of these islands with the purchase of 178 acres in Cornwall, VT. Bond Island is a clay knoll that houses good examples of two of the eleven known natural community types in the swamp. The more common Red Maple-Northern White Cedar swamp is home to an array of animal species that traverse its moss-covered hummocks and hollows. In the winter, it provide important protection and food for white-tailed deer and plenty of hollows for snowshoe hare to hide. In the spring, when the swamp floods with water and teams with insects, migratory songbirds flitter through its canopies and amphibians submerse themselves in its pools.
Bond Island neighbor, Steve Pratt, is happy to see the area protected. “I’ve been walking in Cornwall Swamp for about 50 years,” he said. “I always knew it was a unique place, a unique forest.”
The unique property is also home to important swamp rarities. A Red Maple-White Pine-Huckleberry Swamp, one of only 3 known sites in the state, covers part of the island. Additionally, the property contains two state threatened plants, the cuckoo flower and nodding trillium, and a maternity roost sites for the federally endangered Indiana Bat.
The protection of additional breeding sites for the Indiana bat could not come at a more critical time. In the winter of 2007, biologists in the northeast noticed a mysterious and unknown disease they called “white nose syndrome”. The name arises from the appearance of a white fungal infection on the muzzles of infected bats but the direct impacts of the disease are much more severe. Infected bats leave their hibernating caves too early, sometimes when there is still thick snowfall, only to find no insects for them to feed upon. This bizarre disease has caused high rates of mortality in bat colonies, including some Vermont’s own hibernating dens. Protecting breeding grounds, especially ones with a healthy source of mosquitoes and insects for the bats to feed upon, is a key action for continued bat conservation.
Visit other conserved lands in Otter Creek.

Bipolar Disorder in Children and Teens
Medicines for bipolar disorder in adults have been well studied. But not much research has been completed about how well the medicines work and if they are safe for children and teens.
When you and your child's doctor are deciding which types of medicines to use, consider:
- The side effects of each medicine and how well your child can tolerate them.
- How often your child will need to take the medicines.
- Whether your child is being treated for other illnesses or disorders and how those medicines will interact with medicines for bipolar disorder.
- Whether your child has used any of the medicines before and whether they worked.
Before prescribing medicine to treat bipolar disorder, your doctor will Reference ask questions about possible suicidal behavior.
Be sure to use all medicines exactly as your child's doctor has prescribed them. If your child has intolerable side effects from any medicine, call your doctor immediately.
Medicines most often used to treat bipolar disorder in children and teens include:
Reference Mood stabilizers, such as:
- Lithium (for example, Eskalith or Lithobid).
- Divalproex (Depakote).
- Carbamazepine (for example, Tegretol).
- Lamotrigine (Lamictal).
- Reference Valproate (Depacon).
Reference Antipsychotics, such as:
- Quetiapine (Seroquel).
- Risperidone (Risperdal).
- Aripiprazole (Abilify).
- Antidepressants such as Reference selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), like fluoxetine (Prozac, for example).
While antidepressants can be helpful for some children with bipolar disorder, they can also trigger Reference mania Opens New Window. Doctors usually prescribe antidepressants along with mood stabilizers or antipsychotics to help prevent a manic episode. And the doctor needs to carefully monitor the child for mood changes. Antipsychotics can be used alone, or they may be combined with mood stabilizers for more effective control of manic episodes.
Medicines for bipolar disorder have side effects that need to be managed. Some things you cannot change, such as increased urination (common with lithium). But you can deal with some side effects like weight gain (common with several medicines used to treat bipolar disorder) by increasing exercise and reducing calorie intake.
You can work with your child and his or her doctor to find ways of coping with side effects. If side effects from a medicine are intolerable, the doctor may have to change the dose or the medicine.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued an Reference advisory on antidepressant medicines and the risk of suicide. Talk to your doctor about possible side effects and the Reference warning signs of suicide.
|By:||Reference Healthwise Staff||Last Revised: Reference April 16, 2012|
|Medical Review:||Reference John Pope, MD - Pediatrics
Reference David A. Axelson, MD - Child and Adolescent Psychiatry

Dan Lynch sent along a link to a very interesting web site created by Ben Edwards: Teach History. The blog proclaims, "Teach History is a blog dedicated to educators of Colonial American history. We provide information about resources, products and multisensory learning methods that can help you inspire your students."
The latest articles include:
Learn How Teachers Are Using Twitter
Exclusive Access to Children’s Book MP3 Audio
New Product: Paul Revere in Primary Sources
Behind the Scenes Tours at Old North Church
The site has a strong emphasis on the history of Boston at the pre-revolutionary period. However, there are other articles that will interest history teachers everywhere, such as the article on Learn How Teachers Are Using Twitter.
Check it out at http://teachhistory.com.

Are you ‘information literate’?
See how librarians define the term and challenges – and post your own definition.
The term “information literacy” was first penned in a 1974 report by Paul G Zurkowski for the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science. He used it to define “the techniques and skills for utilizing the wide range of information tools as well as primary sources in moulding information solutions to their problems.”
How do you define information literacy?
We invite you to leave your ideas and definitions in the comment section.
Zurkowski also had a term to define the people who applied these skills to their work: the “information literate.”
Over the last four decades, trouser legs and shirt collars have narrowed, and the meaning of “information literacy” has evolved with the advent of the internet and the speed at which information is delivered. Today, information literacy is at the top of the pyramid of other forms of literacy: traditional literacy, computer literary, digital literacy, library skills, and critical thinking skills according to librarians interviewed by Elsevier.
In 2009, on the prompting of the National Forum on Literacy, President Barack Obama proclaimed October National Information Literacy Month. This year, my colleagues and I at Elsevier asked 150 librarians in our online advice community Innovation Explorers to define the term “information literacy.” With their permission, we are posting a few of their responses here:
What is information literacy?
“Information Literacy is a skill set that allows for fluency with information in our diverse large world,” explained Beth Schuck, Associate University Librarian at Northern Arizona University’s Cline Library. “Many factors influence this including experience with various types of information; location as different cultures use and re-use information in different ways; type of information need also affects Information Literacy skills.
“Being able to locate and appropriately use information according to the individual’s needs is my notion of Information Literacy,” she concludes.
In the words of Stephen Marvin, a Librarian at West Chester University in Pennsylvania, USA, the term now encompasses “reading, understanding, progression, building, assessment, reach, accomplishment, implementation, achievement, knowledge, communication, evaluating, collaborating.”
Satish Munnolli, a librarian at the Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer in Mumbai, India, defines it in terms of how many librarians see their role: “Educating others on how to identify and use the online sources for the authentic and appropriate information in the flood of information.”
Challenges of imparting literacy
As the definition continues to evolve with technology, ensuring library patrons are information literate has its own challenges. Although there are information literacy programs in place at some universities, many others face barriers that limit the level of information literacy available.
Challenges identified by librarians in Innovation Explorers ranged from the lack of faculty understanding of the concept, limited time in the curriculum to implement and promote a strategy, and the shortage of qualified information literacy instructors at a university.
“The biggest problem is that people feel they can find everything on Google and don’t search elsewhere, missing a lot of important information,” said Mark Puterbaugh, an Information Services Librarian at Eastern University in Pennsylvania.Realistically, using just one search engine or database for research doesn’t make you information literate. The majority of today’s students are adept at using iPhones, tablets, smart phones and laptops or juggling several social media networks sites to find information, but are they as proficient at finding and using a campus’s resources?
Mary Heinzman, Executive Director of Information Resources at St. Ambrose University in Iowa, USA, summed up the issue by writing: “Information literacy is realizing the need for information and (having) the ability to find, critically evaluate, and appropriately and ethically use information of all kinds in all formats.”
Getting library patrons to recognize their need for literacy training is just the first step. And the more we agree on definitions and benefits, the closer we are to developing a fully literate population.
So while October may be Information Literacy Month, information literacy needs to be applied daily.
Elizabeth Zwaaf is a Marketing Communications Specialist at Elsevier. In this role she helps to promote the work of the Innovation Explorers community to a wider audience at Elsevier and in the research community. She is currently heading up an internal campaign that focuses on where Elsevier gets customer feedback and how it’s used.

First Green Roofs Ecology Research Center in Israel
Israel’s first Green Roofs Ecology research center has been dedicated at the University of Haifa. The center will focus on research and development of non-irrigated green roofs that are suitable for Middle Eastern climates.
The University of Haifa’s research center for Green Roofs Ecology will strive to improve biological diversity with green roofs and developing ecological and evolutionary theories. The center has been established thanks to a generous gift from a British expert in the field, and was facilitated by VP for External Relations and Resource Development Amos Gaver.
Awareness of the “green roofs” gardening method on building roofs has increased in the past few years. The green roofing system enhances a building’s energy efficiency while minimizing environmental damage. The rooftop vegetation creates better insulation for the buildings, which lowers air conditioning and/or heating consumption, and improves photosynthesis in the city.
The new center, headed by Prof. Leon Blaustein of the University’s Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, will be examining the field in the Israeli context: Will it be possible to assemble green roofs in the Israeli climate without artificial irrigation? Will Israeli flora be reliable to serve for green roofs? Do green roofs increase the biological diversity of insets and plants? Research at the center will also examine the utilization of greywater irrigation for the roofs, whether a building’s height affects insect attraction to a green roof, and if drainage from green roofs might cause more environmental damage than good.
One of the University of Haifa’s roofs has already been transformed into a green research laboratory with 48 different plant beds. Its first research project is focusing on the preferred types of plants and how the different plants attract insects and birds. The center’s team has already begun seeking out additional roofs around the campus that would be suitable for use as green roofs.

BUKU INI DI TULIS PADA TAHUN 1869 OLEH SEORANG MUBALIGH AMERIKA YANG MERANCANG DAKWAH KRISTIAN DI MALAYSIA
“THE MALAYSIA MISSION OF THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH”
By : The Rev. JOHN RUSSELL DENYES
MISSIONARY, SINGAPORE MALAYSIA, 1869
Saya memetik tulisan yang di buat pengarang bagi makluman semua tentang bagaimana kristian berdakawah di Malaysia. Buku ini telah di tulis 140 tahun dahulu dan sangat menarik untuk tatapan kita semua.
Malaysia merangkumi Indonesia, Semenanjung, Borneo dan Filipina
Dalam tulisannya Rev John Russell menyifatkan seluruh kepualaun Melayu ini sebagai Malaysia. Ini membawa erti bahawa semua kepualaun ini adalah merupakan satu negara sebelum dipecah-pecahkan oleh barat.
“Malaysia, the home of the Malay, or brown man, to the southeast of Asia, between Indo-China and Austraha. It includes the Malay Peninsula and the larger half of the islands of the Eastern Archipelago. The Land group are Sumatra, a country as large as the States of Areas Iowa, Missouri, and Arkansas; Java, of the size of New York State; Celebes, the territorial equal of all New England; Borneo, nearly four times as large as Illinois; and all the hundreds of lesser islands and islets which appear so insignificant upon the map, but which are in reality countries capable of supporting a large population. The Philippine Islands are properly a part of Malaysia, but as they are treated in a separate booklet they will not be discussed further in this one.
The land area embraced within the bounds of Malaysia amounts to seven hundred thousand square miles, a territory equal to one fifth of the area of the United States. Much of the country is mountainous. In Sumatra and Java and in many of the smaller islands there are active volcanoes, and these countries are subject to frequent and violent earthquakes. The climate is hot and moist. The Climate thermometer stands at about ninety degrees in the shade the year around.”
Agama orang Melayu ketika itu
“Speaking generally, the Malays are Mohammedans. Before the introduction of Mohammedanism, Brahmanism, Sivaism, and Buddliism prevailed largely throughout Sumatra and Java. This is shown by the numerous ruins of old temples, scattered all over these Mohammedans islands. Even now Islam does not mean here what it does in Arabia and Turkey. The Malay has adopted the creed of Mohammed, but this has “only increased the number of supersensual beings to whom he prays.”
Bila Dakwah Kristian Bermula ?
“Mission work has been carried on among the people of the Dutch possessions in Malaysia since 1603. The results have not been very gratifying, owing partly to the methods adopted and partly to the opposition of the government to the use of aggressive measures in evangelization. Dr. Callenbach, a Dutch authority, says that in 1900 there were ” some 41 European clergymen and evangelists, aided by 355 ordained natives, native preachers and teachers, working among 234,073 natives of the undenominational Protestant Church of the East Indies.”
Penumpuan Kristian Kepada Pelajar2 Sekolah
“The people are content with their own way of living, and resent any interference on the part of a foreigner. But let a boy or a girl become a pupil in one of the mission schools,and the whole situation is at once altered. Interest in a child gives free access to the home and frequently to the hearts of the parents.
The objects of these schools are to educate the children of native Christians, to open the homes of the people to the missionaries, to remove the prejudices of the people against Christianity, and to open the eyes of the younger.
Their aims generation to the moral and spiritual possibilities to be found nowhere but in the Gospel. To this end chapel services are held daily. The children are taught to sing Christian songs, and are instructed in the fundamental truths of religion. Vohintarv Bible classes are conducted, at which a good percentage of the students are in attendance. Lessons are explained from the Christian viewpoint,and five days every week the pupils are under the influence of earnest Christian teachers.”
Hasil Dakwah kepada pelajar
“At the close of 1903 there were in Malaysia, apart from the Philippines, 26 schools, with 112 teachers and an enrollment of 3,270 pupils. The Sunday schools numbered 4G, with 102 teachers and 1,757 scholars.There were 12 foreign missionaries, 8 assistant missionaries,8 representatives of the Woman’s Foreign Missionary Society,57 local preachers, and 1,467 church members and probationers.
The Epworth League has begun its work among the youth, showing its worth here as in other mission fields. But these figures do not tell the whole story of missionary effort. Thousands of Bibles, tracts. Scripture-text pictures, and religious periodicals have been placed in non-Christian homes. Several thousand young men and young women have come under the influence of our mission schools,and while they are not as yet Christians, they have lost faith in idolatry.
A Christian sentiment has begun to pervade public thought, and on every hand are indications that the field is white already to the harvest.”
Cara Mubaligh berdakwah di kampung2
“The opening of a new station in a village or a neighborhood is Reaching usually preceded by street preaching. A missionary,the Natives with a native helper or two, finds his way into av illage, selects a convenient street corner, and begins to sing. The unusual noise attracts a crowd. The missionary mounts a doorstep or box, and explains the nature of his message and calls upon his helpers to testify to the poAver of the Gospel. Portions of the Bible,tracts, and Christian calendars are offered for sale.
Sometimes these visits are made at night, and magic lantern pictures are thrown upon a screen while the missionary tells the stories of the Bible. Sooner or later some man will be found who is ready to offer the use of a room in his home for a small rental or free for the services. As soon as the prejudice has disappeared sufficiently for the people to sit quietly and listen the crowd is divided into smaller groups, w^here more direct and personal work can be done. This is the beginning of the Sunday school. As converts begin to come in, a rudimentary church organization”
Penumpuan kepada China dan India
Kekuatan orang2 Melayu memegang islam menyebabkan mereka menumpu kepada Cina dan India.
“Up to the present time the difficulty of reaching the bigoted and fanatical Mohammedan Malays has led to the concentration of efforts upon the Chinese and the Tamils, as they represent the way of least resistance. There is good reason to believe, however, that aggressive work among the more primitive peoples of the jungles would soon yield a large harvest.”
“The first difficulty to be met in solving the problem is that of language. Malaysia is the meeting place of all languages and dialects. More than fifty languages, to say nothing of the minor dialects, are spoken on the streets of Singapore. The presiding elder of the Singapore District Speech holds Quarterly Conferences in seven distinct languages. When the various native workers are gathered together in Di.strict or Annual Conference the question of secretaries and interpreters becomes a serious one.
The language of commerce is Malay, but although the people of every land soon pick up enough of this language to transact ordinary business, very few of them ever learn enough of it to receive rehgious instruction in it. There is no other way but to seek each group in its ownl tongue. This means that every missionary who survives long enough must learn from one to five languages.”
Pergerakan Kristian di Pulau Pinang
“The records of the same 5′ear begin the stor}’ of another mission that has proved more successful. At the Annual Meeting it was decided to open work in Penang, on the westcoast of the peninsula. Penang is the second city in the Straits Settlements, and has a population of about one hundred and twenty-five thousand people, most of them being Chinese or Tamils.
“The island of Penang was acquired by the English government by cession from a native prince in 1785 for the small annual payment of $6,000. It is two miles from the mainland, and is twelve miles long and nine wide. Later a small strip was taken possession of on the opposite coast to arrest the Malay piracy of that part of the high seas. This strip is known as Province Wellesley, and was purchased for an annuity of $2,000.”

You can use the power of television to help teach early and emergent literacy skills, and Wisconsin PBS Kids can help!
This workshop is designed to help you help preschoolers extend their school readiness math skills, and features content from Sid the Science Kid, Sesame Street, and other Wisconsin PBS Kids programs.
This one-hour workshop offers ways to help children manage anger and learn self-control. Created by the producers of Mr. Rogers’ Neighborhood.
Using tips and segments from your favorite Wisconsin PBS Kids programs, help kids become more selective and active television viewers by creating a "learning triangle,” combining active viewing with reading and activities addressing a common them
What is the
Use this simple three-step process at home or in an educational setting.
Use the magic of Wisconsin PBS Kids to spark your child's sense of curiosity and love of learning.
Transform educational ideas into concrete, hands-on experiences for children.
Make connections between what you view and what you read.

Is what we think of as economics guided by fundamentally wrong principles? That’s the starting hypothesis for John Michael Greer in The Wealth of Nature. He goes back to Adam Smith’s original text, Wealth of Nations, to unearth popular assumptions based on the free market love of the times. The Scottish clergyman proposed that customs could be shed in favor of unregulated commerce, free of governments. Feedback loops of supply and demand would distribute necessary goods and production. Yet from the history of economics, we see how tribal chieftains maintained power by lavishing gifts upon the tribe, particularly in the custom of sharing big game hunts. This was a method of avoiding the bubble and bust cycle that results from the concentration of wealth in too few hands.
Ignoring economic history in favor of brilliant calculations turns out to be profitable business in the short term. Experiments showing how innovations in finance produce ideas for which individuals and businesses will pay good money, while advice that doesn’t promise pie-in-the-sky wealth---or even carries warnings---is rarely a way to collect bonus paychecks. The housing bubble in recent years is an example of past experience warning of an eventual loss of equilibrium, When the ideas go bust, however, as Greer observes, no one has money for an economist!
The profit of predicting profit is one fundamental problem Greer sites. The mentality since 1973 that has led to the gradual decline in median salaries for workers---while derivatives and debt-selling have created wealth that doesn’t depend on any useful goods or services have concentrated wealth in greater percentages into fewer hands. Basic assumptions about the unlimited supply of energy and materials from the earth itself have delayed alternative fuel development, the inevitable ends while we rely overmuch on tapping petroleum resources as our means. He likens the need to re-think economics as similar to the Copernican revolution: formulae that can be tweaked to serve a basic theory are not always supported by natural observation. The numerous variables cannot be controlled in the real world the way they can be in experiments, nor can people be counted on to follow predictions to make the most logical, self-preserving choices in the free market.
As an alternative to Smith’s school of thought, and the underlying assumptions made by modern economics (which Greer classifies as “neo-classical”), he presents the work of Ernst Schumacher.
In the introduction to Wealth, Greer presents four suppositions.
1. Distinction between primary and secondary goods. Conventional, people-made goods and services figure into conventional economics, but primary goods are raw materials from Nature. They prefigure production of any kind. Burning through non-renewable resources like they are unlimited capital will lead to the same problem as writing checks without regard to the balance! It’s silly to call any economy successful when it’s backing its productivity into a future corner, because some problems, we can’t buy our way out of.
2. Energy is the gateway resource; even abundant resources in the secondary goods process will just sit there without energy.
3. The cost per worker of establishing a workplace should figure in; replacing human beings with technology is not always good for the economy. For this reason, development schemes in countries new to industrialization work best with local human minds and hands focused on local needs provides the best employment scenario.
4. Fundamental questions about what exists and what is its value cannot be replaced by equations and mathematical models, disconnected from real world situations.
This book doesn’t rely over much on equations, nor was it composed by a Nobel laureate in economics; at the same time, Adam Smith was not a trained economist, himself, when he wrote Wealth of Nations, a book that doesn’t rely on tables and calculations for its observations. More than one of those laureates has served on the board of companies like Long Term Capital Management, which crashed in 1998. Schumacher’s real world qualifications in managing projects for developing countries are detailed here to establish the basis for his own observations. The book digs further into the failure of modern economics and examines some of the terminology and constructions which are the foundation of finance.
Questions about energy and the future complete his analysis, which we’ll revisit soon.

Submitted by Dyske • December 12, 2002
What does “and of” add to this phrase? That is, what is the difference between:
“I agree. Islam isn’t evil in and of itself.”
“I agree. Islam isn’t evil in itself.”
January 2, 2003, 10:46am
Looks like there's no difference:
• URL to this comment
• Report Abuse
March 17, 2003, 10:52pm
There's a functional difference. "In itself" is a more ambiguous construction, and will occasionally get you into trouble where "in and of itself" won't.
"In" gets used so many ways, in so many different combinations, that if you don't clarify its function by using the "in and of" construction, it can erroneously appear to be teamed up with the wrong word: "The fish the dog brought in itself wasn't the problem."
March 18, 2003, 4:05am
It's a slight archaism. I think, but "of itself" is different from "in itself", meaning "of its own volition". So "in and of itself" would mean something like "inherently and deliberately".
April 10, 2003, 2:18pm
Perhaps it means that it isn't evil, whether observed from within or without. I see an internal vs. external reference in "in and of".
April 10, 2003, 9:47pm
It's an expensive book ($35 to $40 US), but _The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms_ would be a very useful book for those learning English as a second language. Other less expensive books are available, too.
I've been supportive of what Teresa Nielsen Hayde writes, but her example this time wasn't that helpful to me. For the distinction to be made by example, I need to substitute "in and of" for "in" and then be able to see that one version is clearer than the other. I can't do that with her example. If I change it to "The fish the dog brought in and of itself wasn't the problem," I'm pretty much stuck with my original problem with understanding the sentence.
That problem is caused, at least partially, by having "in itself" or "in and of itself" so far removed from "fish." "In and of itself, the fish the dog brought in wasn't the problem." "In itself, the fish the dog brought in wasn't the problem." The sentence just doesn't work the other way. "The fish the dog brought in wasn't the problem" also works, but has a slightly different meaning.
Some difficulty may also stem from being able to say either "dog brought" or "dog brought in." I'd opt for "dog brought in"--not dissimilar to the saying, "Look what the cat dragged in." If I refer to the "fish the dog brought," it almost sounds to me as if the dog bought and then brought a gift to a party's hostess. If I refer to the "fish the dog brought in," there's more a sense of finding the fish and bringing it in, something much more likely for a dog to do.
What WAS the problem? It was either the smell or the fish guts falling on the floor. (Alternatively: It was either the smell or the fish's guts falling on the floor.)
August 24, 2003, 5:00am
The phrase "in and of itself" has become so cliched, I think it should be avoided. To me, "in itself" sounds much better.
August 25, 2003, 1:42pm
Erle... all that stuff about fish and dogs only serves to confuse the issue. :-)The question was, in my opinion, clearly answered by John Peacock below. To that I'd also like to add that the prevalence of this phrase is likely due to the fact that those using it do so in the (mistaken) belief that it has more gravitas than simply saying "in itself".
August 21, 2006, 12:35pm
"in and of itself" is an Americanism for "itself":The fish itself wasn't the problem; The fish the dog brought in wasn't itself the problem; (and there are probably other constructions). The problem itself is that to British ears, "in and of" doesn't add any value whatsoever. We normally are content with "itself" itself, or when we really need a preposition, "in itself".
• URL to this comment
• Report Abuse
Justin K (unregistered)
October 5, 2006, 1:36pm
"The fish THAT the dog brought in wasn't, itself, the problem. Rather, it was the ensuing debate about pompous grammatical constructions that proved confounding."
October 5, 2006, 10:16pm
I hate to beat a dead horse, but here're my two cents: "in and of" is superfluous. Itself as used here is an intensive pronoun, so further emphasis shouldn't be necessary.
January 30, 2009, 5:32pm
Actually, I find it funny that I stumbled across this blog by Googling (is that a good term to use either??) the term "per say" or "per-say" and the Urban Dictionary website said it means "in-and-of-itself" and "in and of itself". Now I'm really confused on which one to use because I don't like either one of them, per say?? There's some word fun for you if anyone else stumbles in here.
October 7, 2011, 9:42am
Funny that "per say" led you to this, as it is also an incorrect (Americanized) spelling for this Latin expression, which actually means "by itself" and should be spelled "per se".http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/per_se
Ironically, English is not my first language, but I regularly find myself correcting English natives's writing. Now I know why I had to suffer learning Latin languages for endless hours...
©2001-2013 CYCLE Interactive, LLC. All Rights Reserved. •
RSS Posts •

[ back ]
Ferocious felines at the fair
If you visit to the Ohio State Fair, where the Marcan Tiger Show will be presented three times daily through Aug. 12, you might catch the cats involved in a favorite hobby: napping.
Messenger photos by John Matuszak
Tosheeba, one of the stars of the Marcan Tiger Show at the Ohio State Fair, looks like a big house cat playing with her favorite ball. But she shows off her strength by carrying a bowling ball in her mouth. Dr. Josip Marcan exhibits his animals and talks about the need to preserve this highly endangered species at 1, 3 and 7 p.m. daily.
But their owner, Dr. Josip Marcan, is alert to the threat tigers face, and he wants to wake up his audiences to the need to preserve these magnificent animals.
In the wild, “they are doomed to extinction, unfortunately,” declared Marcan, who has worked with tigers and other big cats for 50 years.
Three sub-species are already gone. The Bengals are the most numerous, but there are 1,500 or fewer of those outside of captivity, according to Marcan.
The reason for the decline: humans.
At the beginning of the 20th century, there were three billion people and 100,000 tigers on the planet, he pointed out. At the dawn of the 21st century, there were six billion people and 1,500 tigers.
Their habitats in places such as India have been overtaken by a need for more houses and farm land, and many are hunted for hides and the supposed medicinal value of bones and teeth.
Having such a small number squeezed into tiny boundaries is not the ideal breeding environment, offered Marcan, who received veterinary training at the Frankfurt Zoo in Germany.
“That will kill them quicker than poachers,” he said of the resultant in-breeding.
This situation led Marcan to establish his own 80-acre tiger preserve in Ponce de Leon, Fla., and to launch his traveling show to educate the public and raise funds for the breeding effort that provides tigers to zoos across the country.
His cats make five or six fair appearances a year. This is Marcan’s second visit to the Ohio State Fair, having brought his exhibit to Columbus in 1999.
It’s not a circus act, Marcan insisted. Instead, it highlights the bond between tigers and humans and brings out the animals’ natural behavior through positive reinforcement, not punishment.
Each of the tigers has a different personality, “just like people,” Marcan said. “Some are vicious and some are gentle.”
They may loll around like house cats at times, but they also demonstrate their tremendous strength.
A favorite toy is a bowling ball, which Tosheeba picks up in her mouth and carries around as if it were made of foam rubber.
The male Bengal can weigh up to 500 lbs., and the females are around 300 lbs. Bengals are unique in being the only sub-species that has different colored coats, from vivid oranges to almost total white.
Marcan said he has been lucky to have never been seriously injured by a tiger.
“I’m very good at reading them. I can tell what kind of mood they’re in, what they’re thinking,” he explained.
His affinity for animals began at a young age in his native Croatia, where people brought him dogs and horses to train.
He sharpened his skills at the Frankfurt Zoo, eventually becoming assistant director. He became known as an expert on the big cats, earning him appearances on the “Ed Sullivan Show.”
He settled in the United States in the late 1960s and established his breeding program.
“You have to breed responsibly,” he said.
One zoo in Washington wanted a Bengal cub, but had to wait for a year and a half until the time was right, Marcan recalled.
He believes that preserves such as his are the last hope for the tigers, and that the call of animal rights activists for keeping the animals in the ever-shrinking wild is “unrealistic.”
“Where is the wild? I want them to show me,” he challenged.
His ultimate hope is that the species can be saved until a time when they can be returned to the wild.
In the meantime, if people are going to see a live tiger in 50 years, “it will be up to us to keep them alive in captivity,” Marcan said.
The Marcan Tiger Show will be presented daily at 1, 3 and 7 p.m. in the arena on the north side of the Celeste Center.
Information on Marcan’s program is at www.marcantigers.org.
Information about additional fair programs is at www.ohiostatefair.com.
[ back ]

- modern (adj.)
- c.1500, "now existing;" 1580s, "of or pertaining to present or recent times;" from Middle French moderne (15c.) and directly from Late Latin modernus "modern" (Priscian, Cassiodorus), from Latin modo "just now, in a (certain) manner," from modo (adv.) "to the measure," ablative of modus "manner, measure" (see mode (n.1)). Extended form modern-day attested from 1909.
In Shakespeare, often with a sense of "every-day, ordinary, commonplace." Slang abbreviation mod first attested 1960. Modern art is from 1807 (by contrast to ancient); modern dance first attested 1912; first record of modern jazz is from 1954. Modern conveniences first recorded 1926.
- modern (n.)
- 1580s, "person of the present time" (contrasted to ancient, from modern (adj.). From 1897 as "one who is up to date."

Last week the American Cancer Society published Yale University research findings that dental patients who received frequent dental X-rays a generation ago, are at greater risk for developing meningioma, a non-cancerous brain tumor.
The Yale study involved more than 1,400 dental patients from around the U.S. who were diagnosed with the non-cancerous tumor. The study also tracked a similar group of dental patients who did not have a meningioma.
What the Yale researchers discovered is that patients with meningioma were twice as likely to have had dental X-ray exams where they bit down on a tab of X-ray film at least once a year when they were children.
An even greater link was discovered between meningioma and the single X-ray outside of the mouth. Dental patients who had the panorex dental exam when they were younger than 10-years-old had almost five times greater the risk for meningioma.
Since the research publication dentists have found themselves on the defensive regarding dental X-rays.
The American Dental Association released a statement on the study asserting the following, “The ADA has reviewed the study and notes that the results rely on the individuals’ memories of having dental X-rays taken years earlier. Studies have shown that the ability to recall information is often imperfect. Therefore, the results of studies that use this design can be unreliable because they are affected by what scientists call ‘recall bias.’”
In the ADA statement, Dr. Alan G. Lurie, a radiation biologist and head of radiology at the University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine, voiced concerns about the study’s design and outcomes. “I think it’s a very flawed study,” said Dr. Lurie, who is also president of the American Academy of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology.
He characterized at least one outcome of the study—reflected in a table that related meningioma risk to types of dental X-ray examination—as “biologically impossible.”
Said Dr. Lurie, “They have a table, Table 2, in which they ask the question, `Ever had a bitewing,’ and the odds ratio risk from a bitewing ranges from 1.2 to 2.0, depending on the age group. Then they asked ‘Ever had full mouth’ series, and the odds ratio risk from a full mouth series ranged from 1.0 to 1.2.
“That’s biologically not possible because the full mouth series has two to four bitewings plus another 10 to 16 periapicals. A full mouth series, just to round things off, is 20 intraoral X-rays of which two to four are bitewings. They are showing that one bitewing has 50 to 100 percent greater risk than a full mouth series that has multiple bitewings plus a bunch of other films. That’s biologically not possible.”
Explaining this gross internal discrepancy is difficult, as the epidemiologic and statistical methods are widely accepted, Dr. Lurie said. He attributes the perceived discrepancy in the data to possible recall bias in the patients involved in the study.
“Epidemiologists are very aware of this bias,” Dr. Lurie said. “What happens is you’re asking people to remember what kind of dental X-rays they had 10, 20, 30 or 40 years ago. It’s anecdotal, and the argument is that it’s just as anecdotal for the group without meningiomas as it is for the group with meningiomas. That is not necessarily true.”
In this week’s survey, The Wealthy Dentist asked dentists if the news reports will change how their dental practice uses X-rays. We are curious what dentists think about the study and if any patients are calling dental practices questioning X-rays.
To take part in the survey, click here, or leave us a comment and tell us your thoughts on dental X-rays and this study.
For more on this study see: ADA Releases Statement on Dental X-rays Study

There has been an ongoing struggle with the Washington Department of Ecology over rainwater harvesting, and it has finally been resolved – for now. It is in jeopardy, depending on actions taken by the US Congress.
The State of Washington has jurisdiction over “all waters above, upon, or beneath the surface of the earth, located within the state and over which the state has sole or concurrent jurisdiction.” (RCW 43.27A.020). That includes rainfall. There have been tussles in the legislature on a recurring basis over rainwater collection, with occasional threats to start regulating rain barrels under home downspouts and blocked efforts to fully implement sustainable design practices.
DOE Policy 1017 “Water Resources Program Policy Regarding Collection of Rainwater for Beneficial Use,” effective October 9, 2009, formalizes what common sense has told us all along. Collecting rainwater falling on roofs and putting it to beneficial use before it continues on its way as storm water is good stewardship. In some areas of the state (e.g. the San Juan Islands), there may be no other source of fresh water. Capturing rainwater for use on site is a key component of sustainable building design. Conserving water is a good thing everywhere in Washington.
Now the other Washington is quietly pushing a bill drastically impacting both urban sustainable design and rural economic sustainability. Senate Bill 787 Clean Water Restoration Act is intended to address perceived shortcomings of the Clean Water Act of 1977.
In a 2005 US Supreme Court ruling (Rapanos v. United States), the Army Corps of Engineers regulatory authority under the Clean Water Act was confirmed as applying only to “navigable waters,” as stated in the Act. “Navigable waters” are those connected to interstate commerce as defined under the Commerce clause of the Constitution. The definition has been tortuously interpreted to apply to the smallest of tributary streams as long as it could carry a canoe, but at least giving the Act a Constitutional veneer.
In the Rapanos case, the Corps attempted to extend their authority to a prairie pothole in the middle of a cornfield, clearly not navigable, by claiming broad authority over “all waters of the United States” and ignoring the explicitly limited definition carried within the Act.
S.787, if passed in its current form, would bend to the wishes of the Army Corps of Engineers and change the definition from “navigable waters” to “all waters,” with a lengthy definition extending jurisdiction to “all other waters, such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds.”
Based on the Corps previous attempts at regulating rain puddles in cornfields and the EPA’s definition of a playa lake (a temporary sheet of water in a slight depression in a flat area during the rainy season), the effect of S.787 is a transfer of authority over intrastate water and rainwater to the federal government.
It took a long time in the state of Washington to work out a sensible start to resolving rainwater harvesting policy. Overlaying the Army Corps of Engineers and the EPA on top of our own DOE is not going to be an improvement. S787 must be modified or killed before the House takes action to pass a companion bill.
Sen. Maria Cantwell (D) is a co-sponsor. Contact her office and tell her what you think.

The discontent produced by the Peace of Beaulieu (6 May, 1576), which restored the government of Picardy to the Protestant Prince de Condé and gave him Péronne to hold as a security, induced d'Humieres, a Catholic who commanded the city of Péronne, to form a league of gentry, soldiers, and peasants of Picardy to keep Condé from taking possession of the city. D'Humieres also appealed to all the princes, nobles and prelates of the kingdom, and to the allies of the nations neighbouring to France. This League of Péronne thus aspired to become international. From a religious point of view it aimed at supporting Catholicism in France politically at restoring the "ancient franchises and liberties" against the royal power. Its programme was spread throughout France by the efforts of Henri de Guise (see GUISE), and Henry III, then on good terms with the Guises, declared himself its chief. Gregory XIII was apprised of the formation of the League by Jean David, an advocate of the Parliament of Paris, acting for the Guises, and he communicated the fact to Philip II. But when the Peace of Bergerac (17 September, 1577) between Henry III and the Protestants, curtailed the liberties accorded them by the Edict of Beaulieu, the king hastened to dissolve the League of Péronne and the other Catholic leagues formed after its example. This dissolution was the cause of rejoicing to a certain number of royalists, who held that "all leagues and associations in a monarchial state are matters of grave consequence, and that it is impossible for sujects to band themselves together without prejudicing the royal superiority". The nobility had lacked unanimity, and the cities had been too lukewarm to maintain this first league.
The death of the Duke of Anjou (10 June, 1584) having made Henry of Bourbon, the Protestant King of Navarre, heir presumptive to Henry III, a new league was formed among the aristocracy and the people. On the one hand, the Dukes of Guise, Mayenne, and Nevers and Baron de Senecey met at Nancy to renew the League, with the object of securing the recognition, as heir to the throne, of the Cardinal de Bourbon, who would extirpate heresy and receive the Council of Trent in France. Philip II, by the Treaty of Joinville (31 December, 1584), promised his concurrence, in the shape of a monthly subsidy of 50,000 crowns. At Paris, on the other hand, Charles Hotteman, Sieur de Rocheblond, "moved by the Spirit of God", Prévost, curé of Saint Séverin, Boucher, curé of Saint Benoît, and Launoy, a canon of Soissons, appealed to the middle classes of the cities to save Catholicism. A secret society was formed. Rocheblond and five other leaguers carried on a propaganda, gradually organizing a little army at Paris, and establishing relations with the Guises. The combination of these two movements — the aristocratic and the popular — resulted in the manifesto of 30 March, 1585, launched from Péronne by Guise and the princes amounting to a sort of declaration of war against Henry III. The whole story of the League has been told in the article GUISE. We shall here dwell upon only the following two points.
Gregory XIII approved of the League after 1584, but abstained from committing himself to any writing in its favour. Sixtus V wished the struggle against heresy in France to be led by the king himself; the religious zeal of the Leaguers pleased him, but he did not like the movement of political independence in relation to Henry III. Events, however, drove Sixtus V to take sides with the Leaguers. The Bull of 9 September, 1585, by which he declared Henry of Bourbon and the Prince of Condé as Protestants, to have forfeited the succession, provoked so much opposition from the Parliament, and so spirited a reply from Henry, that the League, in its turn, recognized the necessity of a counterstroke. Louis d'Orléans, advocate and a leaguer, undertook the defence of the Bull in the "Avertissement des Catholiques Angais aux Français Catholiques", an extremely violent manifesto against Henry of Bourbon. Madame le Montpensier, a sister of the Guises, boasted that she ruled the famous preachers of the League, the "Satire Ménippée" presently turned them to ridicule, while in their turn the Leaguers from the pulpits of Paris attacked not only Henry of Bourbon, but the acts, the morals, and the orthodoxy of Henry III. Such preachers were Rose, Bishop of Senlis, Boucher and Prévost, the aforesaid curés — the latter of whom caused an immense picture to be displayed, representing the horrible sufferings inflicted upon Catholics by the English co-religionists of Henry of Bourbon. Other preachers were de Launay, a canon of Soissons, the learned Benedictine Génébrard, the controversialist Feuardent, the ascetic writer Pierre Crespet, and Guincestre, curé of Saint-Gervais, who, preaching at Saint-Barthélemy on New Year's Day, 1589, made all who heard him take an oath to spend the last penny they had and shed their last drop of blood to avenge their assassination of Guise. By these excesses of the Leaguers against the monarchical principle, and by the murder of Henry III by Jacques Clément (1 August, 1589) Sixtus V was compelled to assume an altitude of extreme reserve towards the League. The nuncio Matteuzzi having thought it his duty to leave Venice because immediately after the assassination of Henry III the Senate had decided to send an ambassador to Henry of Bourbon, the pope sent him back to his post, expressing a hope that the Venetians might be able to persuade Henry of Bourbon to be reconciled with the Holy See. On 14 May, 1590, the papal legate Caetani blessed, saluting them as Machabees, the 1300 monks who, led by Rose, Bishop of Senlis, and Pelletier, Curé of Saint-Jacques, organized for the defence of Paris against Henry of Bourbon; but, on the other hand, the pope manifested great displeasure because the Sorbonne had declared, on 7 May, that, even "absolved of his crimes", Henry of Bourbon could not become King of France. The Leaguers in their enthusiasm had denied to the papal authority the right of eventually admitting Henry of Bourbon to the throne of France. They found new cause for indignation in the fact that Sixtus V had received the Duke of Luxembourg-Piney, the envoy of Henry's party; and Philip II while in Paris, caused a sermon to be preached against the pope.
But when, after the brief pontificate of Urban VII, Gregory XIV became pope (5 December, 1590) the League and Spain recovered their influence at Rome. Several Briefs dated in March, 1591, and two "monitoria" to the nuncio Landriano once more proclaimed the downfall of Henry of Bourbon. The prelates who sided with Henry, assembled at Chartres, in September, 1591, protested against the "monitoria" and appealed from them to the pope's maturer information. The gradual development of a third party weakened the League and hastened the approach of an understanding between Rome and Henry of Bourbon (see HENRY IV). Briefly, the Holy See felt a natural sympathy for the Catholic convictions in which the League originated; but, to the honour of Sixtus V, he would not, in the most tragic moments of his pontificate, compromise himself too far with a movement which flouted the authority of Henry III, the legitimate king; neither would he admit the maxim: "Culpam non pænam aufert absolutio peccati" (Absolution blots out the sin, but not its penalty), in virtue of which certain theologians of the League claimed that Henry IV, even if absolved by the pope, would still be incapable of succeeding to the French throne. By this wise policy, Sixtus prepared the way far in advance for the reconciliation which he hoped for, and which was to be realized in the absolution of Henry IV by Clement VIII.
Charles Labitte has found it possible to write a book on "La Démocratie sous la Ligue". The religious rising of the people soon took shelter behind certain political theories which tended to the revival of medieval political liberties and the limitation of royal absolutism. In 1586 the advocate Le Breton, in a pamphlet for which he was hanged, called Henry III "one of the greatest hypocrites who ever lived", demanded an assembly of the States General from which the royal officers should be excluded, and proposed to restore all their franchises to the cities. Ideas of political autonomy were beginning to take definite shape. The League wished the clergy to recover those liberties which it possessed before the Concordat of Francis I, the nobility to regain the independence it enjoyed in the Middle Ages, and the cities to be restored to a certain degree of autonomy. After the assassination of Guise, a crime instigated by Henry III, sixty-six doctors of the Sorbonne declared that the king's subjects were freed from their oath of allegiance and might lawfully take arms, collect money, and defend the Roman religion against the king: the name of Henrv III was erased from the Canon of the Mass and replaced by the "Catholic princes". Boucher, curé of Saint-Benoît, popularized this opinion of the Sorbonne in his book "De justa Henriei Tertii abdicatione", in which be maintained that Henry III, "as a perjurer, assassin, murderer, a sacrilegious person, patron of heresy, simoniac, magician, impious and damnable", could be deposed by the Church; that, as "a perfidious waster of the public treasure, a tyrant and enemy of his country", he could be deposed by the people. Boucher declared that a tyrant was a ferocious beast which men were justified at killing. It was under the influence of these theories that upon the assassination of Henry III by Jacques Clément (1 August, 1589), the mother of the Guises harangued the throng from the altar of the church of the Cordeliers, and glorified the deed of Clément. These exaggerated ideas served only to justify tyranny, and did not long influence the minds of men. Moreover, the "Declaration" of Henry IV against seditious preachers (September, 1595) and the steps taken at Rome by Cardinal d'Ossat, in 1601, put a stop to the political preachings which the League had brought into fashion. The memory of the excesses committed under the League was afterwards exploited by the legists of the French Crown to combat Roman doctrines and to defend royal absolutism and Gallicanism. But, considering the bases of the League doctrines, it is impossible not to accord them the highest importance in the history of political ideas. Power, they said, was derived from God through the people, and they opposed the false, absolutist, and Gallican doctrine of the Divine right and irresponsibility of kings, such as Louis XIV professed and practised; and they also bore witness to the perfect compatibility of the most rigorous Roman ideas with democratic and popular aspirations.
It has been possible to trace certain analogies between the doctrines of the League and Protestant brochures like Hotman's "Franco-Gallia" and the "Vindiciæ contra tyrannos" of Junius Brutus (Duplessis Mornay), published immediately after the Massacre of St. Bartholomew. Indeed, both Huguenots and Leaguers were then seeking to limit the royal power; but in the Huguenot projects of reform the tendency was to favour the aristocracy, the optimates; they would not allow the mob — the mediastinus quilibet of whom the "Vindiciæ" speak so contemptuously — any right of resistance against the king; the Leaguers, on the contrary appealed to the democracy. The Huguenots permitted no uprising of the mere private individual save with "God's special calling"; the Leaguers held that every man was called by God to the defence of the Church, and that all men were equal when there was question of repelling the heretic or the infidel. Hence, in his work, "Des progres de la révolution et de la guerre contre l'Église" Lamennais felt free to write (1829): "How deeply Catholicism has impressed souls with the sentiment of liberty was never more evident than in the days of the League."
See the bibliography of GUISE; also LABITTE, De la démocratchez les prédicateurs de Ligue (Paris, 1841); WEILL, Les théories sur le pouvoir royal en France pendant les guerres du religion (Paris, 1891); TREUMANN, Die Monarchomachen; eins Darstellung der revolutionären Staatslehren des XVI. Jahrurderts, 1573-1599 (Leipzig, 1885).
APA citation. (1910). The League. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/09098b.htm
MLA citation. "The League." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. <http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/09098b.htm>.
Transcription. This article was transcribed for New Advent by Mario Anello.
Ecclesiastical approbation. Nihil Obstat. October 1, 1910. Remy Lafort, Censor. Imprimatur. +John M. Farley, Archbishop of New York.
Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email address is feedback732 at newadvent.org. (To help fight spam, this address might change occasionally.) Regrettably, I can't reply to every letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback — especially notifications about typographical errors and inappropriate ads.

With what must be one of their more obtuse headlines, Fox Nation misrepresented a recent study on the impact of climate change on the world's crops, proclaiming that it showed "No Global Warming In North America":
Got that? The globe is not warming in North America -- just like the United States doesn't have an unemployment problem in North Dakota.
What's more is that the study Fox Nation refers to doesn't actually contend that there have been no global warming effects in North America. Here, Fox is echoing an Ottawa Citizen headline which stated: "Climate change hardly visible in North America: Canada U.S. buck trend, scientists say." This too is a misrepresentation of the research.
In fact, the study examined only crop-producing regions and only during the growing seasons of corn, rice, maize, and wheat.The research indicated that those specific regions in the U.S. have not seen the same warming trend evident in global average temperatures over the past 30 years. (Indeed, no climate scientist would say the planet is expected to warm uniformly).
Stanford's David Lobell, one of the authors of the study, explained in an email that he was "disappointed" in both the Fox Nation and Ottawa Citizen coverage, which "do not accurately portray our findings." He added:
The study was only focusing on one aspect of climate change (impacts on agriculture) and looked only in the parts of the countries where and times of year when certain crops are grown. for example, if one looks at winter temperatures in these regions, it would paint a different picture. also, the lack of trend in any one region has very little bearing on whether global warming is happening.
Moreover, responding to an inquiry submitted to the Climate Science Rapid Response Team, Dr. Jacqueline Mohan of the University of Georgia's Odum School of Ecology explained in an email that "modern crops and the vast majority of natural ecosystems are fundamentally different." She explains that annual crops used in agriculture "do not "track" climate as closely as perennial plants which have much longer lifespans" and are more vulnerable to changes in climate. Mohan also points to recent research on ecosystems in North America that "has shown profound responses to changing climate."
Of course, Fox Nation is notorious for finding bogus evidence in an attempt to disprove the fact that the Earth is warming. In this case, the site is pushing the notion that if global warming isn't happening in America, it's not happening anywhere. Unfortunately, it's just not the case that climate change isn't happening here and around the world.
Presumably, Fox Nation paid little attention to a report that actually does examine the impact of climate change on the U.S. as a whole. That report, commissioned by the Bush administration and released in 2009, serves as "the most complete federal look yet at the effects of a changing climate," according to USA Today. It features a compilation of both federal and independent research and includes "analysis of impacts on various sectors such as energy, water, and transportation" at both a national and regional levels. Among its key findings are that "Climate changes are underway in the United States and are projected to grow" and that "Widespread climate-related impacts are occurring now and are expected to increase."
Indeed, regions all over the world are observing trends that foretell a changing environment. According to University of Minnesota scientist Peter Reich, also contacted through CSRRT, Fox Nation is completely missing the important point of Lobell's study, saying via email that "if there is evidence that on average, around the world, agricultural output was already impacted by climate change, that is important, and a 'canary in the coal mine' kind of signal."
Indeed, Lobell's study concludes that communities across the globe are encountering the very real consequences of climate change on the production of vital crops. The very research that Fox Nation uses to sow doubt about global warming found that "Climate trends were large enough in some countries to offset a significant portion of the increases in average yields that arose from technology, CO2 fertilization, and other factors."
Additionally, while there is significant evidence that climate change is occurring right here in the U.S., many other studies have shown that the geographies of other regions make them even more vulnerable to the negative effects of a changing climate. An analysis by World Bank economist David Wheeler projects a median loss of agricultural productivity in Central Africa of 19.8% by 2050. He also forecasts that 14 other regions, including significant portions of South America and Asia will see decreases of 10% or more, whereas North America's median losses are around 1.65%. British firm Maplecroft, which specializes in risk analysis, rated the United States as a "medium risk" country, less vulnerable than 128 other countries in the world.

UMass Memorial offers comprehensive hearing loss tests for adults and children, including the tests listed here. We also dispense hearing aids and other listening devices, and offer a Cochlear Implant Program.
Adult Hearing Testing: Adults with concerns about hearing loss, tinnitus (ringing in the ear) and/or balance may undergo a number of hearing tests. An adult evaluation can include:
- Pure tone audiometry testing - A test to determine sensitivity to tones across the frequency (pitch) range of hearing
- Tympanometry - A procedure that detects middle ear problems, such as eardrum perforation and middle ear fluid
- Speech discrimination testing - A test to determine the ability to recognize speech clearly
- Middle ear muscle reflexes - A test on the function of the inner ear, auditory nerve and brainstem, and facial nerve
- Otoacoustic emissions - A test to assess the function of the inner ear
Threshold Auditory Evoked Response Testing: This testing is used to measure the hearing sensitivity in patients who cannot be tested by conventional means. The most common age for testing is birth to three years; however, it can also be used to check older patients who cannot complete testing due to cognitive/developmental impairment. UMass Memorial uses a combination of tests called auditory brainstem response and auditory steady-state response. The tests are simple, painless and noninvasive, but require the patient to be asleep. Pediatric patients older than three months usually require sedation, which is administered by our Children’s Medical Center anesthesiologists to ensure the highest safety and effectiveness.
Neurodiagnostic Auditory Brainstem Response Testing: This test is used to screen problems with the acoustic nerve and auditory brainstem. Clicking sounds are played through earphones while the response is recorded.
Vestibular Evoked Myogenic Potential Testing: This test is used to test one of the balance organs of the inner ear for patients with unexplained dizziness/vertigo or certain types of hearing loss. It requires the patient to turn and hold their head in fixed positions while tones are played through earphones.
Auditory Processing Evaluations: Auditory processing evaluations are available for both adults and children eight years and older. Individuals with auditory processing disorder have difficulty processing or understanding auditory information, especially when the signal is complex, lengthy, spoken rapidly or in a poor listening environment. Our specialists use a number of tests and provide extensive follow-up recommendations to patients, parents and educators.
Universal Newborn Hearing Screening Program: Audiology Services oversees the Universal Newborn Hearing Screening program, which provides hearing tests at several birth centers in the region, and is a Level One Massachusetts Department of Public Health diagnostic follow-up center.

American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The act or process of one that packs.
- n. The processing and packaging of manufactured products, especially food products.
- n. A material used to prevent leakage or seepage, as around a pipe joint.
- n. The insertion of gauze or other material into a body cavity or wound for therapeutic purposes.
- n. The material so used; a pack.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. Any material used for filling an empty space, closing a joint, and the like; stuffing, as the filling of a piston or a well-tube.
- n. In printing, the fabric used on printing-presses between the iron platen or cylinder and the sheet to be printed. A soft packing is a blanket of wool or rubber cloth, which equalizes the impression. A hard packing is made of glazed millboard or of smooth hard paper, which prevents indentation.
- n. In masonry, small stones embedded in mortar, employed to fill up the vacant spaces in the middle of walls; rubble.
- n. The act of bringing together or manipulating to serve one's own purposes. See pack, transitive verb, 8.
- n. A system of packing in which metal is used, as metallic rings for piston-packing. Such rings are either so cast as to be elastic, or they are divided into segments and fitted with springs to press them against the interior of the cylinder so as to form a steam-tight contact.
- n. Tubes of lead or other soft metal filled with some vegetable material, such as hemp or cotton. The ends of the tubes are either forced or soldered together.
- n. Collusion; trickery; cheating.
- n. In halma, the stage of the game in which the player gets his men in order on the side of the board farthest from him.
- n. In shipbuilding, the pieces of wood used to fill up the space between the bilgeways and the bottom of the ship. A large number of long wooden wedges are placed transversely between the packing and bilgeways, and the weight of the vessel is transferred from the building-blocks to the packing before launching the vessel by driving in the wedges.
- n. In telephony, the crowding together or caking of the particles of carbon in a microphonic transmitter, whereby the sensitiveness of the instrument is impaired.
- v. present participle of pack.
- n. The action of the verb.
- n. As a concrete noun.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. The act or process of one who packs.
- n. (Mach.) Any material used to pack, fill up, or make close. A substance or piece used to make a joint impervious.
- n. A thin layer, or sheet, of yielding or elastic material inserted between the surfaces of a flange joint.
- n. The substance in a stuffing box, through which a piston rod slides.
- n. A yielding ring, as of metal, which surrounds a piston and maintains a tight fit, as inside a cylinder, etc.
- n. (Masonry), Rare in the U. S. Same as Filling.
- n. obsolete A trick; collusion.
- n. any material used especially to protect something
- n. the enclosure of something in a package or box
- n. carrying something in a pack on the back
- From pack (partly from the verb, partly from the noun) + -ing. (Wiktionary)
“Another important point in packing is to keep food from becoming soggy in the box.”
“The phrase packing the Court—always pejorative, imputing one-sidedness—burst on the scene in 1936 in criticism of President Franklin Roosevelt’s plan to appoint a new Supreme Court justice every time one of the “nine old men” a phrase coined by the columnists Drew Pearson and Robert S. Allen reached the age of seventy and refused to step down.”
“The couple said they are going to begin packing their belongings.”
“It teaches them caution, such as in packing one's own parachute.”
“Court-packing is not particularly difficult as a matter oflaw.”
“In the next week or so we will begin packing up our offices.”
“I was not careful enough in packing it in the car, and when my husband opened the back door, its package fell out and it broke!”
“The furniture as you can see all came wrapped in packing foam and when the desks and cabinets were finally arranged we had one gigantic mountain of fun.”
“She needs to spend any money she may have left in packing up her campaign.”
“The senator that was sent packing from the Senate?”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘packing’.
Annoying, little, things. In a single word.
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
includes words of the "Prodcom list"
Amusingly-named mechanical and electrical parts to be found in a particular warehouse in Newfoundland
Listening to this as an audio book for the second time. Tim O'Brien uses simple words and phrases to great effect. Very few unfamilar and big words . The writing style reminds me of words from Joh...
I think the title says it all.
All about boarding life.
There is a mixture of positive and negative.
Looking for tweets for packing.

A common pattern in the way
Worms and one tactic Spammers employ is that they send mails which have
spoofed from address. This means that the from address you see in the mail
is not actually the address from which the mail originated.
Worm when it
infects a PC, makes a list of all e-mail addresses found in the infected
machines address book, html pages, or any other file is searched and a
list is made by the worm. Then it chooses one 'from' address and another address as the 'to'.
The person whom it supposedly come from, may not know about the mail at
follow similar procedure so that the source of the spam is hidden, bounced
back message goes to spoofed addressee, and spoofing also allows spammers
to avoid negative publicity.
Bounced Mail; when the mail is sent to someone fraudulently with your
from address and if for some reason that mail could not go through, it gets
bounced back to you. This is how you get undeliverable message for mails which you
haven't sent. Mail may be getting returned due to over quota or
because server detected virus in the mail.
Affect of spoofing by Virus/Worm: a worm triggered and spoofed mail
wont be sending you cakes. Most often they come with a mail which carries
the worm code itself to start work in your PC. If your network or your PC
does not have effective antivirus in place, you are sure to get infected
and start infecting others.
How to Investigate and find out: currently there is
not much you can do to prevent address spoofing excepting the normal
spam filtering. Your address
can be inserted by someone as their from address very easily in their
e-mail program. In future, the senders domain name may be verified
automatically by the e-mail server trafficking the mail to ensure that the
sender actually is the sender it claims. This technology is in the process
of being perfected and may offer a solution.

Developing Scenario-based Learning: practical insights for tertiary educators
Errington, Edward Peter (2003) Developing Scenario-based Learning: practical insights for tertiary educators. Dunmore Press, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
This is the latest version of this item.
|Image (JPEG) (Book Cover)|
This book is designed to help tertiary educators plan, deliver, evaluate and reflect on four of the most common kinds of scenario. These are skills-based scenarios; problem-based scenarios; issues-based scenarios; and, speculative-based scenarios.
Contributors go further than simply describing innovative practices. They analyse SBL judiciously, provoking the reader to consider a range of scenario options.
|Item Type:||Book (Edited)|
|Keywords:||scenario-based learning; higher education; kinds of scenarios|
|FoR Codes:||13 EDUCATION > 1302 Curriculum and Pedagogy > 130202 Curriculum and Pedagogy Theory and Development @ 50%|
13 EDUCATION > 1302 Curriculum and Pedagogy > 130299 Curriculum and Pedagogy not elsewhere classified @ 50%
|SEO Codes:||97 EXPANDING KNOWLEDGE > 970113 Expanding Knowledge in Education @ 100%|
|Deposited On:||12 May 2010 14:46|
|Last Modified:||02 Nov 2012 09:38|
Last 12 Months: 18
Available Versions of this Item
- UNSPECIFIED (deposited UNSPECIFIED)
- Developing Scenario-based Learning: practical insights for tertiary educators. (deposited 12 May 2010 14:46) [Currently Displayed]
Repository Staff Only: item control page

Ever spell out words in the air with your finger? Now you can do it with an iPad. The result is spooky 3D letters that seem to hover in midair. Casper would love it.
We've seen iPads used to create touch-screen art, but this goes a step beyond. The folks at communications agency Dentsu London and design consultancy Berg teamed up to produce an series of otherworldly animations seen in the vid below. Dentsu says it's part of its Making Future Magic project.
The photographic technique is a kind of stop-frame animation. Hand-held iPads are imaged moving through space with long exposure times, creating a ghostly message in the air.
3D models of letters and objects are first rendered in cross sections in a kind of "virtual CAT scan," as Berg's Jack Schulze explains in the video. Then they're played back as movies on the iPad screen while it moves through the air.
These are imaged in low-light environments as long-exposure photos of 3 to 6 seconds, and each pic is one of many frames in the animation sequence.
The team created luminescent words that seem to hover, as well as walking robots and other 3D shapes (but no ghosts). In one sequence, the word "making" seems to jump off a table and climb a staircase. In another, "future" floats over a puddle. "Magic," meanwhile, dances and skips impishly in a shadowy garden.
<… Read more

This volume contains articles covering a broad spectrum of proof theory, with an emphasis on its mathematical aspects. The articles should not only be interesting to specialists of proof theory, but should also be accessible to a diverse audience, including logicians, mathematicians, computer scientists and philosophers. Many of the central topics of proof theory have been included in a self-contained expository of articles, covered in great detail and depth.
The chapters are arranged so that the two introductory articles come first; these are then followed by articles from core classical areas of proof theory; the handbook concludes with articles that deal with topics closely related to computer science.
Handbook of Proof Theory, 1st Edition
Preface. List of Contributors. I. An Introduction to Proof Theory (S.R. Buss). II. First-Order Proof Theory of Arithmetic (S.R. Buss). III. Hierarchies of Provably Recursive Functions (M. Fairtlough, S.S. Wainer). IV. Subsystems of Set Theory and Second Order Number Theory (W. Pohlers). V. Gödel's Functional ("Dialectica") Interpretation (J. Avigad, S. Feferman). VI. Realizability (A.S. Troelstra). VII. The Logic of Provability (G. Japaridze, D. de Jongh). VIII. The Lengths of Proofs (P. Pudlák). IX. A Proof-Theoretic Framework for Logic Programming (G. Jäger, R.F. Stärk). X. Types in Logic, Mathematics and Programming (R.L. Constable). Name Index. Subject Index.
Quotes and reviews
@qu:The Handbook is most welcome in the logic community. I recommend the Handbook to researchers and graduate students in logic, mathematics, computer science, philosophy, linguistics, artificial intelligence, automated reasoning and cognitive sciences.
@source:Bulletin of Symbolic Logic

Chesapeake Bay is wide and shallow, so contains a small amount of water for an estuary of its size. It also has a very large area of watershed for its volume of water, and thus is quite susceptible to contamination from activities in the watershed. Originally almost entirely forested, the watershed now is the site of coal mining, industry, agriculture and, increasingly, urbanization. A forest acts like a sponge, evening flows and filtering nutrients. Without its forests, the watershed is prone do delivering bursts of freshwater, contaminated with nutrients and worse into the Bay. To save the bay, it is necessary to reclaim at least part of the forests function in the watershed.

- SW Valley
Mark Henle/The Republic
Anyone who lives in metro Phoenix has seen the brown cloud that drapes the horizon on a still day.
The pollution is more than what can be seen. Valley air carries bits of dirt, toxic metals, ammonia from farm fertilizer, ozone that irritates nasal tissues. Freeways spew a mix of exhaust and dust, putting anyone who lives nearby at an increased risk.
A day with bad air takes its toll first on those who are already ill. A heavily polluted day sends children to emergency rooms. People with respiratory problems are forced indoors. But a lifetime with bad air takes a toll on each one of us. People who live in bad air live shorter lives.
Government plans typically focus only on narrow parts of the problem — so overall solutions continue to fall short. The Valley sprawls with little regard for how growth has affected air quality — so each day, traffic rolls on as 300,000 people or more live their lives in the danger zone.
The biggest problem may be the most obvious: No one who lives in the Valley can escape the air we breathe.

I’m not diabetic, but my doctor told me that I have gestational diabetes. What does that mean? And will it last beyond my pregnancy?
Gestational diabetes is a kind of diabetes that comes on during pregnancy. It affects about 4% of all pregnant women, according to the American Diabetes Association. Gestational diabetes is often diagnosed on screening tests done between weeks 24 and 28 of pregnancy.
While doctors aren't sure what causes gestational diabetes, it is believed that hormones from the placenta may block the action of insulin in the mother. This means that the mother needs more insulin and sometimes her pancreas cannot make enough to transport the sugar in the blood into the cells for energy. The mother's blood has high levels of glucose, which can cross the placenta, giving the growing baby a high blood sugar level.
In response, the baby's pancreas starts making extra insulin to transport the sugar into the cells to be used for energy. When the pancreas can't keep up, the extra blood sugar is stored as fat on the baby, and that can lead to health problems for the unborn baby. Infants of diabetic mothers are at risk for abnormal growth, premature delivery, and breathing problems, among other things.
If your doctor diagnoses you with gestational diabetes, it's likely that you'll be started on a treatment plan aimed at getting glucose levels under control. This includes a plan to manage your nutrition, physical activity, and weight gain.
While most diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy resolves after delivery, some women will have gestational diabetes during future pregnancies and some may be more likely to develop diabetes as they get older.
And some women who are diagnosed while pregnant may actually have been diabetic before the pregnancy. In these cases, the diabetes does not disappear after delivery.
Reviewed by: Larissa Hirsch, MD
Date reviewed: March 2010
Have a question? Email us.
Although we can't reply personally, you may see your question posted to this page in the future. If you're looking for medical advice, a diagnosis, or treatment, consult your doctor or other qualified medical professional. If this is an emergency, contact emergency services in your area.
|American Diabetes Association (ADA) The ADA website includes news, information, tips, and recipes for people with diabetes.|
|American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) This site offers information on numerous health issues. The women's health section includes readings on pregnancy, labor, delivery, postpartum care, breast health, menopause, contraception, and more.|
|MyPlate for Moms MyPlate for Moms tailors the USDA's food guide to suit the individual needs of pregnant and nursing women.|
|Pregnancy Myths and Tales Even in these times, pregnancy continues to inspire its own set of myths and tales. Which are true and which aren't?|
|Medical Care During Pregnancy The sooner you begin receiving medical care during pregnancy, the better your chances of ensuring your own health and that of your baby.|
|Prenatal Tests Every parent-to-be hopes for a healthy baby. A wide array of tests for pregnant women can help to reassure them and keep them informed throughout their pregnancies.|
|A Week-by-Week Pregnancy Calendar Pregnancy is an exciting time. Our week-by-week illustrated pregnancy calendar is a detailed guide to all the changes taking place in your baby - and in you!|
|Staying Healthy During Pregnancy During your pregnancy, you'll probably get advice from everyone. But staying healthy depends on you - read about the many ways to keep you and your baby as healthy as possible.|
Note: All information is for educational purposes only. For specific medical advice, diagnoses, and treatment, consult your doctor.
© 1995-2012 The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth. All rights reserved.

Most Active Stories
News & Music Contributors
It's '11022011' !
From our neighbors to the south (University of Portland) come these facts about today’s date:
- One: It’s a palindrome
- Two: It’s an extremely rare one.
Simply, a palindrome is a symmetric word, phrase, number or other sequence of units that reads the same forward and backward.
According to University of Portland engineering professor Aziz S. Inan, who has in several places published a lot of variations on palindrome dates, palindrome dates are rare but today’s date – 11022011 – is extremely rare.
Why? Because it is an eight-digit palindrome day, for one.
Here it is in Turkish:
Now for the number blur
According to the professor’s article in The Beacon, the university’s student newspaper:
Nov. 2, 2011 represented as 11022011 is a one-of-a-kind palindrome date with respect to all palindrome dates contained in all four-digit years. Why?
"First, number 11022011 equals 7 x 7 x 11 x 11 x 11 x 13 x 13, that is, the product of seven square, eleven cube and thirteen square where numbers seven, eleven and thirteen are three consecutive prime numbers! So, number 11022011 is divisible by the product of the squares of three consecutive prime numbers!"
It just gets wilder from there, check out the article and this PDF by Inan: “More Facts about Palindrome Day, November 2, 2011 – 11022011!”
So how many of these things will we have this century?
This year, Inan writes, contains two palindrome calendar dates: 1-10-2011 and today.
This century there will be only be 12 eight-digit palindrome days, with the last one occurring on Sept. 2, 2090 (09022090).
“After this century, 12 more palindrome dates exist in the 22nd century (all being on the 12th day of the month) and another 12 in the 23rd century (all on the 22nd day of the month). The last (36th) palindrome date of this (third) millennium is to occur on Sept. 22, 2290 (09222290). After that, no more palindrome dates will happen for another 711 years until the next one in 3001, on Oct. 3rd (10033001),” reports the Facebook page dedicated to today’s date and other date palindromes.
In an email to the Los Angeles Times, he wrote: "I know both 11-1-11 (which can also be interpreted as 1-11-11) and 11-11-11 dates to occur this month are very interesting dates as well since they won't repeat again until the next century, but 11022011 won't happen again in ALL four-digit years!!"
And now for everyone’s other favorite number sequence:

Computerised back-seat driver
How well do you drive? Probably better than average, or so you might think. Now researchers at the University of Nagoya
in Japan have come up with a way to tell for sure.
They have designed a software system that collects data about the way you drive ? your speed, distance from other vehicles, how often and how much you press the accelerator or brake and how violently you turn the steering wheel. It also creates a mathematical model of the way you drive that can be compared with other drivers? to tell how good you really are behind the wheel. It can also detect when you're driving more recklessly than normal, presumably so you can be warned to calm down.
In Japan, many cars already alert you if you exceed the speed limit, so it is just conceivable that Japanese drivers could be willing to accept greater computerised oversight in the interests of road safety. So if you?re keen to prove your driving is really better than average, you may have to pop over to Japan and hire a car to find out.
Read the patent application for the computerised back seat driver
Justin Mullins, New Scientist contributor

Educational Coloring Pages
Alphabet Coloring Pages
Print and color alphabet pictures, and use them to make a collage, coloring book, or other creative projects.
Number Pictures to Color
Print and color these number pictures, and use them to teach and reinforce counting and math skills. You can use the as coloring book page or to make a collage or other creative projects.
School Coloring Sheets
You can download and print out just one school-related coloring page or print all of these and make your own coloring book.
Billy and Maria
A collection of coloring books to help children learn more about weather.
Fire Safety Coloring Pages
This site offers several fire safety coloring pages for you to print.
Watch for Trains
Print out these coloring pages and learn how you can stay safe around trains and train tracks.

It seems obvious that time runs in one direction- people don't grow younger and an egg can't be unscrambled, for example. But why is this so? In his book "From Eternity to Here," physicist Sean Carroll seeks to create a better understanding of time. According to Carroll, time's one-way arrow is due to conditions before the Big Bang. He argues that our universe is part of a larger family of universes- and that in sibling universes, time runs in the opposite direction. He touches on subjects from entropy and quantum mechanics, to time travel and the meaning of life. Carroll joins Larry Mantle to explain the mind-boggling concepts of time.
Read the Full Story at KPCC Blogs

Do you ever wonder why there are 360 degrees in a circle? Here's why - along with a FREE Download to help you teach it!
Continue Reading »
The conversion from Celsius to Fahrenheit and back again can be strange. One way to understand it is on a graph. And you can use this to teach some linear algebra too!
Do you use Problem Based Learning? Or even Project Based Learning? Here's a "short list" of resources!
Part of Five Minute Friday - Here are some thoughts on being brave in teaching and learning math.
Can you "just say it" to your kids - about math? About anything? Here's a challenge to help you be the adult you want your children to be. Join in!
Did you know that by sharing a blog giveaway, you're REDUCING your chances to win!? Sounds nuts - but there's math behind it!
Do you use Problem Based Learning in your #math classrooms? I'm going to try with college level Finite Math!
I got a little fanatic with my excitement for EdCamp Waller today. So I painted my face with the logo - and used a green bow for the leaf!
Requiring evaluations and offering extra credit for them will ensure the evaluations get done, right? But it's unethical and skews the results!
That's Math! online parent involvement activities need capital from the sharks on Shark Tank to build the teacher back end. Will you help?
Powered by Headway, the drag and drop WordPress theme
Copyright © 2012 MathFour - Web Design by Bon Crowder

State officials and school leaders from all over the upper Midwest are visiting a small farm town in southeastern Minnesota. They're coming to tour what could be the school of the future -- the dome school. Until recently Grand Meadow wasn't known for much more than farming. Now school leaders all over Minnesota are intrigued by a new development in the bedroom community south of Rochester.
Five white domes sit on a stretch of farmland on the edge of town. They look like giant mushrooms. When completed, a purple band will mark the base of each dome. Compared to the houses nearby, the new school looks like a UFO that's accidently landed in Grand Meadow.
Recently, a group of school officials from the Triton district visited Grand Meadow's dome schools. They enter the dimly lit domes for a tour. Superintendent Bob Kelly is here with members of the Triton school board. Kelly's not sure what to make of the sight. "They quit building round barns in Minnesota so why would they be doing this?" Kelly asks. It seems the tour may change his mind. "Until you get down here and take a look at it you don't realize that this is really a pretty neat concept," he says.
Grand Meadow School Superintendent Bruce Klaehn says the tours have become commonplace. Each dome is about as wide as half a football field and four stories high. One will house elementary grades, another secondary. The remaining three domes will have space for a cafeteria, a stage, a gym, a computer lab and administrative offices.
"They quit building round barns in Minnesota so why would they be doing this? Until you get down here and take a look at it you don't realize that this is really a pretty neat concept."
- Superintendent Bruce Klaehn
Last fall, construction workers inflated balloons inside the domes to keep them inflated. Then they sprayed layers of insulation and concrete inside. The domes' monolithic construction makes them tornado proof. With the exception of two sky lights the domes will be windowless. The design will help save money on construction and heat. Often used to store grain or fertilizer domes are known for their durability and energy efficiency. The domes will also use geothermal heating and cooling using liquid pumped through 20 miles of buried pipe. The 96,000 square foot school is touted as the largest of its kind in the country. It will serve about 365 students in preschool through 12th grades.
One of the first things anyone notices when they enter the domes, is the echo. Superintendent Klaehn laughs as he says , "it was basically solid concrete from top to bottom and I let out a hoot and it bounced for 20 seconds. I timed it." Klaehn says carpeting and acoustical spray should absorb most of the echo.
About four years ago Klaehn had to make a decision about the current school building. The original school is 85 years old. The roof, heating and handicapped accessibility problems were adding up.
Like many superintendents across the state Klaehn thought he had only two options: remodel or build another conventional school. "It is a very frustrating decision to do a renovation project. A lot of money spent is on retrofit. Everyone knew we would spend $6.5 to 7 million on a project that would leave some our building 50 years old. You'd really like to get more bang for buck and the best use of taxpayer dollar," said Klaehn.
"It was basically solid concrete from top to bottom and I let out a hoot and it bounced for 20 seconds. I timed it."
- Superintendent Klaehn
Initially, however, he and the school board chose to remodel. Until a nearby resident inspired them to look into dome construction. Klaehn was skeptical. But after visiting four dome schools in Arizona he became a believer. He says, "When you get someone inside and they see how the program space is laid out and they see how well it uses space then they get very excited."
Klaehn was impressed with the use of space and the couple million dollars he would d save on construction and heat. His next task was convincing taxpayers.
"There certainly is reason to understand why folks would be skeptical", said Klaehn. "Most of the skepticism and most of the negativity is based on a lack of knowledge ... And we told people in the community, we wouldn't just go out and find something in the back of a magazine that we thought would save us a few dollars," he said.
Voters passed an $8 million bond issue by a 3-2 margin in 1998. The state helped out with a $3 million innovation grant. State leaders hope this may be a model for cheaper school construction. The Grand Meadow dome school is scheduled to open this fall.

Born in Delee Maidstone, Kent, England on 1560 to Richard Lee and Elizabeth Crispe. Elizabeth married Robert Brewer and had 3 children. She passed away in Kent, England.
Find more historical records for Elizabeth Lee »
View All 10 Images »
English: topographic name for someone who lived near a meadow
or a patch of arable land, Middle English lee, lea, from
Old English lea, dative case (used after a preposition) of
leah, which originally meant ‘wood’ or ‘glade’.
View Family Facts »
Maiden name if applicable
The world's largest family history resource
© 1997-2013 Ancestry.com | Corporate Information | Privacy | Terms and Conditions

One in eight high school students is depressed. But depression in teenagers can be deceptive, and authorities estimate that a huge number of depressed teens are undiagnosed. Adults may mistake symptoms as "typical" teen angst, anger, or anxiety. Or the teen may mask the symptoms with high-energy activity.
For parents who suspect their teen is depressed, the system often fails the family. Insurance coverage for treatment ends too soon, there's a months-long wait to see an adolescent therapist, or long-term follow-up is insufficient.
This means parents must take charge of their child's health to reinforce, extend, and monitor treatment and its aftermath. The good news is they can do it—because parents know their child best.
Although a medical doctor, Dr. Berlinger initially missed the signs of his own son's depression. By combining his parental love with his scientific skills, he developed a set of techniques to lead his son out of depression. Now he shares his 10 Parental Partnering Strategies to help parents rescue their teen from depression—based on his own experiences, nearly 100 interviews with parents of depressed teens, and interviews with mental health professionals.
Increasingly, doctors are asking parents to partner with them to help children get healthy and stay healthy. Partnering has been proven effective in the treatment of other serious emotional illnesses such as anorexia nervosa.
Parents can use Dr. Berlinger's strategies to help distinguish depression from moodiness; be alert to suicide risk; monitor medication effectiveness; help the teen combat negative thinking; organize activities to offset depression; and spot signs of relapse during tense times in their child's life, including exams, relationship breakups, or starting college or a job.
Both a family survival story and a practical guide, this book affirms parents' unique power to help teens overcome depression.

People in Trouble Beg for a Saviour
We learn from the Qur'an that very often social and moral corruption was prevalent in a nation before a messenger was sent to that society. Once a messenger came to that society, those following him attained a blissful, peaceful and bountiful life even in the midst of their honourable struggle for the good pleasure of Allah. After this blessed period, however, some people drifted away from their spiritual values, revolted and ultimately tended almost to disbelief. In some cases, they worshipped gods other than Allah and thus were unjust to their own selves.
In the Qur'an, Allah relates the loyalty, sincerity and fear the messengers felt for Allah and then informs us of how some generations coming after them lost their faith completely. They drifted because of their whims and desires and became deprived of all their values. The Qur'an tells us about these people in the following words:
Those are some of the Prophets Allah has blessed, from the descendants of Adam and from those We carried with Noah, and from the descendants of Abraham and Israel and from those We guided and chose. When the signs of the All-Merciful were recited to them, they fell on their faces, weeping in prostration. An evil generation succeeded them who neglected the prayers and followed their appetites. They will plunge into the Valley of Evil. (Surah Maryam, 58-59)
Those people who neglected their divine responsibilities suffered Allah's wrath expressed through various disasters. Allah withdrew His favour from these people. In accordance with the verse "But if anyone turns away from My reminder, his life will be a dark and narrow one..." (Surah Ta Ha, 124), they suffered from different afflictions such as scarcity and social and economic problems arising from their moral degeneration and political instability.
Under irreligious systems, those people who were insolent towards the divine revelation were exposed to various pressures and injustices. The period of Pharaoh (Fir'awn) is a typical example recounted in the Qur'an. Exulting in his affluence, Pharaoh led an extravagant life and his people suffered under his tyranny. This situation is explained in the Qur'an:
Pharaoh exalted himself arrogantly in the land and divided its people into camps, oppressing one group of them by slaughtering their sons and letting their women live. He was one of the corrupters. (Surat al-Qasas, 4)
Under such circumstances where people suffer economic and social problems under the tyranny of unjust leaders, the need for a saviour is profoundly felt. This is the person who removes the unfavourable aspects of the system caused by the disbelief (kufr) of the ruler and his people and brings the peace, justice and security which come along with obedience to Allah and His Messenger.
After the Prophet Moses (as), the Children of Israel also faced the same difficulties under the rule of tyrants. They were driven from their homes and lands and suffered intensely. Realising that neither the idols they worshipped, nor their possessions, nor ancestors would save them from such undesirable circumstances, they asked for a king from Allah; a saviour who would save them from this cruel system.
"You will Not Find Any Changing in the Pattern of Allah"
From the stories related in the Qur'an, we understand that almost the same fate befell each of the past civilisations that revolted against their messengers. The circumstances under which people led their lives, the sending of messengers to warn them and destruction of some of them all follow the same pattern.
Modern societies also undergo rapid corruption and degeneration. Poverty, misery and disorder throw the lives of people into complete disarray and make them wish for a peaceful life where virtue prevails. Apparently, justice can prevail only if the values of the Qur'an become predominant among people. Only people having real values can bring solutions to all the troubles that people experience today.
Indeed, Allah sent prophets and messengers to the earlier generations who experienced similar social depressions, and He sometimes granted amazing blessings to those who followed the messengers. This is related in the following verse:
If only the people of the cities had had faith and feared, We would have opened up to them blessings from heaven and earth. But they denied the truth so We seized them for what they earned. (Surat al-A'raf, 96)
This verse, as well as many others confirming it, reveals that the one and only way to attain bliss and peace is adherence to Islam. This principle will apply to coming generations as it did to previous ones. In places bereft of Islam, injustice, insecurity and instability prevail. This is the law of Allah. That there exists no change in the law of Allah is stated in the Qur'an:
"... But then when a warner did come to them, it only increased their aversion, shown by their arrogance in the land and evil plotting. But evil plotting envelops only those who do it. Do they expect anything but the pattern of previous peoples? You will not find any changing in the pattern of Allah. You will not find any alteration in the pattern of Allah. " (Surah Fatir, 42-43)
Living Islam According to the Qur'an
As mentioned in the previous section, we are informed in the Qur'an that Allah sends prophets and messengers to communities for their deliverance from disbelief and injustice. This prophet or messenger leads his people to believe (have iman) in Allah without ascribing partners to Him, and to fear Him. If the community persists in denial, he warns them of Allah's wrath. Allah tells us in the Qur'an that He destroys no tribe before this warning is delivered:
We have never destroyed a city without giving it prior warning as a reminder. We were never unjust. (Surat ash-Shu'ara, 208-209)
In the age in which we live, one observes degeneration, both physical and spiritual, in society at large accompanied by economic and political instability. Huge gaps exist between rich and poor, and social corruption is steadily escalating. All these point to significant developments that will take place in the near future. After such dark periods, with the return of the Prophet Jesus (as) and the emergence of Hazrat Mahdi (as), the religion of Allah will certainly prevail over the entire world and the true religion will supersede all pagan religions.
To His true believers (muminun), Allah gives good tidings of this:
But Allah refuses to do other than perfect His Light, even though the unbelievers detest it. It is He Who sent His messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to exalt it over every other religion, even though those who associate partners with Allah (mushrikun) detest it. (Surat at-Tawba, 32-33)
In Surat an-Nur, Allah informs His true believers who engage in "right actions" without associating partners with Him and who purely seek His good pleasure, that they will attain power, as preceding believers always did:
Allah has promised those of you who believe and do right actions that He will make them successors in the land as He made those before them successors, and firmly establish for them their religion with which He is pleased and give them, in place of their fear, security. "They worship Me, not associating anything with Me." Any who disbelieve after that, such people are deviators. (Surat an-Nur, 55)
In the above verse, we learn that the criterion for the spread of Islam is the existence of believers who are purely slaves of Allah without ascribing partners to Him and who engage in good deeds in His way.
We have seen that in every age, Allah has answered the call of His slaves who desperately needed His help. This also holds true for this age and for the future. As was the case with earlier ages, in our time, too, Allah will save people from the injustice of the system of disbelief and present them with the beauty of Islam.
In particular, the deliverance of the Islamic world from the troubles that beset it, as revealed in the hadith, is close at hand. Surely, as in every age, today people hope that a saviour will appear. This saviour, that will take mankind from 'darkness to the light,' is the religion of Islam. The Prophet Jesus (as) and Hazrat Mahdi (as), who will be the means whereby people will live by these superior values, will defeat intellectually all the systems that deny Allah, and they will render corrupted ideologies invalid.
Allah promises His help to His slaves who sincerely turn to Him and have deep fear of Him:
Those who were expelled from their homes without any right merely for saying, "Our Lord is Allah". If Allah had not driven some people back by means of others, monasteries, churches, synagogues and mosques, where Allah's name is mentioned much, would have been pulled down and destroyed. Allah will certainly help those who help Him – Allah is all-Strong, Almighty, those who, if We establish them firmly on the earth, will establish prayer and pay the poor-due, and command what is right and forbid what is wrong. The end result of all affairs is with Allah. (Surat al-Hajj, 40-41)

Rainwater runs off the concrete into the
Are you looking for a creative, yet environmentally friendly way to use rainwater runoff? Consider planting a rain garden.
To help you start a rain garden, the Kansas State University Small Business Environmental Assistance program is hosting a free webinar on rain garden maintenance and wildflower infiltration basins May 26 from 10 – 11 a.m.
A rain garden is usually planted in a depressed area that “catches” water runoff from roofs, driveways and walkways.
In addition to aesthetically improving your lawn area, rain gardens help control local flooding, provide habitats for birds, butterflies and beneficial insects, and improve water quality by filtering run-off, say experts with Kansas State University.
The rain garden webinar is available to anyone with an Internet connection and computer speakers or a phone line.
Topics include rain garden installation, maintenance, preferred plants, typical challenges and results. The speakers will be Lee Skabelund, assistant professor in landscape architecture at K-State, and Sylvia Michaelis, infrastructure support manager with the City of Topeka Water Pollution Control Division.
To register for the webinar, visit www.sbeap.org
. Click on the link in the yellow box and follow the log-in instructions.
For more information, contact Ryan Hamel at 913-715-7018 or 800-578-8898 or firstname.lastname@example.org

When we were growing up, there learned that there were four basic tastes: salt, sweet, sour and bitter. We were told that our taste buds had special taste receptors in particular zones on our tongues that detected these four tastes and that all other components of flavor came from our olfactory sense–the sense of smell.
Well, it turns out that what we learned in middle school about tastes, our tongues and noses, was not quite complete or correct.
There is a fifth basic taste.
It is called “umami,” and a Japanese scientist named Kitunae Ikeda isolated one compound which contibutes this taste back in 1908. Working with a seaweed broth, he isolated the amino acid, glutamate, as one of the sources for the taste which is described as “meaty, rich, savory and satisfying.” Glutamate itself was already a known substance, having been discovered in 1866 by a German chemist named Dr. Karl Ritthausen who discovered it while studying gluten in wheat.
“Umami” itself is a compound Japanese word, from the root words, “umai” meaning “delicious,” and “mi,” meaning “essence,” and while it is often used to describe the flavor enhancing ability of the salt form of glutamate, ,monosodium glutamate, that is not the only proper context for its useage.
In fact, researchers have found that umami accurately describes the flavor of many amino acids and proteins. In 2000, researchers at the University of Miami discovered the taste receptor for umami, which essentially proves that umami is a basic taste, for which humans had evolved a hunger. This receptor, named “taste-mGluR4″ responds not only to glutamate, but in greater and lesser degrees, to every other amino acid and nucelotide.
Considering the myriad of uses to which amino acids are put in the human body, it is no wonder we are programmed to enjoy their flavors. Amino acids are necessary in building muscles, enzymes and other chemicals necessary to bodily function.
So, what does all of this mean to cooks?
Does this mean we need to study chemistry and put MSG in everything?
It means we just need to look at what foods have large supplies of naturally occurring glutamates and amino acids and combine them with the principles we already know of good cooking, to help us make our dishes even more delicious.
It isn’t like any of these ingredients are new or anything.
People all over the world have been cooking with glutamate and amino acid rich foods for thousands of years.
Take a look at the foods surrounding the new cookbook, The Fifth Taste, above, and think about how many of them you have in your kitchen right now. If you are like me, you probably have plenty of umami sitting in your cupboards, refrigerators, shelves and countertops, just waiting to add goodness to your next meal. A quick glance at my illustration should identify soy sauce, nori, dried and fresh shiitake mushrooms, red wine, truffle oil, parmesan cheese, sun dried tomatoes and tomato paste.
Every serious cook in the world is bound to have one or two of those ingredients in their kitchen at any given time. The concatenation of jars, bottles, tubes, packages and loose items above are just what I pulled off my shelves this morning when I went on a mission to find good examples of umami-rich foods.
Over the next few days, look for posts specifically listing and identifying umami rich foods from both the East and the West, recipes featuring my favorite flavor and a review of the new cookbook, The Fifth Taste: Cooking With Umami by David and Anna Kasabian.
The upshot of all of this is, if you don’t know umami now, you will by the time I am finished with you.
Sorry, the comment form is closed at this time.

Government procurement refers to purchases of goods or services, including consultancies and professional services, construction, maintenance and material supply contracts, facilities contracts, capital equipment and property and leasing arrangements, undertaken by governments for their own consumption.
Government procurement accounts for a significant part of the economy of many countries. Although a government procurement agreement did not form part of the core WTO agreement, a number of WTO member governments signed a plurilateral agreement on government procurement. However, this was optional and did not go far enough for private sector and governments vying for new opportunities for profit and control through the liberalization of this important area. Government procurement provisions in free trade agreements stipulate that governments (national and sub-national) must treat overseas tenders no less favourably than local ones. Many bilateral agreements include provisions which already commit governments to open up this lucrative market to transnational corporations. This issue has been a contentious sticking point for Malaysia in its negotiations with Washington on an FTA and India in its negotiations with the EU. Malaysia’s procurement policy has kept foreign companies from bidding for state contracts, which US negotiators object to.
last update: May 2012
EU and US business to profit from the crisis? | 14-June-2013
Court ruling fails to stop business lobbies’ privileged access in EU-India trade talks | 13-June-2013
How popular resistance can defeat corporate power | 3-June-2013
LA social movements map solidarity with ALBA alliance | 27-May-2013
Unfair, unsustainable, and under the radar | 26-May-2013
Perú: ¡por un límite NO negociable de nuestros derechos! | 20-May-2013
Plantón contra el TPP | 20-May-2013
In whose interest is EU-India FTA being negotiated? | 16-May-2013
Colombia: Paro nacional de productores | 13-May-2013
Japanese movement against TPP growing | 10-May-2013
Traders protest against govt policies on FDI, FTA | 6-May-2013

Can getting a piece of paper in the mail that says 20 percent this and 30 percent that and 50 percent the other change the way we see ourselves? Should it?
What does it mean for someone who identifies as culturally mono-racial to discover they are, in fact, genetically multi-racial?
What does it mean for a person of color in America to discover that they are genetically more white than anything else?
What are African Americans to feel about those white ancestors who are on our family trees because of the sexual violence regularly committed against our enslaved foremothers?
Should finding out that one is, for instance, of 50 percent English ancestry, lead a person of color to embrace that culture despite how that DNA came to be a part of her? What about Native American or Asian ancestry?
What is autosomal DNA testing and who cares how not-black you are?
I first became aware of tests that could determine a person's admixture or "racial" makeup when PBS aired the first of Dr. Gates' genealogy programs, "African American Lives." That show, which ignited my interest in family history research, also caused a buzz by revealing that the host, a self-identified black man and head of Harvard's W.E.B. DuBois Institute for African and African American Research, was genetically of more than 50 percent European in ancestry--in other words, more "white" than "black," despite being the progeny of two self-identified African American people. Of course, Gates' heritage was really no surprise for most other black Americans. We know that the black descendants of enslaved Africans are a mixed bunch. You can see it in our family portraits. You can hear it in our family stories. It is there on the vital records that black family historians mine for details about their heritage. There is no need for an expensive test to tell us what we already know. But genealogists are like good detectives. If we want to accurately tell our families' stories, we need to back up family lore with documents and DNA--just like the folks on CSI. Autosomal tests help confirm and illuminate our lineages.
Actually, these tests help confirm our BioGeographical Ancestry (BGA), according to Ancestry by DNA, the company that completed my testing. They are quick to point out that race, as we often hear, is a social construct not a biological one. (That is why I am using scare quotes around racial designations in this post.) Ancestry by DNA describes their process as follows:
What is BioGeographical Ancestry (BGA)?
BioGeographical Ancestry (BGA) is the term given to the biological or genetic component of race. BGA is a simple and objective description of the Ancestral origins of a person, in terms of the major population groups. (e.g. Indigenous American, East Asian, European, sub-Saharan African, etc.). BGA estimates are able to represent the mixed nature of many people and populations today. In the US, as in many other countries across the globe, there has been extensive mixing among populations that had initially been separate. In the fields of human genetics and anthropology, this mixing is referred to as admixture. BGA estimates can also be understood as individual admixture proportions, which take the form of a series of percentages that add to 100%. For example, a person in question may be found to have: 75% European; 15% African; 10% Indigenous American ancestry, or they may be found to have 100% European ancestry.
How is BioGeographical Ancestry estimated?
The AncestrybyDNA™ test uses an especially selected panel of Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) that have been characterized in a large number of well-defined population samples. These markers are selected on the bases of showing substantial differences in frequency between population groups and, as such, can tell us about the origins of a particular person whose ancestry is unknown. For example, the Duffy Null allele (FY*0) is very common (approaching fixation or an allele frequency of 100%) in all sub-Saharan African populations. Thus, a person with this allele is very likely to have some level of African ancestry. After the analysis of these AIMs, in a sample of a person's DNA, the likelihood (or probability) that a person is derived from any of the parental populations and any of the possible mixes of parental populations is calculated. The population (or combination of populations) where the likelihood is the highest is then taken to be the best estimate of the ancestral proportions of the person. Confidence intervals on these point estimates of ancestral proportions are also being calculated.
But the question for some isn't how does autosomal testing work, but why any self-respecting black person would be interested in exploring their non-African heritage. As a poster named Original Man on the African Ancestry forum offered, regarding black people who claim Native American heritage:
Be African and stop trying to be something that you are not!
There is a suspicion that too much attention to non-African ancestry denotes a desire to escape blackness, to be more than (i.e. better than) "just" black. This racial testing could simply be a corollary to "we got Indian in the family" type thinking.
In various genealogy and DNA testing forums, I have witnessed discussions that went like so: If we live in a majority white society that has decided one drop of African blood equals blackness; if we outwardly "look black;" if we are proud of our African roots, as we should be; if we know that we are descendants of enslaved Africans and we are culturally African American, what can be gained by learning about some small fraction of European or Asian or Native American DNA? What does it matter?
Putting the pieces of the puzzle together
I will tell you why it matters to me. For more than four years I have been piecing together my family's history through genealogy research and DNA testing. Shortly after taking a test to uncover my African ancestry, I wrote:
As with my great-grandmother's poems and the results of my first DNA test, I've carried the African Ancestry results around like a charm for days. This ancestry has been lost to my family for centuries. Now that I have found it, I want to keep it close.
You may wonder why all this dusty information, interesting though it is, matters to a 21st century Midwestern American woman. What difference does it make?
There's that old saw: "You can't know where you are going, if you don't know where you've been." Where black Americans have been is all muddled, isn't it? Everything about our past and present is filtered through the lens of a society where we (and the continent we came from) are marginalized. You have to dig to find our real histories, weed through the distortions and biases. It is easy to believe, if you let the mainstream tell it, that the African-American story begins in slavery and ends in failure and dysfunction. That's not true. The blood doesn't lie. There are real stories of triumph and survival and happiness and success cloaked in the leaves of our family trees. There are customs and rituals and beliefs that our ancestors were forced to forget, but we can remember them.
I am not Pollyanna about this. I don't romanticize the lives of my forebears or my "cousins" in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and Senegal. There are hard and ugly stories to be found on the family tree--rotted fruit. But we hear plenty about those things already, don't we? That it is why it is smart to keep good things in your pocket--a cheerful poem written by the mother of 10 kids on a farm in rural Alabama, or the knowledge that Balanta people resisted colonial rule by the Portuguese. These good things are part of who I am.
When I said the Fulbe woman above was me, I meant that the history of my direct ancestors as well as "my people" have made me the person I am today. Because they were who they were, I am who I am. It would be a shame not to "know" the people who walked before me. They gave me life. They make me proud. They give me strength. They are testament to the resilience of my "blood." Read more...
I am visibly a black woman. I am culturally African American. I cannot imagine embracing another culture like this one--the one that the majority of my forefathers and foremothers passed down to me. But I can't complete the puzzle that is my family history if there are pieces missing. Imagine putting together a puzzle of a beautiful pastoral scene, but using only the pieces you like best--perhaps the ones with bright, prairie flowers on them. You might form a pretty bunch of flowers, but miss the round, yellow sun high in a blue sky. You might miss the dappled horses grazing in the background or a mighty oak bending over a stream. Your picture would be incomplete.
Whatever fraction of not-black I am, it is part of my whole. If nothing else, fractions of European, Asian or Native ancestry represent a part of our African ancestors' experience that should not be buried.
But does my DNA change who I am?
The University of British Columbia study I completed included several questions designed to ascertain whether DNA testing has changed the way I see myself:
Before you took any genetic genealogy tests, did you consider yourself Hispanic/Latino/Latina?
I have a hard time imagining how any sort of test could drastically change the way one self-identifies. Being Latina involves far more than DNA, doesn't it? (I found this question interesting. Admixture tests that I am aware of don't test for Latin ethnicity.) What group we identify with is more about culture than chromosomes, though these things often intersect.
In "Faces of America," Elizabeth Alexander, poet and Yale professor of African American and gender studies, learned that, like Henry Louis Gates, she is genetically more European (60 percent plus) than sub-Saharan African. Actress Eva Longoria discovered that rather than being predominately of Mexican indigenous heritage as she always assumed, she is more than 70 percent European. She also discovered that she is a distant cousin to cellist Yo-Yo Ma, who is of Chinese ancestry. "He's Mexican?" She said, laughingly, when Gates' revealed the tie. African American Gates found that he is related to biracial Canadian Malcolm Gladwell. Alexander was related to comedian Stephen Colbert, while patrician Meryl Streep had family ties to Jewish director Mike Nichols. Alexander says:
I think it's one of so many illustrations of the radical mixedness of Americanness and of African Americanness as well...It makes me think of America as just this basin into which so much has been poured and we don't even know the half of it...When we see all of the ways that conversations are so stratified, like we understand what "us" and "them" is all about, really we don't understand it half as well as we might. Again, that doesn't mean that the social realities that we live it are not the daily press that we live with, but to pause for just a moment and to think about all that has been poured into that basin, it's amazing. Watch it...
At another point in the program, Alexander said:
It just gets curiouser and curiouser...Of course, if all of us were just know by our DNA instead of the bodies we walk around in, then we'd have a whole different American history. Watch it...
Truly a member of a global family
I think that what Alexander meant is that we are so certain that our differences are ingrained in the fiber of our being--in the blood. But when scientists actually examine the parts of us that make us, well, us, we find that we are more alike than different, more connected than apart. We find that we are all cousins. We find that we all--ALL, black, Asian, white or Native--originated from an Eve on the African continent. We find that American descendants of enslaved Africans can discover genetic links to specific tribes in a land our ancestors were taken from long ago, but also to Europe and Asia and to the first Americans, our Native brothers and sisters.
The problems we have with each other are not in the blood (in the blood, we are family); our problems are in our hearts and minds.
So, now, after discovering that I am 70 percent sub-Saharan African with cultural ties to Balanta and Fula peoples in Guinea-Bissau, the Mende people in Sierra Leone, and the Mandinka people in Senegal...that I am part of Haplogroup L1b, one of the oldest female lineages on Earth...and that I am also 30 percent European...Who am I now?
Well...the same person I was before. I am a black American woman with all the rich, cultural history that implies. Thirty percent European biogeographical ancestry (likely derived through oppression and sexual violence), doesn't change my identity. I don't think 60 percent European ancestry would change my identity. I am a black American--my culture is my culture. I would also add that learning more about my African roots doesn't make me Senegalese or Fula or Mende. I am a black American--my culture is my culture.
Though genetic testing has not changed the way I look at myself, it has changed the way I look at my place in the world. I feel a greater sense of connectedness to my direct ancestors, but also to my larger global family. I am more aware of our oneness, or, as Elizabeth Alexander said, our mixedness. I am reminded of a passage from the Hindu Upanishads:
Those who see all creatures within themselves
And themselves in all creatures know no fear.
Those who see all creatures in themselves
And themselves in all creatures know no grief.
How can the multiplicity of life
Delude the one who sees its unity?
Through family research and genetic testing, I can now see me in the world and the world in me.
Watch geneticist Spencer Wells of National Geographic at a TED global conference, discussing his research about shared DNA and human diversity that sprang from a single source:

Violence against women
In May the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recommended that Finland should consider specific legislation to criminalize domestic violence.
By the end of 2007 the government had not adopted a national action plan to combat violence against women.
Refugees and asylum-seekers
Accelerated asylum-determination procedures continued to deny sufficient time for claims to be considered thoroughly, and for every asylum-seeker to exhaust all avenues of appeal. Some asylum-seekers were expelled while their appeals were still pending.
The strict application of the so-called “Dublin II” regulations led to asylum-seekers being returned to the EU member state in which they first arrived for determination of their claim for asylum, even in circumstances where it was likely they would have been offered some form of subsidiary protection in Finland which might not be available in other EU states.
Asylum-seekers, including children, were detained unnecessarily. In some cases the right of unaccompanied minors to seek family reunification in Finland was not protected.
In some cases, residence permits were denied solely on the basis of information from the security police, which could be withheld from the applicant. The Supreme Administrative Court ruled that Administrative Courts were entitled to consider information from the security police in secret when deciding appeals against refusals of applications for residence permits.
The number of temporary residence permits issued to foreign nationals declined sharply, from 299 in 2006 to only 24 in 2007.
Legislation relating to special residence permits for victims of trafficking continued to require that in most cases such permits should be conditional on co-operation with the authorities in investigating and prosecuting those suspected of trafficking, unless the victim was considered to be particularly vulnerable.
By the end of 2007 Finland had not ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.
Prisoners of conscience – conscientious objection
The length of the civilian alternative to military service remained punitive and discriminatory. Conscientious objectors were obliged to perform 395 days of civilian service, 215 days longer than the shortest and most common military service.
In December, Parliament approved changes to legislation which would shorten alternative civilian service to 362 days, and would recognize the right to conscientious objection in times of war or other public emergency. Amnesty International considered that the proposed length of alternative civilian service would remain punitive.
- Amnesty International considered 12 imprisoned conscientious objectors to be prisoners of conscience. Most were serving sentences of 197 days for refusing to perform alternative civilian service.

There are about 45 million acres of public rangelands in Nevada. These rangelands are divided into 745 grazing allotments. There are 550 operators, or permittees, with a total of 635 permits to graze livestock.
Public land grazing is managed to achieve the fundamentals of rangeland health as indicated by soil and site stability, hydrologic function and biotic integrity.
Among the challenges to successfully manage public land grazing are:
Grazing/Allotment Information websites:
- BLM Rangeland Administration System (RAS) - www.blm.gov/ras/
The RAS provides grazing administrative support and management reports for the BLM and the public. Click 'Run Reports' on the left column.
- NILS GeoCommunicator - www.geocommunicator.gov/
To view the allotments and pasture in an interactive mapping environment.

The Institution of Slavery in the American Civil Warby Rit Nosotro
Change Over Time essay
Describe the impact of the institution of slavery upon the US Civil War. Mention Haitian emancipation, the 13th Amendment, abolitionists, and black soldiers.
As one of America’s most fierce and bloody wars, the Civil War is never to be forgotten, specifically by the race of African American citizens who remembered what their ancestors, as slaves, did to turn the values, laws, and attitude of America upside down. The impact of the institution of slavery during the Civil War was phenomenal. Not only was slavery a huge cause for the outbreak of war, but it greatly impacted the war itself and law, both in America and around the world through the Haitian emancipation, the 13th amendment, fierce abolitionists, and black soldiers.
When Abraham Lincoln was elected President of the United States for his first term in, the North was strongly opposed to slavery, whereas the South was on the cutting edge of economic success, but only by the means of malicious mistreatment of their many slaves. Trouble began to brew on a cloudy horizon. Lincoln was both loved and hated by his people because of differences in opinion between the North and the South was so great; war was inevitable. Although Lincoln did indeed see the oncoming war as a necessary procedure, he did not come to this conclusion easily, as he knew this meant fighting within a nation, and bloodshed. Still, he did realize the need to save and preserve the union and end slavery. However, even before the thought of a civil war against slavery in America was entertained, influences occurred in other places. In 1802, a French man, Toussaint L’Ouerture led a rebellion of slaves in now Haiti, and “transformed French Saint Domingue, one of the most productive European colonies of its day into an independent state run by former slaves and the descendents of slaves.” Essentially, this revolution of mistreated slaves in Haiti triggered revolts and demonstrations in the US, lit a flame for an American civil war, and gave slaves both a new hope and vision of freedom one day. A book critic states, “It produced the world’s first example of wholesale emancipation of colonial representation in a metropolitan assembly, and of full racial equality in a European colony.”
Once the dissention was brought forth in America, anti-slavery societies formed in the North, and abolitionists voiced their views about the cruelty and injustice of slavery publicly, hoping to gather a crowd of supporters. One such abolitionist was named John Brown who was a fierce opponent to slavery before and during the civil war. He rounded up rebellious slaves to start a rebellion. Brown was hanged when he was found guilty of trying to give guns to slaves. Another famous advocate of the anti-slavery cause was the renowned Harriet Tubman, who lived from 1820 to 1913. This courageous woman, a former slave herself, was the founder and operator of the Underground Railroad. She led more than 19 rescue operations and sent 300 slaves to safety past the northern border in the US, and even more during the war. Another leader of the slave revolution was Nat Turner, who led a revolt within Virginia with the help of fellow slaves after he had killed his master. Although Turner banded 60 slaves to revolt, he was eventually captured and hanged. Stories were also told of escaped slaves banding together, living in the mountains in their own villages, and creating an army of black soldiers to rebel against the Southern plantation owners. These abolitionists, avid supporters of the civil war cause, and against slavery, paved the way for freedom by their devotion, though many of them were killed in the process.
Amidst the civil war, on September 23, 1862, Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. This statement decreed that “all slaves would be declared free in those states still in rebellion against the US on January 1, 1863.” The 13th amendment had originally declared in the first section that, “Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.” However, this amendment was later ratified by Lincoln in 1865 so that this would apply to all states; even those in the South. Slavery was finally abolished, thus ending the civil war.
Although the Civil War itself had ended, hatred and bitter thoughts of revenge remained between the white and black peoples of America for centuries. Bigamy and racism divided our land, and caused the first ever fight within a nation. Though the rip that this hatred caused was mended, the stitches and scars remain to this day. The institution of slavery not only shaped the outcome of the civil war through people, documents, and prior revolutions, but it shaped the very nature of out nation today.
1. Who on this list was NOT an abolitionist or against the idea of slavery?
a. Harriet Tubman
b. John Brown
c. Toussaint L’Ouerture
d. John Knox
2. On what Caribbean Island was the “ “ Proclamation?
c. Dominican Republic
d. Puerto Rico
3. Who was President during the civil war time period?
a. John Knox Polk
b. William Henry Harrison
c. Millard Fillmore
d. Abraham Lincoln
1. “The Kingfisher Children’s Encyclopedia” Kingfisher Books:
New York, 1992
John Paton, Editor in Chief
2. “The Great Documents of Western Civilization” Chilton Books: Philadelphia, 1965 Viorst, Milton
3. Clapham, Francis M. “Picture History of the World” Grosset and Dunlap: New York, 1986
“Making Sense of the Haitian Revolution”
5. Encyclopedia of US History: American Civil War
“The 13th Amendment”
Additional information about <http://hyperhistory.net/apwh/essays/cot/t4w25uscivilwarslavery.htm>
Focus on Facts
The above essay was donated to hyperhistory.net.
of inaccuracies or plagiarism.
Post a link to this essay,
a great essay
on your blog or website :
|Comparative Essays||Biographies||Doc. Based Questions||Change Over Time|

Want to stay on top of all the space news? Follow @universetoday on Twitter
Were you wondering about the North Star? Firstly, you might expect one of the most famous stars in the night sky to be one of the brightest, but it isn’t; not by a long shot. That honor belongs to Sirius and many less bright stars besides. The North Star shines with a humble brightness that belies its navigational importance.
Polaris, or the North Star, sits almost directly above the North Pole; therefore, it is a reliable gauge of North if you find yourself lost on a clear night without a compass. Stars that sit directly above the Earth’s North or South Pole are called Pole Stars. Interestingly, the North Star hasn’t always been, nor will it always be the Pole Star because the Earth’s axis changes slightly over time, and stars move in relation to each other over time.
You can also approximate your latitude by measuring the angle of elevation between the horizon and the North Star. There is no equivalent star in the South Pole, but Sigma Octantis comes close. It isn’t very useful for navigational purposes as it isn’t very bright to the naked eye. Instead, navigators use two of the stars in the Southern Cross, Alpha and Gamma to determine due South.
The North Star is easy to find if you can first locate the Little Dipper. The North Star lies at the end of the handle in the Little Dipper (Ursa Minor). For a point of reference, The Big Dipper (Ursa Major) lies below the little dipper and their handles point in opposite directions. The two stars in the end of the ladle of The Big Dipper point to Polaris. Also, both The Big Dipper and The Little Dipper remain in the sky all night long, rotating in relation to the Earth’s axis.

Uncle Sam says it's not Presidents Day
Federal offices closed for Washington's Birthday
If you're off school or work Monday in observance of Presidents Day, you've got it all wrong, at least according to the federal government.
Federal offices are closed Monday because it's Washington's Birthday, a holiday to honor the first U.S. president, George Washington.
Confused? Here's what the National Archives says on its website:
"This holiday is designated as 'Washington's Birthday.' Though other institutions such as state and local governments and private businesses may use other names, it is Federal policy to always refer to holidays by the names designated in the law."
Washington's actual birthday was February 22, and that's when the holiday was originally celebrated. However, in 1968, Congress passed the Uniform Monday Holiday Act , which designated the third Monday in February as Washington's Birthday, beginning in 1971.
The Presidents Day moniker evolved later, at least partly to honor Abraham Lincoln, whose birthday was February 12, but some hoped it could be a day to honor all presidents.
Of course, states, local governments and businesses are not bound to honor the Uniform Monday Holiday Act, so they can call Monday whatever holiday they like or not have one at all.
Copyright 2013 by CNN NewSource. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

by General Fabb
SketchUp is a free 3D modeling tool that is quite often the very first exposure to 3D modeling for many people. But is it appropriate for producing 3D models for printing?
First off, we must say that SketchUp was not designed with 3D printing in mind; instead it was, like many 3D modeling tools, designed to produce visual 3D representations. While this output appears to your eye to be 3D, it really isn't and this shows when you try to 3D print. For example, 2D surfaces are often used in SketchUp. These have a thickness of, well, zero! They cannot be printed. That's one of several issues encountered when using SketchUp for 3D printing.
We recently encountered a situation where someone wished to 3D print a SketchUp model they'd developed. The model *looked* ok, but in fact was completely unprintable and had to be totally re-engineered in a "real" 3D modeling tool.
That all said, it is possible to use SketchUp to produce printable 3D models - if you carefully follow some rules when you develop your model. But what are the rules?
Shapeways points out a terrific post on MasterSketchUp by Marcus Ritland that explains what you need to do. Some of these apply to many 3D modeling programs, in case you're not using SketchUp. Among the rules are:
- Make it solid
- Ensure walls have thickness
- Scale up to permit detailed features
- Smooth curves
- Build as components
- Use plugins to assist export and inspection
- Consider material constraints
- Reduce the solid size to conserve material
But you'd better read all the details at the link below.

With the Collapse of Royalist control in the British Isles and the uprooting of the rich and a great deal of the middle classes, the integration of British political elites in the Canadian political sphere has been characterized by its own unique problems.
THE CANADIAN EXPERIENCE IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE WAR:
When Canadian troops returned to their country after the conclusion of the peace with honour treaty, Canadian Prime Minister Robert Laird Borden received a marching column of troops headed by the tenacious and well-beloved Canadian general Sir Arthur Currie GCMF, KCB. Currie, esteemed heavily by both the Allies and the Central Powers for his brilliant leadership of the Canadian Corps, had quickly established a reputation for the Canadians as some of the most effective troops on the Western Front.
PM Borden, dogged and tired after holding a Union Government together for the duration of the war, appeared visibly strained and prematurely aged as he proclaimed: "I welcome you home from the fields of war, from which you knew no defeat!" Canadian attitudes to the war were divided. While Patriots and Imperialists took comfort some comfort in the fact that the Empire had not been defeated per se, the fact that the war ended in a unfavourable "draw" heavily in the German favour kindled great resentment, espicially in Quebec where conscription riots and opposition to the war seemed to be justified in the light of German dominance of the European continent.
In the immediate aftermath of the war, all the Union liberals who had not left the government quickly rejoined their fellow party members in the opposition and the government fell apart, divided as to how to take Canada into the future. Former liberal PM Sir Wilfrid Laurier's optimistic prediction that the 20th century would be Canada's century seemed laughable now to most Canadians. Laurier himself had passed away during the war, seemingly taking with him to the grave the sunny prosperity that had affected Canada during his leadership in the late 19th century.
Shortly after calling the election, PM Borden lay in his room at the Chateau Laurier (named in honour of the former liberal PM) and passed away. His last words were of regret that he had never returned to his native Nova Scotia to rejoin the Celtic Diaspora.
With many of the heavyweights of the old 19th century and pre-war political traditions dead, Canada weaved in and out of political obscurity and a deep sense of national malaise. All of this would be grimly impacted by the loss of the Home Islands.
With the loss of the Home Isles, the British liberals, still tarred with having lost the war under the leadership of Herbert Asquith and David Lloyd George (at least in Canada), the liberal tradition of Britain did not impact the Canadian liberal party as much as some thought it would. William Lyon MacKenzie King, who became liberal leader in 1919, had previously been Minister of Labour under Laurier and came from an interesting family. His maternal grandfather had been the leader of the Upper Canadian rebellion and had died in the United States in exile. After serving under Wilfird Laurier as Labour minister for a brief time in 1907, King took time to travel the United States and wrote extensively on Labour relations, becoming well acquainted with many leading American industrialists such as the Rockerfellers while doing his best to aid them in successfully resolving their labour disputes. He returned to Canada at the outbreak of the Weltkrieg.
With the Conservatives led by Arther Meighan after the death of Borden, King has met with mixed success in rallying the forces of Canadian liberalism. His greatest success has been painting Meighan as a yes-man to the British lords and exiles blamed for losing the Empire, but his policy of urging a peaceful foreign policy based on mutually dependent, integrated economies with other the nations within “The Anglo-Saxon World” (as he calls it) has antagonized the British and Canadian military elites and has proven difficult to reconcile with Canada’s massive fleet and imperial obligations in Delhi and the Caribbean. One of King’s highest priority both as Opposition Leader and Prime Minister seems to be helping the traditional political parties in the USA retain control as part of the Anglo-Saxon World. It is rumoured that if civil war comes to the USA, King may side with the America First movement if they legitimately take power, if only to prevent the growth of syndicalism in North America…
An economic upturn and expansion of industrialization was brought about by the infusion of British gold and technology brought by the British exiles but it has not brought a corresponding rise in worker’s rights due to suspicions of Syndicalism. Left wing elements in the Prairies organized a general strike in Winnipeg which was brutally repressed by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, egged on by the British and Canadian elites who desired to stamp out any possibility of another revolution occurring. However the extent that many of the RCMP officers went to shocked many within the Canadian body politic (it was rumoured that the RCMP has been infiltrated by a group of men who are the sons of former members of the old Special Branch), and the Liberals under King reached out to members of the Canadian Commonwealth Federation (CCF) declaring that they were merely ‘Liberals in a hurry.’ King’s charm and reaching out to the left-wing in order to form a united opposition to the Conservatives has resulted in Canadian socialism and liberalism adopting a policy of gradual, legal reform. With this alliance, King was able to win the next federal election and regain the Premiership.
This has not endeared King to many conservatives in Canada. While King’s policies are clearly constructed in view of how much the Canadian people will tolerate, his oppurtunism and accumulation of political alliances among the respectable members of the Left has built a powerful counterpoint to conservatives such as Arthur Meighen and R.B. Bennett. As dangerous as it seems, King is no fool. While his eccentricities are well known, (his doting love for his Scottish Terrier Pat, his interest in séances and the occult and his devotion to his mother) he maintains an iron grip on his party’s discipline and arranges for himself to carry a safe riding every election.
Relations with the Liberals and the Royal family are strained. The King has no time for the Liberal leader, leading wags in the press to talk about the war between the King’s of Canada. The Prince of Wales, the darling of Canada’s media, finds King to be nothing but a mere colonial and spends most of his time putting in valuable facetime for the Monarchy in Canada, especially in Quebec where he is doing his best to woe the French Canadians with his charm (rumours are swirling that he is involved with a Roman Catholic Frenchwoman, a commoner no less, and may in fact cost him the crown). His brother Albert however, possessed of a powerful sense of duty, has granted King a great deal of mutual respect, if not public endorsement, especially in regards to King’s contention that each British Dominion is a separate state with equal rights within a larger Empire, each with its separate crown for its head of state.
The other sons of King George V, HRH Henry Duke of Gloucester and HRH George Duke of Kent have kept a low profile in the Canadian public life, though the Duke of Kent’s interest in the development of airpower has lead to his active engagement and elevation within the Royal Canadian Airforce. He has been instrumental in establishing the Empire Air Training Program in the Province of Alberta where pilots from all over the Empire, from the Pacific, South Africa (though less and less are coming from this troubled part of the Empire), the Caribbean and even some from India.
Henry has remained in the army and patronizes the Royal Military College in Kingston as an honorary colonel. It is suspected that he will be dispatched to one of the other Dominions as Governor-General to increase the connection between the Crown and its subjects.
CANADIAN ELECTIONS FROM 1917
1917 - Conservatives, led by Borden, are re-elected with a majority as part of a pro-conscription unionists coalition, which had former Liberals and Conservatives in the cabinet. The Unionists defeat Laurier's anti-conscription Liberals in the most bitter campaign in Canadian history.
1922 - Liberals, led by William Lyon Mackenzie King, win a minority government, defeating Conservative prime minister Arthur Meighen. The Conservatives are reduced to third place in the House as many Center Left wing MP’s win elections in the West and British Columbia under the new Progressive party. However, the Progressives decline the title of official opposition, leaving open the possibility of a coalition with the Liberals. Meighen becomes opposition leader.
1925 - Mackenzie King's Liberals hold on to power with the help of Progressive Robert Forke, despite Conservatives, led by Arthur Meighen, winning more seats. The Revolution in Britain occurs and the Union of Britain is proclaimed. A political crisis ensues as a flood of British political refugees pours into Canada. The Progressives, painted with the brush of Syndicalism are viciously attacked by the Conservatives in the media. Some street fighting is reported between members of the Right and Left wing militias. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police restores order and Prime Minister King declares a National Emergency and invokes the War Measures Act. The Royal Navy re-establishes itself in Canada as the Union of Britain consolidates its control of the Home Isles. Without a centralized Imperial government, the Empire is thrown into confusion, the Royal Navy, acting mostly of its own initiative is able to maintain control of the Caribbean. The British Indian Army re-groups in Delhi and salvages as much of the former Raj as it can. Australia and New Zealand, without the protection of the Royal Navy (later to become a point of great contention between Ottawa and Canberra) merge into a political union. The German Empire seizes most of the Strategic naval stations of the British Empire, allegedly to prevent a world crisis, but it becomes clear as most of the Empire plunges into rebellion and civil war that the British fleet cannot insure order and the German presence becomes permanent. The declaration of a National emergency plays into King’s hands as he is now able to stifle accusations of corruption and patronage within his government (that actually turned out to have much validity) and the more centrist of the Progressives jump ship to the Liberal party which wraps itself in the flag to weather the Crisis. With a stronger Liberal party and a emasculated Progressive party, the Conservatives bide their time, constantly criticizing King’s failure to secure more of the Empire (though realistically, the tiny Canadian army was only able to send a token force to the Caribbean). King, realizing that the Empire is lost but that the admission of such a fact is political suicide, embarks upon a new Imperial Policy as the most powerful British state left standing. The presence of a British government in exile is a threat to Canadian unity and King’s power, and under the provisions of the War Measures Act and Martial Law, King promulgates a legislative union act, merging the two governments into one under his control. He is able to outmanuver and replace all British leaders who could conceivably try to become PM of Canada in the highly charged emotional mindset of the fall of Britain. After asserting his control over the Cabinet and parliament and making sure that only British MP’s who will follow his line and get elected in their own right in Canadian ridings, King moves on to the armed forces. Seeing the Royal Navy as the only common institution of the Empire still intact, the Fleet is ordered to divide up and deploy squadrons to Karachi, Australasia and South Africa. This does much to reassure the Australasians and South Africans, though it won’t be permanent.
1930 - Conservatives, led by R.B. Bennett, win a majority, defeating the Liberals under Mackenzie King. With the influx of many British Conservatives such as Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain and Winston Churchill, the Conservatives have been able to present themselves as the party of Imperial unity. The endorsement of King George V, blatantly meddling in Canada’s political affairs seals the election for Bennett whose cabinet is 100% Canadian. However, Bennett relies on the financial, political and philosophical guidance of British Exiles who exist in a ‘shadow cabinet’ of Canada’s traditional clubs for the Elite such as the Empire Club in Toronto, the Orange Order of Ontario and the Chateau Clique in Montreal. Even under the Liberal government of King, the Army and Navy staffs were packed with many of Britain’s top generals and admirals. Though a few generals such as Vanier (the top ranking French Canadian in the army), Crerar and McNaughton have attained positions of influence in the army, the Navy is firmly in the hands of British admirals. The Air Force is the only Canadian institution to remain almost equally divided between Canadians and British Exiles. Proclaiming that the ultimate goal of Canada is the reclaimation of Britain, Bennett recalls much of the British Fleet from the Pacific and the entire South African station, causing great resentment in the other Dominions and wages a inconclusive (though popular) war of skirmishes with the Syndicalist Navy in the Atlantic. While the Navy seems well prepared to renew the war against the Union of Britain, the Canadian army remains small and is in need or reorganization if it is to become capable of forcing a landing in Britain. Many Canadian officers look enviously at the Australasian army, which is no more advanced, but is larger, better organized and better led as several of the more progressive British generals settled in Australasia.
1935 - Liberals, led by Mackenzie King, defeat Bennett's Conservatives with a majority. The election was seen mainly as a referendum on Bennett’s Imperial Policy. While it played well at home to wage a tit for tat naval war in the Atlantic for a about a year or so, the public has become weary of a struggle with no conclusive end or objective in sight. The Australasians, whose own economic expansion brought about by its own influx of British Exiles and currency (though much less than the one that affected Canada) has stalled and continues to resent the loss of the majority of the Australasian station of the Royal Navy. Many in Canada fear that the larger Australasian army may not march for the Empire if it means leaving their shores undefended. King’s sensitive balancing of the old Entente Alliance to keep the Dominions firmly within an Global Anglo-Saxon Bloc has resulted in many tense negotiations between Ottawa and Canberra to re-deploy some of the Royal Navy back to the South Pacific, especially in light of the expanding Japanese Navy, which is still technically an “ally”.
FOREIGN POLICY AND DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH THE OLD EMPIRE STATES
Abroad, the old Boer nemesis in South Africa has resurfaced. South Africa was the one Dominion of the Old Empire to receive only a trickle of Exiles and the share of the spoils they were able to save from Britain was miniscule. Even King may not be able to bring the South African’s back into the Empire, though he hopes that they will at least remain as an associated power and maintain the preferential trading agreements that see many of South Africa’s raw materials head to feed Canada’s large industrial appetite.
The British Naval Station in Delhi remains strong enough to be threatening, but too weak to maintain Order in the Indian Ocean and is growing old in the face of the German Naval Squadron based at Ceylon, the Canadians maintain it to maintain a link with the aging British technocrats in the Delhi government.
The fall of the Old Empire and the rebellion of several subject peoples has resulted in a great deal of racism in Canada and Australasia against people who are visibly Non-British, and the Conservative party, back when it was still in power, urged the Australasians to deploy a sizable portion of its army to Delhi to “keep the natives in line”. This further antagonized the rocky relationship between Canberra and Ottawa, and King astutely dropped the matter. While they are not Anglo-Saxon, King has made a point of declaring on no less than 7 public occasions that India has “been a part of the Empire longer than most of Canada and that there exists a special place for them, side by side with their fellow citizens of the Empire…” The fact that King used the word citizens, as opposed to subjects has caused a great deal of debate over the future of the Empire in political circles. With the advent of more sophisticated communication technology, many proponents of a global federation of Imperial British states is gaining more prominence within Liberal circles, especially as it would place a reclaimed Britain on an equal footing with Canada within such a political arrangement.
In Quebec Maurice Duplessis, as leader of the paternal-authoritarian-like Union Nationale, stands unopposed in provincial politics and successfully eliminated overt support syndicalism and ensuring the survival of the Catholic identity of Quebec. His party has used the election slogan "Survival" in every provincial election to paint Quebecois self-image as a religious struggle for God.
Duplessis however has been more than willing to let Anglo companies build branch plants within Quebec and build up an impressive commercial presence so long as they did not allow unions and did not try to intervene in politics at all. He has even allowed some of them to have English-only workplaces. He maintains cheerful and amicable relations with the corrupt and patronage driven government of Mitch Hepburn, the scandalous "Liberal" premier of Ontario.
In light of the fall of the Empire, Duplessis has enhanced relations with the Italian federation and its dominant Catholic political culture, especially in hopes that a weak pope will be elected when the current incumbent dies. If such an election took place and the Pontiff would not interfere with Quebec, Duplessis is eager to maintain his close alliance with the Catholic Church. The Church essentially runs education and social welfare as a result of this arrangement and very few Quebecois receive a higher education. Duplessis also maintains a relationship with National France, not because of a kinship to the European French (whom many Quebecois accuse of abandoning them to the English), but to stamp out any possible Syndicalist infiltration by Commune agents.
Assuming a strong Pope like Innitzer gets elected... Duplessis may be forced to reconsider his alliance as he would not want the Holy Father looking over his shoulder. King has long given up on trying to engineer a liberal government for the Province of Quebec and both Conservative and Liberal governments have refrained from interfering in Quebec politics so long as Duplessis does not stoke disloyalty or interferes with Federal politics.
While R.B Bennet and the British elites wanted to also recapture Ireland, King has embarked on a policy of reconciliation with the “Lost Dominion.” In the event of war, King have suggested sending a diplomatic offer to Michael Collins that offers a public, binding, international decree by the British crown to recognize the sovereignty of the Irish Republic and a vow to never violate that sovereignty, and in return for port rights and airstrips in Ireland to carry out the war against the UoB.
(Amazing Canadian Backstory by UnitedEmpireLoyalist, Cheers)
1936, The Present
Ever since the Proclamation of the Union of Britain, King George V has been plagued with sickness, a sickness which has intensified in recent months. The fate of both the King and of the Empire is unsure, both have begun to slowly wither and die. Next in line for the throne is Edward, Prince of Wales, while R.B. Bennet and the Exiles are waiting for their chance to use the Prince to their advantage. No matter what happens in the first few months of 1936, God Save the King!
- Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg 1.0
- Settings on Normal/Normal
Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg is a mod for HoI2 Doomsday and Armageddon which asks the question: "What if the Germans won WWII?" As you have read, Revolutions at home have forced the British Royal Family to flee to Canada and for the French Nationalists to cross the Mediterranean Sea to Africa.
Now, a decade later, Berlin's economy is in recession and political divisions run deep in the United States. General Strikes by the IWW bring the economies of Chicago, Detroit and Green Bay to a halt while the "American First Council" agruably has more power in the Midwest and Texas than the Federal Government while the West Coast of the United States prospers.
The Commune of France is the leader of a Worldwide radical movement whose goal is to bring down the Reactionary governments in Europe and abroad and establish rule by Trade Unions across the World.
In Russia, political dissent has reached its boiling point and divisions are begin to appear in Spain while the Ausgleich, the Re-Negotiation of the Austro-Hungarian Comprimise is nearing closer.
The economies of South America are dependent on Berlin, its anyones bet what would happen to the Continent if the recession in Germany was to stop sliding and to plunge.
Success or Failure; Whether London is retake or the Revolution follows the Royal Family across the Atlantic, I hope you'll be entertained.

In rural Niger, community pumps are being installed in many villages in response to a widespread water crisis. Sixty-four percent of Niger’s rural population lacks access to clean water. About nine in ten citizens lack a proper way to dispose of their own waste.
These water woes promote disease, stagnate education and economic growth, and result in the majority of rural Niger’s infant and child deaths.
Niger is a drought-plagued land on the borders of the Sahara Desert. There is little rainfall, so groundwater must supply most people’s daily needs. Yet this traditional water source presents many problems.
Hand-dug wells lack concrete liners and are subject to contamination by seepage of waste and other contaminants. Traditional wells also have no pumps, so women must haul water up by hand in a demanding and time-consuming chore.
Existing wells are widely scattered—so that women and children may spend hours and travel many kilometers a day just to provide water for their homes.
A proliferation of modern drilled wells and pump systems can alleviate many of these problems, but most communities lack the resources to fund drilled wells or to purchase and maintain pumps.
In recent years, international organizations like UNICEF and the World Bank have been able to help.
UNICEF has funded the construction and repair of many boreholes and wells to provide clean water to more than a quarter million people.
The World Bank also has a program in place to fund local drillers and pump manufacturers that will be able to install some 100 wells and pumps per year—providing water to an additional 25,000 people annually.
The establishment of more modern wells is easing the health crisis caused by lack of clean potable water. It is also changing communities for the better.
Localized pumps relieve women and children of the water-carrying burden that consumes so much of their time and energy. With water accessible close to home, women and children have time to pursue their educations or other economic opportunities. Many community source pumps are intentionally located near schools, providing an added incentive for children to attend classes near the source of their family’s water.

A ground is a direct electrical connection to the earth, a connection to a particular point in an electrical or electronic circuit, or an indirect connection that operates as the result of capacitance between wireless equipment and the earth or a large mass of conductive material.
Electrical grounding is important because it provides a reference voltage level (called zero potential or ground potential) against which all other voltages in a system are established and measured. An effective electrical ground connection also minimizes the susceptibility of equipment to interference, reduces the risk of equipment damage due to lightning, eliminates electrostatic buildup that can damage system components, and helps protect personnel who service and repair electrical, electronic, and computer systems. In effect, an electrical ground drains away any unwanted buildup of electrical charge. When a point is connected to a good ground, that point tends to stay at a constant voltage, regardless of what happens elsewhere in the circuit or system. The earth, which forms the ultimate ground, has the ability to absorb or dissipate an unlimited amount of electrical charge.
An earth ground usually consists of a ground rod (or a set of ground rods) driven into the soil. At sea, the salt water forms a good earth ground if a corrosion-resistant metal plate having large surface area (such as the hull or keel) is placed in contact with it. In a car, a truck, a boat in fresh water, an aircraft, or a spacecraft, there is no such thing as a true earth ground. But if the mass of metal comprising the vehicle is substantial, that mass can simulate an earth ground reasonably well. An earth ground minimizes the susceptibility of electronic equipment to interference from other devices. In large, base-station wireless installations, a good earth ground also provides a certain measure of protection from the destructive effects of lightning.
A chassis ground is a connection to the main chassis of a piece of electronic or electrical equipment. In older appliances and in desktop computers, this is a metal plate, usually copper or aluminum. In some modern equipment, it is a foil run on the main printed circuit board, usually running around the periphery. Chassis ground is sometimes called common ground. It provides a point that can be considered to have zero voltage. All other circuit voltages (positive or negative) are measured or defined with respect to it. Ideally, all chassis grounds should lead to earth grounds.
In wireless systems, a radio-frequency ( RF ) ground can be obtained by capacitive coupling between devices and the earth. In some cases, several wires known as radials, parallel to and near the earth's surface, are necessary to obtain a good RF ground. At higher frequencies, radials are not always necessary. The capacitance between a handheld radio transceiver or cell phone set and the user's body, and the capacitance between the user's body and the earth, can provide a reasonably good RF ground. Certain types of antenna s can function effectively without an RF ground.

New research in The FASEB Journal suggests that rats fed homobrassinolide, found in the mustard plant, produced an anabolic effect, and increased appetite and muscle mass, as well as the number and size of muscle fibers.
Bethesda, MDIf you are looking to lean out, add muscle mass, and get ripped, a new research report published in The FASEB Journal (http://www.fasebj.org) suggests that you might want to look to your garden for a little help. That's because scientists have found that when a specific plant steroid was given orally to rats, it triggered a response similar to anabolic steroids, with minimal side effects. In addition, the research found that the stimulatory effect of homobrassinolide (a type of brassinosteroid found in plants) on protein synthesis in muscle cells led to increases in lean body mass, muscle mass and physical performance.
"We hope that one day brassinosteroids may provide an effective, natural, and safe alternative for age- and disease-associated muscle loss, or be used to improve endurance and physical performance," said Slavko Komarnytsky, Ph.D., a researcher involved in the work from the Plants for Human Health Institute, FBNS at North Carolina State University in Kannapolis, N.C. "Because some plants we eat contain these compounds, like mustards, in the future we may be able to breed or engineer these plants for higher brassinosteroid content, thus producing functional foods that can treat or prevent diseases and increase physical performance."
To make this discovery, Komarnytsky and colleagues exposed rat skeletal muscle cells to different amounts of homobrassinolide and measured protein synthesis in cell culture. The result was increased protein synthesis and decreased protein degradation in these cells. Healthy rats then received oral administration of homobrassinolide daily for 24 days. Changes in body weight, food consumption, and body composition
|Contact: Cody Mooneyhan|
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology

Heart Paper Chain
These heart paper chains are easy to make but they do require scissors so adult supervision is recommended.
- Take a peice of paper and cut it length-wise into 4 strips.
- Valley-fold the paper in half and unfold.
- Valley-fold again into quarters, and unfold.
- Mountain-fold each of the four sections in half. You should have 8 sections.
- Compress the strip of paper along the already made creases. The pleats will look like an accordion.
- Draw a heart shape onto the top layer of paper. Draw it such that the rounded top-part of the heart (shown with an arrow) doesn't connect with the bottom part of the heart. Cut along the line making sure that you don't cut the rounded corner of the heart (they need to remain connected to one another).
- Unfold and voila! A heart paper chain. Repeat with the other strips of paper and connect them together with tape.
Note: there are two possible result. The first is as shown above: four connected hearts. The other possibility is 3 connected hearts and two half-hearts at the beginning and end of the chain. Experiment a bit to determine how to position the paper to get the chain that you prefer.

Free Democratic Party
The Free Democratic Party (Freie Demokratische Partei--FDP) is much smaller than the CDU or SPD, but its limited electoral strength masks the party's inordinate influence. Prior to the 1994 election, the FDP had experienced its worst results in national elections in 1969 (5.8 percent) and 1983 (7 percent). Both of those poor showings occurred following an FDP decision to switch coalition partners. Beyond these two exceptions, between 1949 and 1990 the FDP averaged 9.6 percent of the vote in national elections. Given its pivotal role in governing coalitions, the FDP has held over 20 percent of the cabinet posts during its time in government.
The FDP served in coalition governments with the CDU from 1949 to 1956 and from 1961 to 1966. As of mid-1995, it has governed with the CDU since 1982. The FDP governed in coalition with the SPD from 1969 to 1982. The remarkable amount of time that the FDP has spent in government has been a source of continuity in the German political process. FDP ministers carry a detailed knowledge of government personnel and procedures unsurpassed among the other parties.
The central role played by the FDP in forming governments is explained by the fact that a major party has been able to garner an outright majority of Bundestag seats only once (the CDU, in 1957); thus, the CDU and the SPD have been compelled to form coalition governments. Therefore, the FDP has participated in every government except the one from 1957 to 1961 and the Grand Coalition of 1966-69. Because the SPD and CDU/CSU enjoyed roughly equal electoral support, the FDP could choose with which major party it wished to align. This ability to make or break a ruling coalition has provided the small FDP with considerable leverage in the distribution of policy and cabinet positions. To take one example, as of mid- 1995, the FDP, in the person of Klaus Kinkel, led the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which it has held since 1969. The most prominent member of the FDP, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, served as foreign minister from 1974 until his resignation in 1992.
The FDP was created in 1948 under the chairmanship of Theodor Heuss, who served as the first president of the Federal Republic, from 1949 to 1959. The party's founders wanted the FDP to revive the liberal party tradition of pre-World War II Germany. Although there was some initial debate over what was meant by "liberal," the party did articulate a political philosophy distinct from that of the two major parties. The FDP gave precedence to the legal protection of individual freedoms. Unlike the SPD, it supported private enterprise and disavowed any socialist leaning, and, unlike the CDU/CSU, it envisioned a strictly secular path for itself. In the early 1990s, the Free Democrats remained closer to the CDU/CSU on economic issues and closer to the SPD on social and foreign policy. Many Germans view the FDP as the party of the middle, moderating the policies of both major parties.
Following the 1949 national elections, the FDP emerged as a natural ally of the CDU/CSU, most importantly because of a congruity of economic policy. During the mid- to late 1960s, the FDP, under the leadership of Walter Scheel, went through a transformation of sorts, shedding its conservative image and emphasizing the reformist aspects of its liberal tradition. Its new focus on social concerns resulted in an SPD-FDP coalition in 1969. The party's new direction was ratified at the FDP's 1971 party congress, which endorsed a program of "social liberalism." As economic conditions worsened in the early 1980s, however, the FDP returned to its earlier advocacy of economic policies more conservative than those endorsed by the SPD. The FDP was most concerned with the growing budget deficit, whereas the SPD gave priority to the impact of the economic downturn on workers. The FDP abandoned the coalition with the SPD in September 1982, shifting allegiance to the CDU/CSU. The FDP lost considerable electoral support in the 1983 federal election but regained strength in the 1987 election.
The Free Democrats benefited initially from unification, garnering 11 percent of the vote in the first all-Germany elections in December 1990. In part, the FDP's popularity in the east was directly attributable to Genscher, an eastern German by birth who played a leading role in negotiations over the international agreements that made unification possible.
In light of the FDP's strong showing in the 1990 election, it is perhaps surprising to note that, by the time of the 1994 national election, the FDP was, in many ways, a party in crisis. It had lost representation in every Land that held elections in 1994, and thus the FDP has no seats in any eastern Land legislature. Minister of Foreign Affairs Kinkel had been elected party chairman in 1993, and some critics felt that the two posts had overwhelmed him, leading him to perform inadequately in both. Other observers, however, argued that it was the party's message, rather than its messenger, that needed revamping. Increasingly, the FDP found it difficult to differentiate its policy from that of Kohl's CDU. Given the fact that the FDP had performed so poorly at the Land level in 1994, there was much speculation as to whether the party would cross the 5 percent hurdle in the national election. FDP politicians breathed a collective sigh of relief when the party garnered 6.9 percent of the vote when Germans went to the polls in October 1994. Reportedly, the FDP had over 500,000 CDU voters to thank for this outcome, because they gave their second votes tactically to the FDP to ensure a victory for Kohl. One poll showed that 63 percent of those who voted for the FDP gave the CDU as their preferred party.
The structure of the FDP is decentralized and is loosely organized at all levels. The party basically is a federation of Land organizations, each maintaining a degree of well-guarded independence. The national party headquarters lacks the power to orchestrate activities at the Land level, and the formal party institutions--the Federal Executive, Presidium, and party congress--are weak. The FDP deemed this lack of centralization necessary to accommodate differences within the party, particularly between economic conservatives and social liberals. The FDP has never sought to be a mass party, and its members accordingly have little influence on decision making.
|Country Studies main page | Germany Country Studies main page | Celebrity|

Light and Matter Interactions (An 8-page activity originally by Concord MW team, modified by Ed O'Sullivan, Parkland College)
Interactive, scaffolded model
This Activity Requires:
Important! If you cannot launch anything from this database, please follow the step-by-step instructions on the software page.
Please Note: Many models are linked to directly from within the database. When an activity employs our scripting language, Pedagogica, as do some of the "guided" activities, the initial download may take several minutes. Subsequent activities will not take a long time. See this page for further instructions.
Students are introduced to the basic concepts of light, followed by several interactive simulations that model the interactions of light with matter.
Students will be able to:
• manipulate intensity and frequency of light, including adjusting intensity and seeing its effect on the heating of matter;
• replicate in a model a beam of photons of particular intensity and energy;
• describe two fates of light-matter interaction: passage through, or absorption and consequence by matter;
• generate and read an absorption spectrum.
Interdisciplinary science, Science and modern technology, Biotechnology, Photonics
Additional Related Concepts
Adapted from the CC original by Edward O'Sullivan, Parkland College, Champagne, Ill.
Last Update: 11/25/2008
Maintainer: CC Web Team (email@example.com)
Document Options: Text-only / Accessible Version | Printable Version | E-mail this Page
Copyright © 2013, The Concord Consortium.
All rights reserved.
These materials are based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under grant number DUE-0402553
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.

TRANSLATE:Français, Deutsch, Italiano, Portuguêses, Españoles
DIRECTORY Return to MAIN HISTORY INDEX
The First People had little desire to explore America:
They however led the way for the Coureurs de bois and Metis
They were fully aware of the four seas to the north/south, east/west,
they believed their own location was the best.
The Coureurs Des Bois and Metis needed Indian girls, as translators, guides, to cook, prepare food supplies for winter, make and prepare clothing, heal wounds, make moccasins, make snowshoes and to prepare the furs. They became so indispensable they were taken as loving and devoted Country Wives and mothers.
The HBC saw these Country Wives as bad for morals.
History has shown most of HBC men had no morals and would abandon their wives and children when they moved on. Granted in the early days HBC denied the taking of wives and children back to Europe.
The NWC saw the Country Wives as good for business and as a result most French Canadians remained faithful to their wives and family.
"These are the Peoples who learned to live without
the bold accents of the national ego-trippers of other lands." Marshall
Herbert McLuhan (1911-1980)
The life of the Coureur des Bois was one of adventure, freedom, danger and travel.
Pierre Esprit Radisson (1636-1710).
Metis: Some claim the first use of the word Metis appears in the Jesuit Relations of 1666, with a pejorative connotation of mongrel and bastard. I have read these translated books and must have missed it. The earliest notation of Metis, that I have seen, appears in 1750, in the Quebec records of death. Cyprien Tanguay (1819-1902) includes this Metis among the listing of Sauvages (Savages).
The focus of my research ,however, is the North West Algonquian Metis culture, being distinct from the South West Mississippi or Missouri Metis, or the other Mixed Blood Peoples of America. The Red River of the North West, from a Canadian perspective, has been traditionally acclaimed as the cultural apex of the Metis culture. The Metis culture, however, finds its apex- not in the Red River- but in the story of the Grand Kitchi Gami (Lake Superior), also known as the 'Old North West'.
The people of the Grand Kitchi Gami are the Ojibwa, who could be identified by their
moccasins. The Ojibwa word for Moccasin is Makisin. It is interesting that the
First People of Canada identified their neighbors by
cultural traits like their clothing, methods of cooking etc. Europeans use religion, skin color,
warlike nature, etc. They use these old world attributes and then assume
that First Nation People used the the same criteria.
Modern historians, political and religious folks still view the people with a European perspective. They still attempt to impose their prevailing system of beliefs and values when viewing other cultures. Their view is typically from a land, building and money perspective.
My original objective was not to research the Metis culture, nor the Indian (Peoples) culture, but to trace my Canadian ancestors. While conducting research into source documents, traders diaries, census records etc. I was forced to record dates, locations, cultures, clans, people, and events which assisted in my quest. Before long it became too big and had to be placed on my computer. Over the years it grew and grew. I now have over 25MB of data on line. It is now my turn to share my collection to those who might be interested.
What is Metis: Basically, it is a cultural tradition based on a premise of First Nation ancestry or adoption into that tradition. The word Metis is derived by the French from the Ojibwa word Wissakodewinmi, which figuratively means half burnt woodsman: not quite a full fledged woodsman. The Cree called the Metis Oteepaymsoowuk, which means their own boss; as distinct from French or English people. The Cree viewed the English as being slaves to their Company. In fact, many were in fact indentured slaves- as were the French. The Metis culture evolved from the Coureurs des Bois, Voyager and the Indian cultures. The Voyagers were of two types: the French Voyager pork eaters (mangeur de lard) and the more Metis type Winter Voyager, winterer (hivernant), who normally took country wives. The term voyager actually refers to one who paddles a fur trade canoe, but some have expanded its meaning to include all those who ventured into the interior via canoe, engaged in the fur trade or for exploration.
The Jesuit Father Vivier, in 1750, first introduced the derogatory term half breed into Canada. He believed the very condition of being Metis was against the Laws of God. The English, in Canada, first called the Metis 'those Peddlers' (about 1750) and later called them 'those Canadians'. The French were called 'those French Canadians'. The English would later also adopt the French term Half Breed. The term mixed blood was introduced by the American English during the 1800's treaty process.
The Jesuit also called the Metis, Couriers des Bois meaning illegal runners of the forests but more commonly used the terms savage, heathen or half-breed. The A.F. Ewing Commission of 1935 decided to be Metis, "a person had to either look like an Indian or be able to establish Indian ancestry. They also had to live the life of an ordinary Indian and non-treaty Indians would be included" as Metis. Malcolm Norris a member of the Commission maintained that, "if a person has a drop of Indian blood in his veins and has not assimilated in the social fabric of our civilization he is a Metis." This assimilation assumption is a European belief that is based on paternalistic logic.
(VI)-Louis Garneau, a Metis, born 1789 in the North West, son Frenchman (most likely (V)-Jean Baptiste Garneau (born 1762) and Sowayguay Ojibwa, is the motivation for this North West historical perspective. These, my ancestors, worked Lake Superior, La Pointe, Red Lake, Pembina, Red River and Manitoba. Records and family tradition indicate they acquired ‘Country Wives’, possibly Dakota Sioux and positively Ojibwa (Chippewa). It would appear that two generations of Garneau's worked for the North West Company and one or more for the Montreal Companies. One or more may also have worked for the French Trading Company. It is likely the Garneau's are Voyagers, Nor'wester and Coureurs des Bois. The family married into the Cadotte family who arrived in the West in 1671, and made it their permanent home about 1755. This family introduced Huron (Wendat) and Iroquois into the family. We also know that the Thomas clan, who joined the Garneau clan in marriage, arrived Hudson Bay, North West Territories 1789 and became some of the first recorded Prairie Metis with a Cree ancestry. I say recorded because the taking of native wives, or the recording of Metis children, was forbidden by the Hudson Bay Company until the 1790's. This section attempts to view history from the Mixed Blood Nature of the North West Territories. It therefore speaks of the Metis Nation of the North West. It is worth remembering that there are two North West Territories: the Old North West- first known as the west or interior, and the New North West.
To bring some order to our understanding of the evolving Territories and cultures, you can visualize three classical periods.
These trading periods are:
The exclusion of the English is due to the fact that they had little real impact on the formation of early Canadian culture, until after the 1790's, when they adopted the Canadian Metis method of conducting business. Their unique contribution only began in 1812, in the Red River, and with their acquisition of the North West Company in 1821. My exclusion of the Eskimo, or Inuit, is only due to the fact that I have not discovered a relative associated with this very interesting culture, which came early on to the American scene. There are surely many Metis among their numbers, but they seem to have been absorbed into the Inuit culture.
Another more European perception of the trading periods is:
Montreal and North West Company period - (1763 to 1821).
Hudson Bay Company period (1787 to 1870). The Hudson Bay Company is established in 1670, but had very little impact on Canadian culture until after about 1787. They considered themselves as foreign traders; not allowed to mix with the Indians, Canadians (French) or those Peddlers, as they called the Metis.
Dutch West India Company period (1621 to 1664). They had an indirect impact on Canadian culture through the Iroquois.
Thirteen English States Trader period (1664 to 1776), whose impact is also through the Iroquois and the English wars against Canada.
American Trading Companies period (1776 to 1834), whose impact was lost among the North West Company and the Free Traders, but which set the stage for the Mountain men of America.
Russian Trading period (1784 to 1867), that impacted Alaska, British Columbia and California.
Metis, Mixed Blood or Half Breed peoples, are the only indigenous people
of the Americas. The three major founding cultures of Canada are
the Indian, Inuit and Dene, who themselves are of mixed blood origin. There
has been a continuous migration of peoples from and to the Americas since the
beginning of human history. It is noteworthy that the European cultures are reluctant to admit that
they also are all of mixed blood origin, or Half Breeds. The Native
Americans inherently knew this great truth and therefore freely accepted
all people as their brothers. Most European people do not hold this
great truth, thereby creating a transitional culture called the Metis.
Metis, therefore, is a transitory state of mind; a figment of our imagination;
a cultural anomaly. That it still remains an anomaly surely speaks
to unresolved Canadian cultural issues.
By the year 2000, some estimate that 50 percent of the population of Western Canada will have Native blood and will, therefore, be Metis by any genetic measure. As a result of four hundred years of persecution, by year 2000, only about one million Canadians will freely admit to Native origins by the end of the twentieth century. If we don't understand the historic Metis condition, we are consigning our children to repeat the errors of the past. We don't have a large Aboriginal Native population, with strong brotherhood and an integrated set of beliefs and values, to accommodate the transformation of the Canadian, Asian and European Half Breeds into a 21st century Canadian Metis culture.
Metis a Stereotype The new world defines its cultures primarily by their clothing, so it comes as no surprise that the Metis adopted a unique attire. A short shirt, red woolen cap, deer skin leggings, the azion (breech cloth) and a pair of deer skin moccasins. Their thighs are left bare- like the Indians. Let us not forget the blue capote, inevitable pipe, gaudy sash (long colorful wide belt), gay beaded bag or pouch which hangs from the sash and the fiddle. You now have a pro-type Metis. It is said if a Metis has a fiddle, he doesn't need sleep. This attire evolved over time, but it is noteworthy that present day Metis usually search back to their roots to recover components of a cultural attire, and then to recover their real culture of principles, beliefs and values.
The Metis culture was originally called irrepressible, made up of unassuming gens libre (freemen) who were humble and filled with peals of laughter, songs of merriment, campfire stories, tall tales, foaming rapids, birch rimmed lakes, shallow winding streams and, 'Oh Yes', lets not forget the grand bison (buffalo) hunts. I was fortunate to have experienced the tail end of this dying culture, which is now going through a 'Grand Renaissance'.
The Aboriginal American culture had already accommodated Buddhist Chinese, East Indian, Judaism, Celtic, Viking, Norwegian and Basque, before the arrival of the Spanish, Dutch, French, and English. The Spanish diseases, as they were called, had already killed tens of millions of the Aboriginal peoples, before the French and English ventured into this region of the world. Most historians, for the last few hundred years, claim that America gave Europe the French disease Syphilis, that took a terrible toll in Europe. The theory says that syphilis must have been brought to Europe by Columbus, as there was little trace of the disease before 1492. Recent evidence, however, points to Hull, England, where an excavated priory unearthed evidence of the disease in many of the 14th century monks, prior to the Columbus trip. Other evidence also suggests this disease is evident in Italy (Greater Greece) about 700 B.C. It has now been suggested that Columbus spread this terrible disease to the Americas.
Metis, as a cultural issue, did not surface in Canada until the 17th century. The Roman Catholic Jesuit Order is the first to introduce this cultural cast system into Canada, based on the color of one's skin, their religion and/or value system. Their classifications are: White French, Black Slaves, Savage Indian, Protestant English, and those Coureurs des Bois or Metis- who are at the low end of the scale. It is noteworthy that the Jesuit classified the Protestant English as lesser than black or Indians. They also had another value scale of Catholic, Pagan and Protestant , with Protestant being the worst evil. This implied that if you are a Protestant and English, you are grouped into the same class as the Coureurs des Bois regardless of your skin color.
The voyagers average height was 5 feet 6 inches, with a few being greater than 5 feet 8 inches. He could paddle 15-18 hours per day and still joke beside the campfire. He could carry 200 to 450 pounds merchandise. The voyagers always sang while they paddled; songs of their canoe, country, life, loves, church, old ballads, humorous jingles, poems, but always to the stroke of the paddle, sometimes as frequently as one per second. Canoe racing was one of the chief delights of these voyagers. These attributes were passed to the decedents the Metis.
Metis Colonies An American perspective suggests the more significant Metis Colonies include: Sault Ste Marie, La Pointe, Detroit, Mackinac, Chicago, Milwaukee, Green Bay, Prairie Du Chien, St Paul, St Louis, Winnipeg, and many more lesser historical locations. The Metis colonies are described as charming, with Acadian simplicity. They have time for friendliness, politeness, and have a note of picturesque-ness to their attire. They have a simple faith, and a childlike objectivity. They accepted the Indian at his own value, which was not low, whereas the American Frontiersman could scarcely find words for his contempt of what he considered a thieving, shiftless, dirty race.
The southern Mississippi (Louisiana) had very early Metis settlements, but they are referred to as Canadians and, occasionally, as Coureurs de Bois. The Spanish left a trail of Metis, but most appear to be absorbed into the Native cultures.
& First Nation You will notice I have avoided the more recent Indian,
Inuit, Dene, Metis and First Nation legal and political debates that have taken
place in Canada. There are hundreds of writers and historians trying to
focus on these issues so we don't need another paddle in the water.
It would be nice if there was one set of governing principles for all First Nation Peoples, respecting the diverse traditions within one Nation.
It would be nice if there was one set of beliefs that valued the dignity of each member, their religion and their environment; rather than Land, Buildings and Money.
It would be nice if there was one set of values that acknowledged the rights of all members regardless of their life style; such as life in the high-rise vs. life closer to nature; life off the reservation vs. life on the reservation.
Why can't we recapture the Old Spirit of caring & sharing in a new modern world? A new paradigm is possible- just as a 1,000 mile journey begins with the first step...
Dream dreams of what could be rather than dreams of what was- and is- lost.
E-MAIL RE: METIS NATION
Jean Champagne wrote: (10-2007)
Bonjour - Can you tell me why a Metis from Quebec is not recognized as a Metis in Manitoba? ? Who coined the phrase ' Metis nation" . It seems that Mr Chartrand and its western allies had an hidden agenda when they defined Metis as belonging or coming from the Metis nation. Can you shed some light on this. A group of Metis friends from Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Quebec have difficulty understanding this issues. How come the Canadian government does not have a definition of the work Metis in their Charter of Right and Freedom?
Jean-Renan 'Lambert' dit Champagne
I can see you want me to jump into the POLITICALLY CORRECT definition of Metis. I usually don't pay homage to politically correctness. The term
'Metis Nation' is a current trend with lots of different hidden agendas.
In my opinion there is no such thing as 'Metis Nation' and there is no reference in history to Metis Nation.
NATION: "A politically organized body under a single government"
"A federation of tribes"
'The people who live in a nation or country".
The Metis People can best be described as an evolving 'Metis Culture', a 'Distinct Society' maybe!
The Metis People of North America are not politically organized under a single government.
The Metis People of North America were never a federation of tribes like the Iroquois or Algonquin tribes.
The Metis People of North America never lived in a nation or country, they were too busy exploring and developing America.
To call the Metis People, a Metis Nation, we have to accommodate the Metis from B.C., Alberta, Quebec, Acadia, or Louisiana and this is not likely to happen in the near future.
The Metis Culture developed primarily in Detroit; Wisconsin & Minnesota especially south of Lake Superior, and later in Red River, Manitoba. The first significant Metis settlement was Acadia but most preferred to call them selves Arcadians.
Manitoba is I believe one of the first to include the 'Metis Nation' philosophy to the exclusion of other Metis People. I believe this is driven by a desire for power, a sign of arrogance and an inferiority complex. This type of thinking had no place in early Indian Culture (The People) or early Metis Culture.

Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
discovery of Sāsānian murals
...These motifs often figure both on surviving textiles and on those recorded in the paintings. The murals at Varakhsha, for example, include motifs taken from textiles, and a 5th-century mural from Balalyk Tepe displays the head of a tusked, boarlike animal set in a roundel that is almost identical to that on a Sāsānian fabric found at Astana in eastern Turkistan.
What made you want to look up "Balalyk Tepe"? Please share what surprised you most...

Like most of Southeast Asia's countries, Myanmar's people and history is a glorious mishmash of settlers and invaders from all fronts. The Mon and the Pyu are thought to have come from India, while the now dominant Bamar (Burmese) migrated through Tibet and, by 849, had founded a powerful kingdom centered on Bagan. For the next millennium, the Burmese empire grew through conquests of Thailand (Ayutthaya) and India (Manipur), and shrank under attacks from China and internal rebellions. Today Myanmar is a resource-rich country, suffers from pervasive government controls, inefficient economic policies, and rural poverty. What was once one of the richest and most developed countries in Asia has since slumped into poverty due to widespread corruption. Myanmar's culture is largely a result of heavy Indian influences intertwined with local traditions and some Chinese influences. This can be seen in the various stupas and temples throughout the country, which bear a distinct resemblance to those in northern India. Like neighboring Thailand, Theravada Buddhism is the single largest religion, and even some of the most remote villages will have a village temple for many to pray. Other religions which exist in smaller numbers include Christianity, Islam and Hinduism.

Start Your Visit WithHistorical Timelines
General Interest Maps
Hitler's early years
Adolf Hitler was born on April 20, 1889, in Braunau-am-Inn, Austria, near the Austro-German border. Adolf's father, Alois, worked as a customs officer on the border. His mother, Klara, had previously given birth to two other children by Alois, Gustav and Ida, but they both died in infancy. Adolf attended school from the age of six, and the family lived in various villages around the town of Linz, east of Braunau. By that time, Adolf had a younger brother, Edmund, but he lived only until the age of six. In 1896, Klara gave birth to Adolf's sister, Paula, who would outlive him.
Hitler was a poor student and left school before graduation. He had an ambition to become an artist, and had gained an interest in politics and history. He applied twice unsuccessfully for admission to the Vienna Academy of Fine Arts. In 1909, after both parents had died, he moved to Vienna in the hope of earning a living. Living in homeless shelters and eating at charity soup kitchens, he declined to find regular employment, but took occasional menial jobs, and sold his paintings and advertising posters whenever he could to provide sustenance.
Munich and the Great War - 1913-1918
At Munich in 1914, near the beginning of World War I, Hitler volunteered for service in the German army and was accepted into the infantry. He fought bravely in the war, was promoted to corporal, and was decorated with the Iron Cross Second Class and First Class; the latter he wore until his dying day. On the day of the armistice announcement in 1918, Hitler was in a hospital recovering from temporary blindness caused by a British gas attack in the Ypres Salient. In December 1918 he was released from the hospital.
Early politics - 1918-1933
Between December 1918 and March 1919 Hitler, still a corporal in the German army, was posted to a German prisoner-of-war camp at Traunstein before returning to Munich. Shortly after his return he witnessed a governmental takeover bid by local Communists, who seized power before being ousted by the army. After Hitler gave evidence about the takeover attempt in an investigation, he was asked to become part of a local army organization that was responsible for persuading returning soldiers not to turn to Communism or Pacifism. During his training for that task, and his subsequent military duties, he was able to hone his oratory skills.
Hitler's first love was a much younger niece, Angelika ("Geli") Raubal, who died of a gun-shot wound to the chest at the age of 23. Subsequent intimates included Eva Braun, a secret mistress; Magda Goebbles, a loyal follower; and Winifred Wagner, daughter-in-law of the famous German composer.
The Nazi Party
As part of his duties, Hitler also was asked to spy on certain local political groups, and during a meeting of the German Workers' Party, became so incensed by one of the speeches that he uncorked a fierce harangue at the speaker. The party's founder, Anion Drexler, was so impressed by Hitler's tirade that he asked him to join their organization. Hitler, after some thought, finally agreed in September 1919. He was eventually given responsibility for publicity and propaganda. His oratory succeeded in attracting larger and larger audiences and party donations. The party's name was changed to the National Socialist German Workers Party (NAZI) on April 1, 1920.
Hitler was discharged from the German army in February 1920. He continued to expand his influence in the party, and formed a private group of thugs that he used to quash disorder at party meetings, and later to break up rival parties' meetings. That group subsequently became the Sturmabteilung (SA) - Hitler's brown-shirted storm troopers. He also became the regular main speaker at party events and attracted large crowds at each meeting. Important Nazi Party members and Third Reich architechs, Heinrich Himmler, Hermann Goering and Rudolf Hess joined the party at this time.
During the summer of 1920, Hitler chose the swastika, an ancient symbol historically used by many cultures, to be the Nazi Party emblem. By 1921 he had secured virtually total control of the Nazi Party. During that time Hitler also plotted to overthrow the German Weimar Republic by force. On November 8, 1923, he led an attempt to take over the local Bavarian government in Munich, in an action that became known as the "Beer Hall Putsch."
The coup was ended after a brief gunfight with Munich police. Himmler, Goering and Hess also participated in the putsch. Hitler was arrested and charged with treason. He successfully used the subsequent trial to gain publicity for himself and his ideas. Following his trial, he was sentenced to five years in Landsberg prison, but served only six months.
During his prison term, Hitler began to dictate his thoughts and philosophy to co-conspirator and cellmate Rudolf Hess, which became the book Mein Kampf (My Struggle). It became the blueprint for Hitler's political plans. In Mein Kampf, he contended that Germans should expand east, liquidate the Jews and turn the Slavs into slave labor. Hitler blamed the Jews for Germany's political and economic problems.
While in jail, Hitler realized he would have to take control of Germany by legal means, not through revolution. He increased the size of the Nazi Party, even though the government had banned it. Hitler's Brown Shirts terrorized political opponents on the streets, which discouraged political competition. During that period, Hitler also created the infamous Schutzstaffel (SS), which was initially intended to be Hitler's bodyguard under the leadership of Himmler.
National politics - 1929-1934
The collapse of the American Wall St. stock exchange in October 1929 lent fuel to a worldwide depression, which had hit Germany especially hard. All loans to Germany from foreign countries dried up, German industrial production slumped, and millions became unemployed. Unemployment in Germany had reached 43 percent by the end of 1932.
Those conditions were fertile ground for Hitler and his Nazi campaign. The Nazis became the second largest party in Germany. Hitler also began to win over the support of both the army and the big industrialists, the latter contributing substantially to Nazi Party finances. Both groups hoped Hitler would return Germany to its former pre-World War I status and glory. He assured top army leaders that the Nazis would reject the punitive Versailles Treaty and rearm Germany.
Hitler versus Hindenburg - 1932 In February 1932 Hitler decided to run against President Paul von Hindenburg. No one won a required majority on March 13, 1932, so a required second election gave Hindenburg 53 percent and Hitler 36.8 percent (one other candidate ran). Thus Hindenburg was re-elected and Hitler was forced to wait for another opportunity to win power.
In the July 1932 elections, the Nazi Party won 13,745,000 votes, which gave them 230 out of the 608 seats in the Reichstag. Although the Nazis were the largest party, they were still short of a majority. Hitler, however, demanded of Hindenburg that he (Hitler) be made chancellor, but was offered only the position of vice-chancellor in a coalition government — which he refused. Hindenburg feared Hitler's potential for dictatorship.
Hitler's Third Reich began as he consolidated power. Through deft political manipulations by Hitler and his Nazi Party, President Hindenburg was forced to appoint Hitler as chancellor with Franz von Papen as vice-chancellor, on January 30, 1933.
The burning of the Reichstag
A February 1933 fire that burned the Reichstag building was blamed on a Communist. The incident was used by the Nazis to crack down on Communists in Germany. The "Enabling Act" of March 1933, passed by the Reichstag, gave Hitler legal dictatorial power for four years.
After July 14, 1933, only the Nazi party was legal. All non-Nazi organizations were disbanded. Individual German states were stripped of autonomous powers and Nazi officials were installed as state governors. Hitler outlawed strikes and abolished independent labor unions. Publishers, universities, and writers were brought into line by intimidation and rough tactics. Democratic, socialist, and Jewish literature was placed on blacklists. Students and professors burned forbidden books in public squares. Modern art and architecture were prohibited.
German withdrawal from the League of Nations
Hitler withdrew Germany from the League of Nations in 1933, while he secretly began to rearm the country. Italy's Fascist leader, Benito Mussolini, and others were concerned when Hitler withdrew from the Versailles Treaty. Understanding the danger, Italy, France and Britain protested strongly and agreed to use force against Germany to maintain the status quo.
A year later, however, Mussolini allied with Hitler to help fascists win in Spain during the Spanish Civil War (1936). Mussolini and Hitler used that conflict as a testing ground for their military forces: Italy's army and Germany's air force, the Luftwaffe.
The Night of the Long Knives - June 30, 1934
Violence-prone and socialist-leaning SA members envisioned becoming a new German revolutionary army. By wreaking havoc in the streets despite Hitler's order to lie low, the SA became an embarrassment to Hitler. Through the SS, under its chief, Heinrich Himmler, Hitler put down a small SA revolt in Berlin.
Hitler installed former SA leader, Ernst Röhm, as the new leader to reorganize and quiet the SA, whose numbers had grown to more than 60,000 members. The SA and its leadership would remain a problem for years for Hitler, culminating in a major crisis in the near future.
Hitler realized that the army and big business were suspicious of the SA (Brown Shirts). Hitler's SA was a purely political force, not a military one. Hitler needed the support of the German army if he was to be named as Hindenburg's successor. In May 1934, he struck a secret deal with the military chiefs to suppress the SA and increase support for the German military, in exchange for their support in his bid to succeed Hindenburg.
Pressure from Hindenburg and threats of a coup forced Hitler to order Himmler and Goering to eliminate the SA. On June 30, Hitler's elite personal guard, the SS, and the Gestapo arrested and shot - without a trial - about 1,000 SA leaders and other political enemies.
Hitler becomes führer
President Hindenburg died on August 2, 1934. Hitler had already agreed with the cabinet that, upon Hindenburg's death, the offices of president and chancellor would be combined. Hindenburg's last wish was that, upon his death, the monarchy be restored. Hitler managed to suppress that wish and did not publish the president's will.
Having already ensured the Army's support, Hitler went a step further by compelling all of the armed forces to swear an oath of loyalty to him personally. A plebiscite was then held for the public to decide on whether they approved of the changes already made — 90 percent of voters gave their approval. Thus Hitler had become führer and reich chancellor, and the title of president was abolished.
"Nazification" - 1934-1937
Joseph Goebbels, minister of propaganda, effectively glorified Hitler and the Nazi state. The SS grew in influence dramatically as Hitler's private army. The SS joined the political police, the Gestapo, to expand its network of special courts and concentration camps.
The Nuremburg Race Laws of 1935 deprived Jews of all rights of citizenship. By 1938, 25 percent of German Jews had emigrated. Other victims of persecution included Slavs, gypsies, Jehovah's Witnesses, Communists, homosexuals, mentally handicapped persons, and political opponents. The Nazis indoctrinated German youth. Children were encouraged to turn in teachers, or even their parents, if they seemed disloyal to the reich.
The German economic recovery contributed to Hitler's soaring popularity. He had delivered on his economic promise of "work and bread." Large public works programs started to pull Germany out of the depression. Programs included super highways (autobahn), office buildings, gigantic sports stadiums, and public housing. Government spending began to focus on the military with effective results. By 1938 the standard of living for the average employed worker increased moderately and business profits rose sharply.
The road to World War II
British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, swayed by pacifist feelings at home, adopted the policy of appeasement. Chamberlain returned to Britain from the 1938 Munich Conference a hero, proclaiming "peace in our time." The German invasion of Czechoslovakia during the spring of 1939 dismayed the double-crossed Chamberlain, who had stated that if Germany attacked Poland, there would be war in Europe.
To avoid a two-front war against France and Britain in the west and Russia in the east, Hitler signed the Nazi-Soviet Non-aggression Pact of August 1939. The world was shocked that two archenemies, Hitler and Stalin, would arrive at such an agreement.
Hitler sought assurances that the Soviet Union would not attack Germany if Germany invaded Poland. The public agreement was a non-aggression treaty; their private agreement was that Germany and the Soviet Union would invade Poland and split the country in half.
World War II was the main event of the 20th century. It was the largest, most destructive and costliest war in human history. Adolf Hitler was at the very core of the war. Hitler committed suicide in a bunker beneath the streets of Berlin in April 1945.
On May 8, 1945, Germany surrendered, ending the European part of the conflict. The results of the European war included approximately 57 million people dead; six million of them were Jews and others who perished in the genocidal Holocaust. Millions were left homeless and millions were refugees. Much of Europe lay in ruins.
It would require years to rebuild European economies. The American Marshall Plan committed more than $13 billion to rebuild Europe. The U.S. and Soviet Union emerged as the two dominant powers in the post-war world.
Adolf Hitler Biography
Marrin, Albert. Hitler. New York: Viking Kestrel, 1987. Toland, John. Adolf Hitler. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976. Zitelmann, Rainier. Hitler: The Policies of Seduction. London: London House, 1999. User Contributions: Comment abAdolf Hitler. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976. Zitelmann, Rainier. Hitler: The Policies of Seduction. London: London House, 1999. User Contributions: Comment about this ...
Adolf Hitler's Last Will
Thus ended the six years of Hitler's War ... Adolf Hitler had founded the Third Reich 12 years and three months before. His Nazi Regime led to the annihilation of more than six million Jews in Europe. The Third Reich would survive himAdolf Hitler had founded the Third Reich 12 years and three months before. His Nazi Regime led to the annihilation of more than six million Jews in Europe. The Third Reich would survive him for one ...
First World War.com - Who's Who - Adolf Hitler
Who's Who: Adolf Hitler Updated - Saturday, 5 June, 2004 Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) was born on April 20, 1889, the fourth child of Alois Schickelgruber and Klara Hitler in the Austrian town of Braunau. Two of his siblings died from diAdolf Hitler Updated - Saturday, 5 June, 2004 Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) was born on April 20, 1889, the fourth child of Alois Schickelgruber and Klara Hitler in the Austrian town of Braunau. Two of his siblings died from diAdolf Hitler (1889-1945) was born on April 20, 1889, the fourth child of Alois Schickelgruber and Klara Hitler in the Austrian town of Braunau. Two of his siblings died from diphtheria ...

By Show and Tell
By Byron Graham
By Jamie Siebrase
By Bree Davies
By Zoe Yabrove
By Zoe Yabrove
By Jamie Siebrase
By Emilie Johnson
Between the First World War and the 1930s, the United States experienced an internal population shift unprecedented in its history. More than 1 million rural blacks left their sharecropper farms in the South and came north in search of factory jobs and better living conditions in the industrialized urban centers of the East and the Midwest.
Not even the great westward expansion of the late nineteenth century took place on this scale. Yet, unlike the way west, which has spawned entire genres in literature, film and the fine arts, the way north has barely been talked about. It did, however, inspire at least one artist: Jacob Lawrence. In the early 1940s he painted a group of sixty closely interrelated panels immortalizing this tremendous movement of people. The resulting mammoth painting cycle is the subject of Jacob Lawrence: The Migration Series, now on display at the Denver Art Museum.
The traveling show was organized by Elizabeth Hutton Turner, an associate curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington, D.C., which has been the repository of thirty of the Lawrence paintings since soon after they were presented in 1941. The remaining thirty were acquired at the same time by New York's Museum of Modern Art. The current exhibit marks the first time in more than fifty years that all sixty paintings have been shown together.
Lawrence, who now lives in Seattle, was not a southern migrant himself. "I had never even been to the South until the series had been completed," he said during a recent visit to Denver. But he was familiar with the subject. "My father was from North Carolina, my mother from Virginia," he told the crowd at a reception held to mark the opening of the new show. "Thus I had Southern mores."
Born in Atlantic City, Lawrence moved from Pennsylvania to New York's Harlem as a teenager in 1930. Harlem was then the center of black culture in America, and the Harlem Renaissance was in full swing. Lawrence blossomed in this environment. "Harlem was vital at the time," he recalled. "You could hear the great writers talk. The influence of Harlem remains with me sixty years later."
But it was also the time of the Great Depression, which had a profound effect on the art world. "Most galleries were forced to close," said Lawrence. Yet the artist called the 1930s "one of the most creative periods of the century." What made the difference, he said, were New Deal programs such as the Works Progress Administration and the Fine Arts Project.
In 1935, when Lawrence was only eighteen, he was hired by the FAP to produce two paintings every six weeks for $23 per week--"which was good money." He remained with the FAP until 1940. (Lawrence feels that federal support for the arts at the time was essential to his career, and imminent budget cuts at the National Endowment for the Arts are heavy on his mind. "Many of the WPA murals were covered later because they were deemed pornographic or too political," he said. "Times repeat themselves.")
Lawrence was recruited into the FAP by the noted African-American sculptor Augusta Savage. Her decision to lend him support was "the highlight of my life," Lawrence said. But Savage's traditional three-dimensional sculptures had no discernable effect on Lawrence's painting and printmaking. Instead, Lawrence embraced Modernism. And though he claims that "feelings were more important than art influences" in providing him with inspiration, it's impossible not to see his work as being totally of its time, closely related to the work of other now-famous artists then working in New York.
The Migration Series was intended to depict the struggles of the oppressed--a concept then being broadly embraced by many artists. The idea that art can be used to tell a story was another mainstream idea. Taking advantage of the resources of Harlem's Schomburg Center for Black Research, Lawrence devoted weeks to researching the Great Migration. But in retrospect, he said at the reception, the research he did wasn't nearly as important a factor as the people he met. "It was the Harlem community--teachers and librarians," he said, who ultimately provided the concept for the series.
Lawrence was doubtless affected by Haitian painting and folk art, two of the many aspects of black culture he researched at the Schomburg. However, the draw of the almost exclusively white art world centered in Greenwich Village also shaped his approach. Specific stylistic affinities can be seen in Lawrence's paintings and contemporaneous works by older and more established white artists like Milton Avery, Stuart Davis and Ben Shahn. Like those Modern artists' works, Lawrence's paintings are characterized by compositional simplicity, a strong graphic sense in the design of the pictures and the use of bright colors employed against dark ones. He was surely aware of the work of the other Moderns, since he, like Davis and Shahn, was represented by Edith Halpert's Downtown Gallery.
Significantly, Lawrence's relationship with the Downtown Gallery, where The Migration Series was first shown, marked the end of segregation in the art world. Even before his teachers, Lawrence became one of the first African-American artists to be represented by a commercial gallery. Previously, only public institutions provided blacks with exhibition opportunities.
The sixty individual paintings in The Migration Series, each one numbered, are all the same small size--eighteen by twelve inches, still an art-supply-shop standard. Some are vertically oriented, some horizontally, an arrangement that creates visual interest without sacrificing unity--which is particularly important, since Lawrence saw them "not as individual panels but as a single work of art." In fact, Lawrence says he was so committed to the series' "oneness" that he "worked the colors," painting the black portions of all sixty panels, then the yellow portions, and so on until the series was complete.
In addition to the paintings in The Migration Series, another historical exhibit meant to connect us with Lawrence and his time is presented in an adjacent gallery. There are some problems with this presentation, not the least of which is that it includes a reproduction of one of the panels in an elephantine enlargement. I think it's the first time I've ever seen a reproduction in an art museum. What were the out-of-town organizers thinking?
Another, better exhibit that also complements the Lawrence show is The Narratives Continue, which features work by black artists from the permanent collection of DAM's Modern and Contemporary department. A real standout here is the masterful 1963 painting "The Procession," by an African-American in Paris named Bob Thompson. The painting reveals a debt to Lawrence's work, particularly The Migration Series. Later this fall the show promises a rare sighting of Floyd Tunson's very different "Before and After," a mural-sized acrylic painting. Unfortunately, Tunson's from Colorado--the reason, apparently, why he's forced to time-share gallery space at the museum.

|Quarter of Berlin|
|Quarter subdivisions||13 zones|
|Area||10.7 km2 (4.1 sq mi)|
|Elevation||52 m (171 ft)|
|Population||79,582 (30 June 2009)|
|- Density||7,438 /km2 (19,263 /sq mi)|
|Time zone||CET/CEST (UTC+1/+2)|
|Postal codes||(nr. 0101) 10115, 10117, 10119, 10178, 10179|
Mitte (German for "middle, centre", commonly used without an article) is a central locality (Ortsteil) of Berlin in the homonymous district (Bezirk) of Mitte. Until 2001 it was itself an autonomous district.
It comprises the historic centre of Alt-Berlin around the churches of St. Nicholas and St. Mary, the city hall Rotes Rathaus, the city administrative building Altes Stadthaus and numerous main tourist attractions of the city. For these reasons Mitte is considered the "heart" of Berlin.
The history of Mitte corresponds to the history of the entire city until the early 20th century, and with the Greater Berlin Act in 1920 it became the first district of the city. It was among the areas of the city most heavily damaged in World War II.
Following a territorial redeployment by the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom that reshaped the borders of West Berlin's British Sector in August 1945, the western part of Staaken became in effect as of 1 February 1951 an exclave of Mitte, then still a borough of East Berlin. This ended on January 1, 1961, when western Staaken was incorporated into then East German Falkensee, which had already been under its de facto administration since June 1, 1952.
Between 1961 and 1990 Mitte, one of the most important boroughs of East Berlin but close to all three western sectors of the city, was almost surrounded by the Berlin Wall. One of the most important border crossings was Checkpoint Charlie, near Kreuzberg.
Situated in central Berlin and mostly in its old town, it is traversed by the river Spree. It borders the localities of Tiergarten, Moabit, Wedding, Gesundbrunnen, Prenzlauer Berg (in Pankow district), Friedrichshain, and Kreuzberg (both in Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg district).
Mitte is subdivided into 13 zones or neighborhoods (Stadtviertel) (the numbers refer to the map above right):
- Cölln (1)
- Alt-Berlin (2)
- Nikolaiviertel (2a)
- Friedrichswerder (3)
- Neukölln am Wasser (4)
- Dorotheenstadt (5)
- Friedrichstadt (6)
- Luisenstadt (7)
- Stralauer Vorstadt (8)
- Alexanderplatz (9)
- Spandauer Vorstadt (10)
- Scheunenviertel (10a)
- Friedrich-Wilhelm-Stadt (11)
- Oranienburger Vorstadt (12)
- Rosenthaler Vorstadt (13)
Sister cities 
Main sights 
Buildings and structures 
Places, squares and streets 
See also 
- Berlin Alexanderplatz railway station
- Berlin Friedrichstrasse railway station
- Berlin Potsdamer Platz railway station
- (German) Historical infos about Mitte
Media related to Mitte at Wikimedia Commons

Evergreen, Shrubs, Trees
Conifers ranging from rock garden shrublets to timber trees. Sometimes mistaken for arborvitae (Thuja), but arborvitae’s leaves are entirely green, while false cypresses have white lines on leaf undersides. Most have two distinct types of foliage: juvenile and mature. Juvenile leaves are short, needlelike, soft but often prickly; they appear on young plants and some new growth of larger trees. Mature foliage consists of tiny, scalelike, overlapping leaves. Cones are small and round.
All of the many varieties sold are forms of five species’two from western U.S., two from Japan, one from eastern U.S. New varieties appear each year, while older ones lose market share. Mislabeling is common, since many of these plants closely resemble one another. Numerous dwarf and variegated kinds are available, providing a rich array of choices for bonsai and rock gardens.
Pinch out or cut back tips of new growth to control size and shape; don’t cut back into old, leafless wood. All types, including trees, can be sheared into hedges. All need good drainage and protection from wind.
Pyramidal, 60-ft.-tall Western timber tree with lacy, drooping foliage. Species is seldom seen in gardens, but its varieties are used there.Chamaecyparis obtusa
Native to Japan. The species grows 30 ft. tall, but most Hinoki cypresses are selected varieties. There are dozens of golden, dwarf, and fern-leafed forms.Chamaecyparis pisifera
Japanese native to 20–30 ft., rarely seen except in its garden varieties.
Native from Arizona to Texasand Mexico. To 4–10 ft. tall and3–8 ft. wide. Narrow leaflets.Blooms from ...
Close relatives of coleus; native to many tropical regions of the world. They have square stems, oppos...
Native from western Mediterranean to central Asia. Golden yellow, 1/2-in. flowers, one on each 6- to 9...

- United Kingdom
More informationWhat keeps you awake at night? Money worries? Your conscience? Traffic? Dogs barking? Or the shrill sound of a stressed robin forced to sing at night to find a mate?
This composed feature by Nina Perry explores the problem of sleeplessness and the crucial relationship between sound and sleep, all set within a soundscape of noises heard during a sleepless night interwoven with specially composed music.
Tinnitus sufferer Helen takes us on a journey through a sleepless night of thought and sounds of ticking clocks, snoring, a restless child, mysterious footsteps and a neighbour's late night party. How are these sounds perceived in a state of sleeplessness? How do we respond to sound emotionally, physiologically and hormonally. Are the sounds of the night changing? Are silent nights a thing of the past?
Answering these questions and elucidating the relationship between sound and sleep are: Professor of Acoustics and Dynamics Andy Moorhouse and Senior Lecturer in Acoustics Bill Davies, from Salford University; David Baguley, Head of Audiology at Cambridge University Hospitals, who discusses sound perception, the meaning of sound and the reaction to sound as elements within Tinnitus treatment; Dr Ken Hume, a sleep researcher specializing in sound and sleep, discussing the physiology and psychology of sleep and sound disturbance; and Rupert Marshall, Lecturer in Animal Behaviour at Aberystwyth University, describing how urban wildlife is changing its behaviour to cope with modern life (for example, robins nesting in urban areas who struggle to be heard during the day are more likely to sing at night than their country cousins).
Producer: Nina Perry
A White Pebble Media production for BBC Radio 4.

This book is written with the intention of exposing the traditional knowledge, skills and livelihood adaptation strategies employed by the Pastoralists and Agro-pastoralist Communities to curve the climate variability situations in Jigjiga District Somali Regional State, Ethiopia. Moreover, in this volume some key issues and areas of concerns about Adaptation to Climate Variability among the pastoralist and agro-pastoralists has been dealt with wider array of livelihood adaptation strategies in the light of Sustainable Livelihood framework approach to combat climate variability in the study area. Furthermore, this book provides numerous examples and incorporated very useful recommendations throughout, while skillfully indicating the systematic ways by which environmental resources and other livelihood assets are utilized and properly managed. Thus, adapting to climate variability in particular and climate changes in general seeks global thinking and local actions whereby saving our planet from easily torn by the changing climate. "Let's Save our Planet by Planting Trees and hence Creating Corbon Free World for ourselves and the coming generation."

Phage T4 is a large DNA virus that infects and multiplies in the bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) and certain other bacteria that normally inhabit the mammalian gut. Relatives of T4 are widely distributed in nature and propagate in a variety of bacterial species in marine and terrestrial environments. The genomes of these phages encode an enormous biochemical complexity that rival the complexity exhibited by the much larger genomes of their bacterial hosts. Collectively, T4 and its relatives have proven to be powerful systems for research into the genetic and biochemical mechanisms that control the replication, expression and evolution of DNA genomes as well as viral assembly. This book contains a collection of review articles covering research in these areas over the last 20 years. The articles appeared online as a thematic series in 2010 in BioMed Central's Virology Journal. They are reprinted here in hardcopy as a convenient source of the most current reviewed information on this family of phages for instructors and trainees in the microbial and molecular biological sciences.

Home > Works & Ministries > World Map
The word “mission” comes from the Latin mittere or “to send”.
In Marguerite’s time, to go on mission meant, for a Sister of the Congregation, to be sent to work outside the Mother House in Montreal. By extension, all these other houses came to be called “missions”. At first, the community generally would accept the responsibility for the establishment of a new mission and select who was to be sent, always in response to an invitation or request. Later, major superiors decided where new missions would open and named the Sisters who would go there. The Sisters received “nominations” telling them where they were “sent.”
For over three centuries, the Sisters have been engaged in carrying on the mission of Marguerite Bourgeoys, who crossed the ocean to take part in the development of a fledgling colony, which would embody the ideal of the first Christian community. Already during Marguerite’s lifetime, the work begun in Ville-Marie expended further and further, in response to the needs of the people and the pressing requests of the priests and bishops. Gradually, the Church asked that the Congrégation de Notre-Dame be present in Ontario, in the Maritime Provinces and in the United States. Later, the Sisters widened their field of action even more to work in Japan, Central America, Africa and France.
This is how we come to find today Sisters and Associates of the CND, inspired by the charism of their foundress, living and working in the four corners of the world.
Canada and the Congregation : A Shared History
United States: First Mission Country
Japan: Catholic Faith in the Land of the Rising Sun
The CND in Central America: a Growing Community
Cameroon: We are Together!
Following Marguerite’s Footsteps in France

There are several
topologies suitable for the access network: tree, ring, or bus. A PON can also
be deployed in redundant configuration as double ring or doubletree; or redundancy
may be added only to a part of the PON, say the trunk of the tree. For the rest
of this article, we will focus our attention on the tree topology; however, most
of the conclusions made are equally relevant to other topologies
transmissions in a PON are performed between Optical Line Terminal (OLT) and Optical
Network Units (ONU). Therefore, in the downstream direction (from OLT to ONUs),
a PON is a point-to-multipoint network, and in the upstream direction it is a
multipoint-to-point network. The OLT resides in the local exchange (central office),
connecting the optical access network to an IP, ATM, or SONET backbone. The ONU
is located either at the curb (FTTC solution), or at the end-user location (FTTH,
FTTB solutions), and provides broadband voice, data, and video services. In the
downstream direction, a PON is a P2MP network, and in the upstream direction it
is a MP2P network.
The advantages of using
PONs in subscriber access networks are numerous.
1. PONs allow for long reach
between central offices and customer premises, operating at distances over 20km.
PONs minimizes fiber deployment in both the local exchange office and local loop.
PONs provides higher bandwidth due to deeper fiber penetration, offering gigabit
per second solutions.
4. Operating in the downstream as a broadcast network,
PONs allow for video broadcasting as either IP video or analog video using a separate
5. PONs eliminate the necessity to install active multiplexer
at splitting locations thus relieving network operators
6. Being optically
transparent end to end PONs allow upgrades to higher bit rates or additional wavelengths.
One possible way of separating the channels is to use wavelength
division multiplexing (WDM) in which each ONU operates at a different wavelength.
While a simple solution, it remains cost prohibitive for an access network.
WDM solution would require either tunable receiver or a receiver array at the
OLT to receive multiple channels. An even more serious problem for network operators
would be wavelength-specific ONU inventory instead of having just one type of
ONU, there would be multiple types of ONUs based on their laser wavelength .It
would also be more problematic for an unqualified user to replace a defective
ONU. Using tunable lasers in ONUs is too expensive at the current state of technology.
For these reasons a WDM PON network is not an attractive solution in today's environment.
You may also like this : EDGE, Holographic Data Storage , Integer Fast Fourier Transform, NRAM, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplplexing , Ovonic Unified Memory, 4G Wireless Systems , Daknet, AC Performance Of Nanoelectronics , High Performance DSP Architectures, Millipede , Free Space Laser Communications, Short Message Service (SMS), Conditional Access System , SyncML, Virtual keyboard, High Altitude Aeronautical Platforms, MANET , Smart Fabrics, Dynamic Virtual Private Network, Blue Tooth, Autonomic Computing , Voice Over Internet Protocol, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) , DNA Based Computing, Digital Subscriber Line , Freenet, Access gateways , Free Space Optics, Introduction to the Internet Protocols, High Altitude Aeronautical Platforms, Fiber Distributed Data Interface , Hyper-Threading technology , IMode, Cyberterrorism Adding Intelligence to Internet, Self-Managing Computing, Unified Modeling Language (UML), Socket Programming, SAM, VoCable , ATM with an Eye,Mind Reading Computer, Blue Brain, 6G Wireless, Touch Screens,IT Seminar Reports, PPT and PDF.

Note: This message is displayed if (1) your browser is not standards-compliant or (2) you have you disabled CSS. Read our Policies for more information.
Question: What is the easiest, best way to keep from getting sick from food?
Answer: It’s so simple it might surprise you! The answer is handwashing.
Hans B. Kleen has lots of helpful hints and information to help you remember how and when it’s important to wash your hands.
Bacteria and viruses are tiny, one-celled living organisms. Just like people, bacteria need water, food, and air to breathe in order to stay alive and to multiply. Viruses do not need food or water, but they do need a host – another living creature – to live and multiply. These organisms are microscopic, meaning you can’t see them without a microscope. You can’t see, smell or taste them in your food.
Your body normally is covered with millions of bacteria every day. Most of these bacteria are harmless, but some can make you very sick. Our hands are usually one of the germiest parts of our bodies, because they touch lots of things every day. Think about the things that you have touched in the last hour, that might have a lot of germs (or bacteria) on them. Some examples might be a telephone, a doorknob, a computer keyboard, a toilet handle, a pet, a trashcan or even your own mouth. When you touch a surface that has many bacteria or viruses, you can transfer them to your mouth while eating, drinking, coughing or just touching your face. Some of these germs can make you pretty sick!
Hans B. Kleen knows how to keep himself from getting sick from food – that’s called a foodborne illness. He knows that washing his hands at the right times will get rid of most of the bad bacteria and viruses that cause illness. Below, he has listed some of the most important times to wash his hands.
After using the restroom
Before touching any food
Before cooking or making a snack
After coughing, sneezing or blowing his nose
After feeding or playing with his pet, or after cleaning a pet’s cage or litter box
After taking out the trash
After changing a baby’s diaper
After helping his parents with housecleaning chores
After playing outside
Any time his hands look or feel dirty
Do you think you are a good handwasher? Hans can give you some tips on the best way to wash your hands. Read the list below, and see if you wash your hands as well as you should.
Wet your hands first with warm water?
Use about a ½ teaspoon of soap?
Scrub your hands for 20 seconds?
Rinse your hands completely?
Dry them off with a paper towel?
Use the towel to turn off the water faucet?If you follow all these steps when you wash your hands, congratulations!
You are a good handwasher.
Here’s a little trick you can use to remember how long to scrub:
Sing the "happy birthday" song two times in a row. This equals about 20 seconds.

The Integral Trees
|The Integral Trees|
Cover of first edition (hardcover)
|Genre(s)||Science fiction novel|
|Media type||Print (Hardback & Paperback)|
|Dewey Decimal||813/.54 19|
|LC Classification||PS3564.I9 I54 1984|
|Preceded by||A World Out of Time|
|Followed by||The Smoke Ring|
The Integral Trees is a 1984 science fiction novel by Larry Niven (first published as a serial in Analog in 1983). Like much of Niven's work, the story is heavily influenced by the setting: a gas torus, a ring of air around a neutron star. Its sequel is The Smoke Ring.
The story is set at the fictional neutron star Levoy's Star (abbreviated "Voy"). The gas giant Goldblatt's World (abbreviated "Gold") orbits this star just outside its Roche limit. Thus, Gold's gravity is insufficient to hold its atmosphere, which is pulled loose into an independent orbit around Voy. This orbiting air forms a ring known as the Gas Torus. The Gas Torus is huge—one million kilometers thick—but most of it is too thin to be habitable. The central part of the Gas Torus, where the air is thicker, is known as the Smoke Ring. The Smoke Ring supports a wide variety of life.
There is no "ground" in the Smoke Ring; it is a world consisting entirely of sky. Thus, most animals can fly, even the fish. Furthermore, since the Smoke Ring is in orbit, it is in free fall. There is no "up" or "down". Most animals have trilateral symmetry, allowing them to see in all directions.
Most plants in the Smoke Ring are quite fragile, as they do not have to support their own weight. A notable exception to this rule are the eponymous Integral Trees. These are trees that are up to 100 kilometers long. Tidal locking causes them to be oriented radially, with one end pointing in toward Voy and one end pointing out. The ends of the tree feel a tidal force of up to 1/5 g. Each end consists of a leafy "tuft", which is where photosynthesis occurs. Compared to trees on Earth, the tufts are both canopy and roots.
Each tuft of a tree is up to 50 kilometers from the tree's center of mass. Thus, a tuft is either orbiting too slowly (the "in" tuft) or too quickly (the "out" tuft), compared to the atmosphere, which is in orbit at all points. The ends of the tree are subject to a constant hurricane-force wind. This wind bends the ends into the shape of an integral symbol: ∫. The trees are "fed" by the constant inflow of materials to their tufts caused by water and food being blown into the tufts, or alternately onto the trunk, where the gravity-like tidal forces pull the material out towards the tufts.
The Smoke Ring was colonized 500 years prior to the beginning of the story by a crew of 20 astronauts on board an interstellar "ramship". Their descendants have adapted to the free-fall environment by growing taller and developing prehensile toes. Small numbers of devices from the original crew are coveted items in the Smoke Ring society.
Plot summary 
Plot setup 
Quinn Tribe inhabits the "in tuft" of Dalton-Quinn tree. They normally subsist on the tree's cottony foliage, augmented by hunting and a flock of domesticated turkeys. But ever since the tree passed near Gold six earth years ago it has been falling in toward Voy, nearly dropping out of the Smoke Ring. As a result, the tribe is suffering from a severe drought. The tribe's leader, the Chairman, decides to send a party of nine up the tree, ostensibly to hunt and re-cut tribal markings into the trunk. The group consists mostly of cripples or people the Chairman dislikes, and including the Chairman's son-in-law (and rival), Clave, and Jeffer, the Scientist's apprentice.
Plot conflict 
As they approach the midpoint they notice that the tribal markings are different. When the party reaches the midpoint of the tree, they are attacked by members of the Dalton-Quinn tribe living at the other end of the tree. During the battle a massive tremor splits the tree in half, causing the in tuft to fall farther in toward Voy (killing its inhabitants) allowing the out tuft to find a new equilibrium closer to the Smoke Ring's median. The seven surviving members of the Quinn Tribe and one of the attackers jump clear of the shattered tree, and are left adrift in the sky with only a few "jet pods" (high pressure seed cases that provide a temporary thrust when opened) as their only method of propulsion.
Before dying of thirst, they manage to hook a passing "moby" (a flying whale-like creature), which takes them to a "jungle", a floating mass of plant life. They cut loose and crash, and find themselves in the middle of a battle between the Carther States, who live in the jungle, and slave-runners from London Tree. The group is split when six of them are captured by the slavers; the other two remain in the jungle.
Plot resolution 
Carther States counter-attacks some weeks later, and the Quinn Tribe group is reunited. During the battle they manage to steal the London Tree's CARM (Cargo And Repair Module), a miniature spacecraft, a relic of the original settlers. Not fully understanding how to pilot the CARM, they engage its main motor, which sends them thousands of miles away before running out of fuel. As a result, they become the first Smoke Ring inhabitants in centuries to see the naked stars.
Unknown to any of the inhabitants of the Smoke Ring, the ship their ancestors arrived in, Discipline, is still in orbit, and its AI autopilot, Kendy, is watching their progress. When Kendy sees the CARM dangerously far from the habitable area of the Ring he contacts them. With help from the on-board computer and after some interaction with Kendy, the occupants of the CARM eventually find their way safely back into the Smoke Ring. Unable to find their way back to any of the trees they know, they decide to settle on a new tree, which they dub Citizens Tree.
Awards and nominations 
The Integral Trees won the 1985 Locus Award for Science Fiction novel
The Integral Trees was a nominee for the following awards
- 1985 Hugo Award for Best Novel
- 1985 Nebula Award for Best Novel
- 1985 Science Fiction Chronicle Reader Awards
- "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1985 Locus Awards". Retrieved 2008-05-15.
- "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1985 Science Fiction Chronicle Reader Awards". Retrieved 2008-05-15.

As Internet Protocol (IP)-based networks are increasingly deployed, packet-based applications such as voice over IP (VoIP), IP video, video telephony (VT), integrated voice and email, and instant messaging (IM), have emerged. The ability to integrate these services over the same network has become more important as customers appreciate and demand the bundling of multiple services. Many of these services benefit from session based connections between communicating network devices. For example, rather than having each data transmission between two devices be considered independent from each other, a series of data transmissions may be logically grouped together as a session. As session based traffic increases in the network, the problems of how to provide redundancy and load balancing among a cluster of session handling servers have to be addressed.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS
FIG. 1 a is a diagram of an exemplary system for implementing a congestion control method;
FIG. 1b is a system diagram of an exemplary upstream network device;
FIG. 2a is a representation of server and cluster capacities;
FIG. 2b is a representation of server and cluster capacities in the event of a server failure;
FIG. 3 is a flowchart depicting exemplary steps and decisions related to a process for managing congestion control and server redundancy;
FIG. 4 is a flowchart depicting exemplary steps and decisions related to a process for updating server utilization factors; and
FIG. 5 is a flowchart depicting exemplary steps and decisions related to a process for scheduling packet data traffic to servers in the cluster.
Exemplary illustrations of a congestion control method for session based network traffic are described below. In the interest of clarity, not all features of an actual implementation are described in this specification. It will of course be appreciated that in the development of any such actual illustration, numerous implementation-specific decisions must be made to achieve the specific goals of the developer, such as compliance with system-related and business-related constraints that will vary from one implementation to another. Moreover, it will be appreciated that such a development effort might be complex and time-consuming, but would nevertheless be a routine undertaking for those having the benefit of this disclosure.
Referring now to the drawings wherein like numerals indicate like or corresponding parts throughout the several views, exemplary illustrations are provided.
FIG. 1a illustrates a system 100 for use with a congestion control method for session based network traffic. Details of the elements depicted in the figures are included following a brief functional overview of the system 100 and method. Packetized data on a packet data network 105 may be transmitted to and from any of a number of interconnected network devices. For example, end user devices such as a Personal Computer (PC) 110, a mobile phone 115, a television 120 via a set-top-box 125, etc., may be the recipient or initiator of data traffic over the packet network 105. Servers 130a-c may receive and process data traffic from the end user devices. Moreover, the servers 130a-c may provide responsive data traffic to the end user devices. When multiple servers 130a-c collectively handle the same type of requests and data traffic, they may be arranged into a cluster 135.
When arranged as the cluster 135, additional measures may need to be implemented to ensure that the servers 130 are utilized in a suitable manner. For example, it may be desirable to have similarly situated servers 130 handle corresponding amounts of data. Accordingly, a load-balancing scheme may be implemented to assign certain amounts of data processing to particular servers 130 of the cluster. Additionally, certain amounts of the data processing capacities of the servers 130 may need to be reserved for redundancy. A redundancy scheme may allow the cluster 135 to maintain normal operations even with a failure of one of the servers 130.
By focusing on the capacity of each server to process data as well as on the amount of data actually processed by each server 130, a single cluster manager may be able to implement both redundancy planning and load-balancing schemes. A router 140, or any other network device acting as the cluster manager, may have the responsibility of tracking the amount of data actually processed by each server 130 and scheduling new data traffic to a particular server. Accordingly, the router 140 may provide a congestion control module 145 to implement the redundancy planning and load-balancing schemes.
The packet network 105 may be a packet switched communication network such as an Internet Protocol (IP) network. The packet network 105 generally interconnects various computing devices and the like through a common communication protocol, e.g. the Internet Protocol. Interconnections in and with the packet network 105 may be made by various media including wires, radio frequency transmissions, and optical cables. Other devices connecting to and included with the packet network 105, e.g., switches, routers, etc., are omitted for simplicity of illustration in FIG. 1. The packet network 105 may interface with an IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS), which integrates voice, video, and data communications on the same network infrastructure.
The PC 110, mobile phone 115, and television 120 by way of a set-top-box 125 merely represent three of many possible network devices capable of connecting to the cluster 135 for session based data processing. Each of these devices has computer software including an implementation of the network protocol needed to communicate over the packet network 105. Additionally, the devices may also implement higher level protocols to interface with the session handling facilities of the servers 130. For example, the mobile phone 115 may include instructions for conducting a voice communication based session over the packet network 105. Likewise, the set-top-box 125 may include instructions for conducting a video based session over the packet network 105.
The servers 130 of the cluster 135 generally provide session handling capabilities. For example, they may be able to initiate a session based on a request from one of the network devices 110, 115, 125, etc., process data during the session, and terminate the session as necessary. Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is a signaling protocol for initiating, managing and terminating application sessions in IP networks, and provides a mechanism to allow voice, video, and data to be integrated over the same network. Accordingly, the servers 130 may implement SIP for session handling.
The router 140 may interconnect one or more computing devices, e.g., servers 130, to the packet network 105. Moreover, the router 108 may establish and operate a local area network (LAN) for the servers 130, and may route certain communications thereof. For example the computing devices 110 may be connected to the router 108 using a wireless connection, a network cable such as a “Cat5” cable, or the like.
The router 140 may further act as the cluster manager of the cluster 135. The cluster manager may be an upstream network device to the cluster 135 such as a device positioned between the cluster and the packet network 105. However, in another exemplary approach, one of the servers, e.g., 130a, may be designated as the cluster manager. In such an approach, the designated server 130a may be considered upstream in that it acts as a gateway of the cluster 135 for incoming network traffic.
The congestion control module 145 may include computer instructions for implementing redundancy and load balancing schemes. The congestion control module will be provided by the device acting as the cluster manager, e.g., the router 140 as depicted in the exemplary approach of FIG. 1. As will be discussed in detail below, the congestion control module 145 may continuously schedule incoming traffic to particular servers 130, calculate utilization rates of the servers, monitor the cluster 135 for server failures, and update redundancy factors based on the state of the cluster. Positioning the congestion control module 145 upstream from the servers 130 may allow for the estimation of current utilization rates of the servers. Estimating utilization rates by the congestion control module 145 may eliminate time consuming bi-direction communication between the servers 130 and router 140 to determine the actual current utilization rates.
FIG. 1b illustrates the elements of an exemplary upstream network device, such as the router 140. As illustrated, the router 140 may include elements for guaranteeing the quality of service for different classifications of data. For example, the incoming packet data 155 may first encounter a classifier 160. The classifier 160 may inspect the header of the packet data 155 to identify the proper classification. A marker 165 may write, or rewrite, a portion of the packet header to more clearly identify the determined classification. For example, the marker 165 may write to the Differentiated Service Code Point (DSCP) field of the header.
A meter 170 may track the amount of incoming data 155 processed by the router 140. Moreover, the meter 170 may track the amount of data 155 for each classification. A policer/shaper 175 may use the tracked amounts from the meter 170 to enforce particular traffic routing polices, e.g., quality of service guarantees, service level agreements, etc. To enforce a policy, the policer/shaper 175 may drop packets if the tracked amount of data 155 exceeds the service level agreement. Additionally, the policer/shaper 175 may buffer or delay traffic that fails to conform to policy being enforced. A scheduler 180 has the responsibility of deciding which packets to forward to the cluster 135 for data processing. The scheduler typically bases its decision on the priority levels of the data as well as on the service level agreements. However, the scheduler 180 may be further influenced by the congestion control module 145. In one exemplary approach, the congestion control module 145 may be integrated into the scheduler 180. However, in another exemplary approach, the congestion control module 145 may be distinct from the scheduler 180 while still providing input thereto.
FIG. 2a illustrates a representation 200 of server and cluster capacities during normal operation. Each server 130 may have an actual capacity 205, which represents the normal or default ability of a server to process data. As depicted, each server 130 has the same actual capacity 205a-d. However, in another exemplary approach, servers 130 with different actual capacities may be part of the same cluster 135.
The actual capacity 205 may be artificially limited or reduced to an available capacity 210. The reduction of the actual capacity 205 provides redundant capacity 215 that is reserved for periods in which there is a server failure. The reduction of the actual capacity 205 of each server 130 may differ. Accordingly, a respective redundancy factor, ri, i=1, 2, . . . , n, where 0≦ri≦1, may be established for each server 130. The redundancy factor ri states the amount of redundant capacity as a fraction or percentage of the actual capacity 205. Accordingly, the available capacity 210a for each server 130 will be expressed as (Actual Capacity*(1−ri)), while the redundant capacity 215 will be expressed as (Actual Capacity*ri)
If ri=0, it is assumed that the server 130 is expected to have an available capacity 210 equal to the actual capacity 205. Accordingly, any server with a redundancy factor of zero (ri=0) will not provide any redundancy to the cluster 135. On the other hand, if ri=1, then the server will limit its entire actual capacity 205 for redundant capacity 215. Moreover, any server with a redundancy factor of one (ri=1) will not handle any data processing requests unless there has been a failure of another server in the cluster 135. In general, higher redundancy factor values limit larger amounts of actual capacity 205 for redundancy capacity 215.
The available capacity 210 may be used to handle data processing sessions from remote devices. A current usage 220a-d of each server reflects the amount of the available capacity 210 that is currently being used to handle data processing sessions. The current usage 220 will typically fluctuate as the server 130 receives new sessions and completes others. Moreover, the data processing demands on the server 130 may vary throughout a session. The router 140, or equivalent cluster manager, may determine which server 130 should handle newly received packet data. As will be discussed in detail with respect to FIG. 4, a utilization factor may be defined as the ratio of the estimate of current usage 200 over the available capacity 210. In one exemplary approach, the router 140 may implement packet data scheduling decisions by directing incoming traffic to the server meeting at least one threshold criterion. In one illustrative approach the criterion includes a consideration of utilization factor and in another approach the criterion is the lowest utilization factor.
Because the servers 130 act together as a cluster 135, the sum of the actual capacity 205 of each server defines an actual cluster capacity 240. Similarly, the sum of the available capacities 210 of each server defines an available cluster capacity 250. The sum of the redundant capacities 215 of each server defines a cluster redundant capacity 255. The actual cluster capacity 240 will remain constant so long as there are no server failures in the cluster 135. Likewise, the available cluster capacity 250 and the cluster redundant capacity 255 will remain constant so long as there are no changes to the any of the redundancy factors (ri). However, a cluster usage 260 will fluctuate as the sum of the current usage 220 of each server varies.
FIG. 2b illustrates a representation 202 of server and cluster capacities during a failure of one of the servers. As indicated by the X, the actual capacity 205a is currently unavailable due to a server failure. Accordingly, the actual cluster capacity 240 is reduced by the actual capacity 205a of the failed server 130. Because of the failure, the redundancy capacity 215 of the remaining servers may be reallocated as available capacity 210. Moreover, the redundant factor of the remaining servers may be set to zero (ri=0) in order to cause the available capacity 210 to fully encompass the actual capacity 205. The current usage 220a of the failed server 130 represents sessions with incomplete or unfinished data processing. Accordingly, the sessions encompassing the current usage 220a may be redistributed to the remaining servers of the cluster 135, thereby increasing the current usage 220b-d levels thereof. As expected, the cluster usage 260 will typically remain unchanged.
The router 140 and servers 130 may be any general purpose computing device, such as a PC, or a specialized network device. The router 140 and servers 130 may have software, such as an operating system with low-level driver software, and the like, for receiving signals over network links. The operating system may also include a network protocol stack, for establishing and accepting network connections from remote devices.
The router 140 and servers 130 may employ any of a number of user-level and embedded operating systems known to those skilled in the art, including, but by no means limited to, known versions and/or varieties of the Microsoft Windows® operating system, the Unix operating system (e.g., the Solaris® operating system distributed by Sun Microsystems of Menlo Park, Calif.), the AIX UNIX operating system distributed by International Business Machines of Armonk, N.Y., and the Linux operating system. Computing devices may include any one of a number of computing devices known to those skilled in the art, including, without limitation, a computer workstation, a desktop, notebook, laptop, or handheld computer, or some other computing device known to those skilled in the art.
The router 140 and servers 130 may include instructions executable by one or more processing elements such as those listed above. Computer-executable instructions may be compiled or interpreted from computer programs created using a variety of programming languages and/or technologies known to those skilled in the art, including, without limitation, and either alone or in combination, Java™, C, C++, Visual Basic, Java Script, Perl, etc. In general, a processor (e.g., a microprocessor) receives instructions, e.g., from a memory, a computer-readable medium, etc., and executes these instructions, thereby performing one or more processes, including one or more of the processes described herein. Such instructions and other data may be stored and transmitted using a variety of known computer-readable media.
A computer-readable medium includes any medium that participates in providing data (e.g., instructions), which may be read by a computer. Such a medium may take many forms, including, but not limited to, non-volatile media, and volatile media. Non-volatile media include, for example, optical or magnetic disks and other persistent memory. Volatile media include dynamic random access memory (DRAM), which typically constitutes a main memory. Common forms of computer-readable media include, for example, a floppy disk, a flexible disk, hard disk, magnetic tape, any other magnetic medium, a CD-ROM, DVD, any other optical medium, punch cards, paper tape, any other physical medium with patterns of holes, a RAM, a PROM, an EPROM, a FLASH-EEPROM, any other memory chip or cartridge, or any other medium from which a computer can read.
FIGS. 3-5 and the description thereof below present exemplary approaches to the functional details of the congestion control module 145. As illustrated, processes 300, 400 and 500 all operate concurrently. Concurrent operation may allow for the constant monitoring and detection of any failures in the servers 130 of the cluster 135. However, in another exemplary approach, the steps of the processes may be rearranged to operate sequentially. For example, after the initial set-up steps of process 300, process 400 may operate repeatedly for a period of time. Subsequently, process 400 may be paused while the cluster 135 is checked for server failures and process 500 updates the utilization factors.
FIG. 3 illustrates a flowchart of an exemplary process 300 for managing congestion control and server redundancy. The router 140 may include a computer-readable medium having stored instructions for carrying out certain operations described herein, including some or all of the operations described with respect to process 300. For example, some or all of such instructions may be included in the congestion control module 145. As described below, some steps of process 300 may include user input and interactions. However, it is to be understood that fully automated or other types of programmatic techniques may implement steps that include user input.
Process 300 begins in step 305 by receiving initial parameters. The initial parameters include at least the actual capacities 205 and redundancy factors for each of the servers 130. The parameters may be received from user input, e.g., via a command line interface, Graphical User Interface, etc. In another exemplary approach, the parameters may be provided in a configuration file, or the like. Accordingly, the parameters may be received in step 305 by opening the file for reading and extracting the relevant data.
Next, in step 310, an expected traffic load may be established. The expected traffic load may be used to alter or set the redundancy factors of the servers. Historical traffic loads for similar dates and times may be used to establish the expected traffic load. Moreover, the expected traffic load presets a baseline value to be used when initially setting the redundancy factors.
Next, in step 315, the actual capacity 205 of each server may be limited to respective available capacities 210 based on the redundancy factors. In generally, the sum of the available capacities 210, also referred to as the available cluster capacity 250, will correspond to the expected traffic load in order to ensure that all expected traffic will be able to be processed. Moreover, the limiting provides redundant capacity 215 which is reserved for times in which there is a failure of one of the servers 130 of the cluster 135. This initialization step sets baseline values for the available capacities 210. However, in the event of a server failure, the available capacities 210 may be altered by changing the respective redundancy factors.
Following, step 315, steps 320, 325, and 330 may operate concurrently as discussed above. Step 320 includes the steps and decisions of process 500 discussed below. Similarly, step 325 includes the steps and decisions of process 400, also discussed below. Because the utilization factor (uij) is based on the estimated current usage for the given time interval (j), the utilization factor will be calculated at each interval. The process will continue to schedule the data for the given time interval. At the conclusion of a time interval, the process must update the current usage based on the recent traffic load of each server.
In step 330, it is determined whether any of the servers 130 have failed. In one exemplary approach, the router 140 may attempt to contact the servers 130, e.g., by initiate a connection, transmitting a so-called ping (Internet Control Message Protocol echo), etc. In another exemplary approach, the servers 130 may be configured to send out a communication, sometimes referred to as a life beat, to the router 140. No matter the approach, the router 140 will continuously monitor the servers 130 for failures. For example, the lack of a response or the lack of a life beat may be indicative of a server failure.
In step 335, the redundancy factors are set to a failure state if a server failure is detected in step 340. As discussed above, the redundancy factors may be dynamically set to a high values, e.g., one, in order to allocate all of the redundant capacity 215 as available capacity 210.
In step 340, the redundancy factors are set to the initial parameters if a server failure is not detected. In most cases the redundancy factors will already be set to the initial parameters. However, if the functionally of a server 130 has just been restored following a failure, the redundancy factors may need to be changed from the failure state. As discussed above, the redundancy factors may be established such that the available cluster capacity 250 corresponds to the baseline or expected traffic load.
Next, in step 345, the parameters may be adjusted. For example, the redundancy factors may vary based on time and date to correspond with expected traffic loads and the service level that needs to be provided by the cluster 135. For example, if service must be guaranteed to a high degree for a certain time, the redundancy factors may be set to a low level to ensure there is redundant capacity 215 to accommodate any server failures. Accordingly, the parameters may be scheduled for particular times. However, in another exemplary approach, process 300 may be adaptive to current traffic conditions. For example, the parameters may automatically adjust in the face of changing traffic conditions.
If the parameters need to be adjusted, process 300 may return to step 305 to receive the new parameters. However, if no adjustment is required, process 300 may return to concurrent steps 320, 325, and 330.
FIG. 4 illustrates a flowchart of an exemplary process 400 for updating server utilization factors. The router 140 may include a computer-readable medium having stored instructions for carrying out certain operations described herein, including some or all of the operations described with respect to process 400. For example, some or all of such instructions may be included in the congestion control module 145. As discussed above, process 400 may be sub-process for process 300, e.g., in step 325.
Process 400 begins in step 405 by determining the available capacity 210 of each server. In one exemplary approach, the actual capacity 205 and the respective redundancy factor (ri) may be retrieved. For example, these values may be provided as initial parameters via user input, a configuration file, etc. The actual capacity 205 may be multiplied by the redundancy factor (1−ri) to determine the limited available capacity 210.
Next, in step 410, the current usage 220 of each server 130 may be estimated. Unlike the expected traffic load discussed above for setting baseline values for the available capacity, the estimated traffic load attempts to determine the current or actual traffic load. Because it may be too costly to constantly monitor the actual traffic load, e.g., amount of packet data traffic sent to a server 130, the router may break the monitoring into discrete time intervals. In one exemplary approach, the router 140 may monitor the amount of packet data sent to a server every 200 milliseconds. Accordingly, the router 140 only knows historical amounts of packet data traffic sent to a server 130. Moreover, the router may not know the actual amount of traffic sent to a sever during the instant time interval. However, because traffic volumes could potentially change dramatically even during a brief interval, an understanding of the current usage 220 of a server 130 is important for properly balancing the data processing load over the cluster 135. Moreover, the scheduling decision (discussed with respect to FIG. 5) is ideally based on an estimated current usage (Eλij) and not on historical usage.
In one exemplary approach, the current usage 220 may be based on a weighted moving average of the actual amounts of usage in prior intervals (λi,j−1), (λi,j−2), etc. Because the data processing may be based on sessions which exist and draw on server capacity for a period of time, it may be useful to base the current usage on more than just the actual usage of the most recent interval (λi,j−1). A weighting factor (0≦w≦1) may be selected to allocate the weight given to the most recent interval (λi,j l) and the second most recent interval (λi,j−2). For example, if it is unusual for a typical session to extend beyond a single interval, the weighting factor (w) may be set to a high value to give more weight the most recent period. Similarly, a lower value of (w) may be selected if it is likely that sessions draw on server capacity 210 for more than one time interval. Accordingly, the estimated current usage (Eλij) of each (i) server at each (j) time interval may be represented as Eλij=w·λi,j−1+(1−w)·λi,j−2. In other exemplary approaches, formulas that take even more historical values of the actual usage may be appropriate. As will be discussed with respect to FIG. 5, the actual usages for prior time intervals (λi,j−1) (λi,j−2), etc., may be stored during the packet data scheduling.
Next, in step 415, utilization factors for each server 130 may be calculated. The utilization factor may represent the estimated current usage (Eλij) as a ratio to the available capacity 210, where the available capacity is the actual capacity limited by the redundancy factor (ri). In one exemplary approach, the utilization factor (uij) may be expressed as
FIG. 5 illustrates a flowchart of an exemplary process 500 for scheduling packet data traffic to servers in the cluster. The router 140 may include a computer-readable medium having stored instructions for carrying out certain operations described herein, including some or all of the operations described with respect to process 500. For example, some or all of such instructions may be included in the congestion control module 145. As discussed above, process 500 may be sub-process for process 300, e.g., in step 320.
Process 500 begins in step 505 when incoming packet data traffic 155 is received by the router 140. As discussed above with respect to FIG. 2b, the router may classify, meter, mark, and shape the traffic as necessary. Subsequent to these preliminary steps, the scheduler 180, in coordination with the congestion control module 145, may proceed with the following steps to further process and direct the traffic to a particular server 130 of the cluster 135.
Next, in step 510, it is determined whether the received packet data belongs to an existing session. For example, the data may include a session identifier thereby associating the data with a particular session.
In step 515, the packet data will be scheduled to the server 130 that is already handling the session to which the data belongs. The session data from step 510 may be used to determine which server is handling a particular session. While not depicted, process 500 may also store associations between the servers 130 and sessions being processed thereby.
In step 520, following the determination in step 510 that the packet data does not belong to an existing session, the data will be scheduled to one of the servers 130 of the cluster 135. As discussed above with respect to process 400, utilization factors may be maintained and updated for each server. The utilization factors express the estimated usage of the server 130 with respect to the available capacity 210. The server with the highest utilization factor has the least amount of unused available capacity 210. To effectively balance the traffic load between the servers 130 of the cluster 135, the new traffic may be scheduled to the server 130 having the lowest utilization factor.
Following both steps 515 and 520, the record of the amount of packet data traffic sent to the server 130 may be updated in step 525. The router 140, or cluster manager, may keep historical records of the amounts of traffic sent to each server, e.g., a record for each of the last five time intervals. As discussed above, a time interval, e.g., 200 ms, may be defined for breaking down the calculation of the utilization factors. The historical records may be in the form of a circular list, or equivalent data structure, with an index value, e.g., 0-4, used to identify the record associated with the current time interval. Accordingly, the amount of the traffic scheduled to the server in either step 515 or step 520 will be added to the record associate with the server and the current time interval. While in another exemplary approach, the servers 130 could report back their actual current usage rates, monitoring estimated usage rates by the router 140 may eliminate time consuming bi-directional communication required for such reporting.
Accordingly, an exemplary congestion control method for session based network traffic has been described. Session handling servers 130 arranged in a cluster 135 may receive packet data traffic 155 from an upstream network device such as a router 140. The actual traffic handling capacity 205 of each server 130 may be limited by a redundancy factor (ri) to respective available capacities 210 in order to provide redundancy capacity 215. The redundancy factors (ri) may be altered dynamically in order to provide more or less redundancy in the cluster 135. For example, the redundancy factors (ri) may be decreased during times in which service availability is critically important. At other times, the redundancy factors may be increased to provide more available processing capacity 210, which may be useful in the event of a failure of one of the servers 130. To balance the traffic load across the cluster 135, the amount of data traffic sent to each server may be tracked and recorded for a number of historical time intervals. Some or all of the historical records may be used to estimate a current usage (Eλij). Newly received traffic that is not associated with an existing session may be scheduled to the server having the lowest utilization factor (uij), e.g., the ratio of the estimated usage to the available capacity.
With regard to the processes, systems, methods, heuristics, etc. described herein, it should be understood that, although the steps of such processes, etc. have been described as occurring according to a certain ordered sequence, such processes could be practiced with the described steps performed in an order other than the order described herein. It further should be understood that certain steps could be performed simultaneously, that other steps could be added, or that certain steps described herein could be omitted. In other words, the descriptions of processes herein are provided for the purpose of illustrating certain systems, and should in no way be construed so as to limit the claimed invention.
Accordingly, it is to be understood that the above description is intended to be illustrative and not restrictive. Many systems and applications other than the examples provided would be apparent upon reading the above description. The scope of the invention should be determined, not with reference to the above description, but should instead be determined with reference to the appended claims, along with the full scope of equivalents to which such claims are entitled. It is anticipated and intended that future developments will occur in the arts discussed herein, and that the disclosed systems and methods will be incorporated into such future systems. In sum, it should be understood that the disclosure is capable of modification and variation and is limited only by the following claims.
All terms used in the claims are intended to be given their broadest reasonable constructions and their ordinary meanings as understood by those skilled in the art unless an explicit indication to the contrary is made herein. In particular, use of the singular articles such as “a,” “the,” “said,” etc. should be read to recite one or more of the indicated elements unless a claim recites explicitly to the contrary.

Fascinating facts, figures, and foibles of the forty-two U.S. presidents and their first ladies.
Do you know . . .
- Which president could simultaneously write in Greek with one hand and in Latin with the other?
- As a young law student, what president broke into the dean's office at Duke University Law School?
- Which president, at age seventeen, underwent a gall bladder operation without anesthesia?
- Who was the first president to be born in the twentieth century?
- What was Bill Clinton's name at birth?
- When finding himiself short of funds during poker games, President Warren G. Harding sometimes used what White House items with which to ante?
- Which president became stuck in a White House bathtub?
- In the May 1995 issue of Outlaw Biker magazine, who was selected as "First Lady of the Century"?
- Early morning skinnydipping in the Potomac River was a frequent activity of which president?
- Who became president of the United States without having been elected as president or vice president?
In Presidential Trivia more than 1,200 unusual, interesting, and little-known facts are assembled in a volume that will tantalize the mind and teach history. It's a handy guide offering more than 200 years of facts about those who have served in the position that is today the most influential one in world politics. Presidential Trivia will encourage readers to learn more about each of the fascinating individuals who have served as president of the United States of America.
|Publication Date||March 1, 1996|

A paradigm shift in the development sector – from income poverty to human poverty – has been paralleled in the disaster management sector by a shift from seeing disasters as extreme events created by natural forces, to viewing them as manifestations of unresolved development problems. This has led to increased emphasis on integration of poverty reduction programs with other sectoral issues such as environmental management, gender and public health. However, examples of systematic long-term integration of such programs with the disaster management sector are few.
Over the past few decades, there was an exponential increase in human and material losses from disaster events, though there was no clear evidence that the frequency of extreme hazard events had increased. This indicated that the rise in disasters and their consequences was related to a rise in people’s vulnerability, induced by human-determined paths of development. An evolution in approaches – from relief and response to vulnerability analysis to risk management – has started influencing how disaster management programs are now being planned and financed. As it is becoming clear that the nature of people’s vulnerability is complex and varied, linkages between poverty and vulnerability are being explored. Three approaches to doing this include a livelihood framework from the bilateral development aid context, community-based disaster management from that sector, and risk transfer and finance from multilateral development finance institutions.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has been in the forefront of recognizing the adverse impact of disasters on development and has played a pioneering role in promoting the incorporation of disaster reduction in development planning. ADB can set an example by making disaster risk assessment an integral part of the proposal approval process and by adopting appropriate mitigation measures in project implementation. Poverty reduction and disaster reduction programs can mutually support each other by developing innovative, multi-dimensional, inter-sectoral approaches.
Please click here to access the full paper.
Source: University for Peace
NB: Press Cutting Service
This article is culled from daily press coverage from around the world. It is posted on the Urban Gateway by way of keeping all users informed about matters of interest. The opinion expressed in this article is that of the author and in no way reflects the opinion of UN-Habitat.

Recommended Grade Levels: 7-12+
Tips for using the site with students
Before using this activity in class (or at home with your kids), go through the activity once to make sure it works correctly on your computer(s). This activity is recommended for broadband internet access - expect load times between 15 seconds and 1.5 minutes depending on your internet connection.
If the activity does not load after clicking the 'start' button, you may be asked to download a Flash Player from Adobe.com. Please click yes as this allows you to view the Edheads Aortic Aneurysm Surgery activity. If you are using school computers, you might need to contact your tech support team to download the Flash Player.
If you are using an iPad or other iDevice, our games will not play without downloading an app or browser. We recommend the Photon browser available at: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/photon-flash-player-for-ipad/id430200224?mt=8.
Your computer(s) will need to have some sort of sound output. Either speakers or headphones will work well. The majority of this activity has voice audio. We highly recommend headphones in a classroom setting. Students with hearing impairments can read the text at the bottom of the screen. If you are having difficulty hearing, check the audio settings on your computer.
We strongly recommend that students use a real mouse, as the touch pads on laptop computers are more difficult to use for this activity and slow students down significantly.
If the teacher would like students to fill out a worksheet while doing the activity, that can be printed here. The worksheet is NOT necessary to complete the activity, but is a way for students to show they have done the activity or for teachers to track student progress.
Students in the target grade-range will take approximately twelve to fifteen minutes to complete surgery working individually or in groups of two to three. Some students can get queasy using this activity. We recommend closely monitoring students when they experience this activity for the first time.
Answers to Questions Asked in the Activity
Q1. Do you think we should continue with surgery?
Q2. Why don’t we just cut through the abdominal muscles from side to side instead of up and down?
A2. This would cause the patient more pain and take longer to heal.
Q3. Why do you think we clamp the iliac arteries first?
A3. To avoid embolisms, or blood clots, going down into the legs.
Q4. Why do we clamp the aorta below the renal arteries?
A4. To prevent kidney failure during or after surgery.
Q5. Why would we use permanent suture here instead of dissolvable suture?
A5. We can’t take the chance on dissolvable suture dissolving too soon.
Q6. Why would we close the aorta around the graft instead of just cutting away the diseased parts of the artery?
A6. The aorta wall, even though diseased, provides an extra layer of protection to prevent the bowel from rubbing on the graft.
Q7. Why use a permanent suture on the abdominal wall?
A7. Abdominal muscles are very strong and could potentially put a lot of pressure on the sutures that might dissolve too soon.
Q8. Why do we use staples instead of suture for the skin?
A8. Staples are more sturdy and easier to remove if an infection in the skin develops.
The worksheet for this activity is optional. Teachers may choose to have their students do the worksheet as a means of ascertaining that the students have completed the activity. However, the worksheet is NOT required to complete the activity.
Assessment and Discussion
For an assessment tool, teachers may want to have students put their names on the Worksheets and turn them in. These should indicate if students completed the assigned activity.
A quick five question quiz can be found here.
Answers to the quiz questions can be found here.
After students use the site, additional in class discussion questions (which can also act as assessment tools) can be asked or assigned as homework:
- How do you think the surgeon knew to put the clamps at the bottom (near iliac arteries) of the aneurysm first, instead of at the top near the renal arteries? How do you think knowledge like that is gained? Answer: Somewhat through personal experience or through the personal experience of the surgeon that trained the one performing the operation. Primarily through published papers and continuing education seminars and conferences for medical personnel. This clearly illustrates the need for scientists to share their work and data sets.
- Students can research and, if desired, write a report on the history and advancement of the grafts used to repair aortic aneurysms.
- Students can design an experiment or process that would allow them to determine the answer to the question of why so many more men than women have aortic aneurysms (80% of patients are men). This would most likely involve something like the Framingham Study, referenced here: http://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/ or could also involve genetic studies or perhaps even the development of a test to determine which individuals might be more likely to develop aneurysms. Students can discuss their ideas in class or write a report to turn in to the teacher.
Ohio Science Standards
Science & Technology
- Give examples of how technological advances, influenced by scientific knowledge, affect the quality of life.
- Design a solution or product taking into account needs and constraints (e.g., cost, time, trade-offs, properties of materials, safety and aesthetics).
- Explain that there are differing sets of procedures for guiding scientific investigations and procedures are determined by the nature of the investigation, safety considerations and appropriate tools.
Scientific Ways of Knowing
- Explain how ethical considerations shape scientific endeavors.
- Explain how societal issues and considerations affect the progress of science and technology.
National Science StandardsContent Standards
- Understandings about scientific inquiry.
- Understanding of structure and function in living systems, reproduction and heredity.
- Abilities of technological design and understandings about science and technology.
- Personal health risks and benefits, science and technology in society.
- Understandings about scientific inquiry.
- Matter, energy and organization in living systems and behavior of organisms.
- Abilities of technological design, understandings about science and technology.
- Natural and human-induced hazards, science and technology in local, national, and global challenges.
- Understanding of the nature of scientific knowledge and science as a human endeavor.

Aphrodisias of Cilicia
Aphrodisias is situated on Cape Tisan near the town of Yeşilovacık in the rural area of Silifke district which itself is a part of Mersin Province. The ancient name of this region was Cilicia Trachea ("rugged Cilicia") So it is customary to call the ruins Aphrodisias of Cilicia to distinguish it from the better known Aphrodisias in Aydin Province. The ruins are at the east side of the cape facing Dana Island and Güvercinlik Island. The coordinates of the ruins are The highway distance to is Silifke 50 kilometres (31 mi) and to Mersin is 133 kilometres (83 mi).
The foundation date of the ancient settlement is unknown. But it was a port of Ptolemaic Egypt in the fourth century BC. The settlement was incorporated into Roman Empire and in the marine book Ps.Skylax written in 101 AD, the settlement was named Cap Aphrodisias . During the early Middle ages when the port was a part of Byzantine Empire, it was named Porto Cavaliere. Then it faded away. The location of the long forgotten ruins was discovered by Austrian Archaeologist Rudolf Heberdey in 1891.
There are ruins of a necropol, a cistern, city walls and floor mosaics of a 4th century church named St.Panteleon (The church was a temple prior to Christianity) . In 1987, Ludwig Budde from Germany published his book St.Pantaleon von Aphrodisias in Kılikien about the church. But most of the mosaics are not unearthed yet.

||This article needs additional citations for verification. (August 2009)|
In spaceflight, a launch vehicle or carrier rocket is a rocket used to carry a payload from the Earth's surface into outer space. A launch system includes the launch vehicle, the launch pad and other infrastructure. Usually the payload is an artificial satellite placed into orbit, but some spaceflights are sub-orbital while others enable spacecraft to escape Earth orbit entirely. A launch vehicle which carries its payload on a suborbital trajectory is often called a sounding rocket.
Launch vehicles, particularly orbital launch vehicles, have at least two stages, but sometimes up to 4 are employed.
Types of launch vehicles
Expendable launch vehicles are designed for one-time use. They usually separate from their payload, and may break up during atmospheric reentry. Reusable launch vehicles, on the other hand, are designed to be recovered intact and used again for subsequent launches. For orbital spaceflights, the Space Shuttle has been the only launch vehicle with components which have been used for multiple flights. SpaceX is currently developing a reusable rocket launching system slated for use on both the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles. A second-generation VTVL design was announced in 2011. The low-altitude flight test program of an experimental technology-demonstrator launch vehicle began in 2012, with more extensive high-altitude over-water flight testing planned to begin in mid-2013, and continue on each subsequent Falcon 9 flight. Non-rocket spacelaunch alternatives are at the planning stage.
Launch vehicles are often characterized by the amount of mass they can lift into orbit. For example, a Proton rocket has a launch capacity of 22,000 kilograms (49,000 lb) into low Earth orbit (LEO). Launch vehicles are also characterized by the number of stages they employ. Rockets with as many as five stages have been successfully launched, and there have been designs for several single-stage-to-orbit vehicles. Additionally, launch vehicles are very often supplied with boosters, which supply high thrust early on in the flight, and normally in parallel with other engines on the vehicle. Boosters allow the remaining engines to be smaller, which reduces the burnout mass of later stages, and thus allows for larger payloads.
Other frequently-reported characteristics of launch vehicles are the nation or space agency responsible for the launch, and the company or consortium that manufactures and launches the vehicle. For example, the European Space Agency is responsible for the Ariane V, and the United Launch Alliance manufactures and launches the Delta IV and Atlas V rockets. Many launch vehicles are considered part of an historical line of vehicles which share the same or similar names such as the Atlas V being the latest member of the Atlas rocket family.
By launch platform
- Land: Spaceport and fixed missile silo (Strela) for converted ICBMs
- Sea: fixed platform (San Marco), mobile platform (Sea Launch), submarine (Shtil', Volna) for converted SLBMs
- Air: aircraft (Pegasus, Virgin Galactic LauncherOne, Stratolaunch Systems), balloon (ARCASPACE), JP Aerospace Orbital Ascender, proposal for permanent Buoyant space port
||This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. (May 2013)|
||The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. (May 2013)|
- A sounding rocket cannot reach orbit and is only capable of sub-orbital spaceflight
- A small lift launch vehicle is capable of lofting up to 2,000kg (4,400lbs) of payload into low earth orbit (LEO)
- A medium lift launch vehicle is capable of lofting between 2,000 to 20,000kg (4,400 to 44,000lbs) of payload into LEO
- An heavy lift launch vehicle is capable of lofting between 20,000 to 50,000kg (44,000 to 110,200lbs) of payload into LEO
- A super-heavy lift vehicle is capable of lofting more than 50,000kg (110,200lbs+) of payload into LEO
Various methods are used to move an assembled launch vehicle onto its launch pad, each method with its own specialized equipment. These assembly activities take place as part of the overall launch campaign for the vehicle. In some launch systems, like the Delta II, the vehicle is assembled vertically on the pad, using a crane to hoist each stage into place. The Space Shuttle orbiter, including its external tank, and solid rocket boosters, are assembled vertically in NASA's Vehicle Assembly Building, and then a special crawler-transporter moves the entire stack to the launch pad while it is in an upright position. In contrast, the launch vehicles such as the Soyuz rocket and the Falcon 9 are assembled horizontally in a processing hangar, transported horizontally, and then brought upright once at the pad.
As an alternative, Project Vanguard provided a contraction of the phrase "Satellite Launching Vehicle" abbreviated to "SLV". This provided a term in the list of what the rockets were allocated for: flight test, or actually launching a satellite. The contraction would also apply to rockets which send probes to other worlds or the interplanetary medium.
Orbital launch vehicles
Sounding rockets are normally used for brief, inexpensive space and microgravity experiments. Current human-rated suborbital launch vehicles include SpaceShipOne and the upcoming SpaceShipTwo, among others (see space tourism). The delta-v needed for orbital launch using a rocket vehicle launching from the Earth's surface is at least 9300m/s. This delta-v is determined by a combination of air-drag, which is determined by ballistic coefficient as well as gravity losses, altitude gain and the horizontal speed necessary to give a suitable perigee. The delta-v required for altitude gain varies, but is around 2 kilometres per second (1.2 mi/s) for 200 kilometres (120 mi) altitude.
Minimising air-drag entails having a reasonably high ballistic coefficient, which generally means having a launch vehicle that is at least 20 metres (66 ft) long, or a ratio of length to diameter greater than ten. Leaving the atmosphere as early on in the flight as possible provides an air drag of around 300 metres per second (980 ft/s). The horizontal speed necessary to achieve low earth orbit is around 7,800 metres per second (26,000 ft/s).
The calculation of the total delta-v for launch is complicated, and in nearly all cases numerical integration is used; adding multiple delta-v values provides a pessimistic result, since the rocket can thrust while at an angle in order to reach orbit, thereby saving fuel as it can gain altitude and horizontal speed simultaneously.
Under international law, the nationality of the owner of a launch vehicle determines which country is responsible for any damages resulting from that vehicle. Due to this, some[who?] countries require that rocket manufacturers and launchers adhere to specific regulations in order to indemnify and protect the safety of people and property that may be affected by a flight.
In the US, any rocket launch that is not classified as amateur, and also is not "for and by the government," must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration's Office of Commercial Space Transportation (FAA/AST), located in Washington, DC.
Specific to launch vehicles
||This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. (August 2009)|
- See for example: "NASA Kills 'Wounded' Launch System Upgrade at KSC". Florida Today.
- "SpaceX says 'reusable rocket' could help colonize Mars". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 4 October 2011.
- "Elon Musk says SpaceX will attempt to develop fully reusable space launch vehicle". Washington Post. 2011-09-29. Retrieved 2011-10-11. "Both of the rocket’s stages would return to the launch site and touch down vertically, under rocket power, on landing gear after delivering a spacecraft to orbit."
- Lindsey, Clark (2013-03-28). "SpaceX moving quickly towards fly-back first stage". NewSpace Watch. Retrieved 2013-03-29.
- there are no Russian roadless terrain or railway car based mobile launchers converted for spacecraft launches.
- NASA Space Technology Roadmaps - Launch Propulsion Systems, p.11: "Small: 0-2t payloads, Medium: 2-20t payloads, Heavy: 20-50t payloads, Super Heavy: >50t payloads"
- HSF Final Report: Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation, October 2009, Review of U.S. Human Spaceflight Plans Committee, p. 64-66: "5.2.1 The Need for Heavy Lift ... require a “super heavy-lift” launch vehicle ... range of 25 to 40 mt, setting a notional lower limit on the size of the super heavy-lift launch vehicle if refueling is available ... this strongly favors a minimum heavy-lift capacity of roughly 50 mt ..."
- S. A. Kamal, A. Mirza: The Multi-Stage-Q System and the Inverse-Q System for Possible application in SLV, Proc. IBCAST 2005, Volume 3, Control and Simulation, Edited by Hussain SI, Munir A, Kiyani J, Samar R, Khan MA, National Center for Physics, Bhurban, KP, Pakistan, 2006, pp 27–33 Free Full Text
- S. A. Kamal: Incorporating Cross-Range Error in the Lambert Scheme, Proc. 10th National Aeronautical Conf., Edited by Sheikh SR, Khan AM, Pakistan Air Force Academy, Risalpur, KP, Pakistan, 2006, pp 255–263 Free Full Text
- S. A. Kamal: The Multi-Stage-Lambert Scheme for Steering a Satellite-Launch Vehicle, Proc. 12th IEEE INMIC, Edited by Anis MK, Khan MK, Zaidi SJH, Bahria Univ., Karachi, Pakistan, 2008, pp 294–300 (invited paper) Free Full Text
- S. A. Kamal: Incompleteness of Cross-Product Steering and a Mathematical Formulation of Extended-Cross-Product Steering, Proc. IBCAST 2002, Volume 1, Advanced Materials, Computational Fluid Dynamics and Control Engineering, Edited by Hoorani HR, Munir A, Samar R, Zahir S, National Center for Physics, Bhurban, KP, Pakistan, 2003, pp 167–177 Free Full Text
- S. A. Kamal: Dot-Product Steering: A New Control Law for Satellites and Spacecrafts, Proc. IBCAST 2002, Volume 1, Advanced Materials, Computational Fluid Dynamics and Control Engineering, Edited by Hoorani HR, Munir A, Samar R, Zahir S, National Center for Physics, Bhurban, KP, Pakistan, 2003, pp 178–184 Free Full Text
- S. A. Kamal: Ellipse-Orientation Steering: A Control Law for Spacecrafts and Satellite-Launch Vehicles, Space Science and the Challenges of the twenty-First Century, ISPA-SUPARCO Collaborative Seminar, Univ. of Karachi, 2005 (invited paper)
- Christmas turns bad for ISRO, GSLV mission fails.

The history of corruption in post-Independence India starts with the Jeep scandal in 1948. VK Krishna Menon, the then High Commissioner for India in London signed a deal with a foreign firm worth Rs 80 lakh for jeeps for the Indian Army in Kashmir without observing normal procedure.
The then Government announced on September 30, 1955 that the Jeep scandal case was closed, despite the demand of the opposition for judicial inquiry as suggested by the Inquiry Committee led by Ananthsayanam Ayyangar.
Union Minister GB Pant said "that as far as Government was concerned it has made up its mind to close the matter. If the opposition is not satisfied they can make it an election issue."
Soon after, on February 3, 1956 VK Krishna Menon was inducted into the Nehru cabinet as minister without portfolio.

About the Exhibition
This exhibition chronicles America's past through the decorative and useful arts of our ancestors. The exhibition covers five themes using the depth and richness of Winterthur's unrivalled collection of decorative and fine arts made or used in America between 1640 and 1860: the early settlement period, the mid-eighteenth-century high styles of the urban centers, the influence of the Far East on American taste and design, the tremendous cultural heritage of the Pennsylvania German communities, and the influence of classicism on American design in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The exhibition consists of approximately three hundred objects including furniture, paintings, silver, ceramics, textiles, and glass.
An illustrated catalogue accompanies the exhibition.
This exhibition was organized by Winterthur Museum and Country Estate.

LaosOn March 6, 1970, I gave the first comprehensive accounting of our activities in Laos that has ever been made to the American people. I traced the pattern of subversion and then invasion by North Vietnam. I reviewed US efforts under previous administrations to help the legitimate government. When we took office there had already been a US military assistance program for six years and increasing US air operations for four.
Since early 1963 the North Vietnamese have in effect conducted two wars in Laos. in the north they have kept up constant pressure against the neutralist government established in 1962 at their own urging. In the south they have occupied and fortified the Ho Chi Minh Trail area to attack South Vietnam.
In the face of these continuing North Vietnamese actions, we believed that the US role we inherited remained important. Our material aid and air operations in the north were needed to support the Royal Lao government and preserve the 1962 Geneva agreements. In the south, Vietnamization called for continued air strikes against the enemy to protect allied forces. Since 1965 at least 630,000 North Vietnamese troops have streamed down the trail. They have brought with them more than 400,000 weapons, over 100 million pounds of ammunition, and at least 200 million pounds of food.
Our defensive and supportive policy was outlined in the March 6 statement: no American around combat forces; minimum American presence; military assistance for regular and irregular Lao forces when requested by the Lao government; reconnaissance flights and air operations to interdict North Vietnamese troops and supplies on the Ho Chi Minh Trail: logistic and air support for Lao forces when requested by the government.
Within this framework we have maintained our military aid and air operations during the past year in response to increased North Vietnamese levels of infiltration and aggression.
Southern Laos became critical for Hanoi after the allied Cambodian operations deprived it of the port of Sihanoukville and the border sanctuaries. They swelled their forces in the area by more than twenty-five thousand, captured the towns of Saravane and Attopeu and intensively built up their supplies and their logistics network. Whereas for years southern Laos had been central to Hanoi's opera- tions in northern South Vietnam, at the end of 1970 it was becoming the hub and crossroads of Hanoi's campaigns throughout Indochina. Almost all of its men and supplies were now flowing through this area. The strategic principles that applied to the enemy's bases in Cambodia were valid as well for southern Laos. Hanoi deepened the area's part in the Vietnam war, with direct implications for Vietnamization and our withdrawals.

TENS of thousands of Australians could have undiscovered heart disease because the key method used by doctors to assess patients is outdated and grossly underestimates risk, a leading hypertension specialist says.
The International Society of Hypertension hosted its annual conference in Sydney this week and its president in Australia, Stephen Harrap, said doctors were estimating heart disease risk based on a study conducted six decades ago.
The standard method of testing did not consider a person's socio-economic situation, he said, even though poorer people had a higher risk of developing heart disease due to less access to information and health care as well as higher levels of anxiety and depression.
''These people are living shorter lives because of their socio-economic status and we're talking amounts of 15 to 20 years less than those elsewhere in Australia,'' Professor Harrap said. ''Not only do they die younger, they suffer over a much longer period.''
Called the Framingham Score, the method is designed for adults aged 20 and older who do not have heart disease or diabetes but was tailored towards patients who were relatively well-off, Professor Harrap said.
It involves measuring blood pressure, cholesterol, body weight, age, sex and other things that feed into a formula designed to estimate a patient's ''score'' or risk of dying from cardiovascular disease.
''But the score was developed long ago from a study of well-off people in a small town in Massachusetts and is not appropriate to people living in big cities, where there are less well-off pockets, indigenous communities or people living in the red-centre - even though those people share the greatest burden of cardiovascular disease,'' Professor Harrap said.
''If you were to measure the blood pressure and cholesterol in a poor person based on the Framingham Score it may tell you their risk is 10 per cent but in reality that risk might be 30 per cent.''
Although the impact of being poor on health was now widely recognised in scientific research, Professor Harrap said it could take decades for that research to result in new tools widely used by doctors to better assess risk.
The director of the Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Garry Jennings, agreed the score was based on ''old technology'' developed when obesity, another risk factor, was uncommon.
''But at the moment Framingham is the best diagnostic tool we've got,'' Professor Jennings said. ''It doesn't apply to very high risk groups and also doesn't work so well in those with major psychiatric disease, kidney problems and those with inflammatory diseases.''
Programs carried out beyond the doctors office were needed to reach the most high-risk populations, he said, such as mobile clinics that went to people's workplaces and education targeted at poorer populations.

Mosquito control in effect for the City of Newnan
The Public Works Department will begin a mosquito management program in June and continue through September, fogging Tuesdays and Fridays from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m., weather conditions permitting.
The department uses a truck mounted ULV (ultra low volume) aerosol fogger for spraying a ready-to-use, quick knockdown, low odor, non-corrosive, synergized, synthetic Pyrethroid for the control of adult mosquitoes, biting and non-biting midges, black flies and other outdoor flying insects that cause public health annoyance and is intended for use in residential, municipal and recreational areas. At this time, the Public Works Department does not have a program for larval monitoring or surveillance, nor does the Department use any larval control products.
Because of ideal weather conditions, the mosquito population this spring and summer are predicted to be a bumper crop.
Mosquitoes are an all-too familiar summer nuisance, but much worse, they can carry West Nile virus or Eastern Equestrian Encephalitis for humans and heartworms for pets. West Nile virus can result in serious illness and sometimes death. The virus can infect humans, birds, mosquitoes, horses and other mammals and is transmitted through the bite of a mosquito that has bitten an infected bird.
People over the age of 50 and anyone living in areas where the virus has been detected are most at risk. Standing water in your yard means you could be raising dangerous mosquitoes. Some mosquitoes lay their eggs in standing water where they hatch in just a day or two. Other mosquitoes lay their eggs in old tires, tin cans or other potential water-holding containers where the eggs remain un-hatched for weeks, months or even years until they are covered by water.
We will accommodate special requests, including requests for not spraying near particular residences; however, we only spray from the right-of-way.
Residents and property owners can help abate existing mosquito breeding sources by clearing property of any potential breeding sites and preventing them from recurring. Here are some suggestions for what you can do help eliminate potential breeding grounds and increase your enjoyment of the outdoors:
• Get rid of old tires, tin cans, buckets, bottles or any water-holding containers
• Fill in or drain low places in your yard
• Keep drains, ditches and culverts clean of weeds and trash to help drainage
• Cover trash containers to keep water out
• Repair leaky outside pipes and faucets
• Empty plastic wading pools regularly and store them indoors when not in use
• Fill in tree rot holes and hollow stumps
• Change the water in bird baths and tray for plant pots at least once a week
• Keep your grass cut short and shrubbery trimmed
Together we can eliminate potential breeding grounds and increase our enjoyment of the outdoors.
If you have any questions, comments or requests, please call the Public Works Department at 770-253-1823 or email Michael Klahr at email@example.com.

Helping Children Adjust to Divorce: A Guide for Teachers
Human Development State Extension Specialist
Human Development Specialist, Pike County
Approximately one of every two divorces in Missouri (51 percent) involves children. Although children whose parents divorce are at greater risk for problems such as aggression, depression, lower self-esteem and poorer school performance, most children adjust to the divorce successfully. However, the adjustment process is stressful and takes time. It is typical for children to experience distress for 1 to 2 years following the divorce.
Schools can play an important role in helping children make a positive adjustment to their parents' divorce. This guide suggests ways that schools, preschools and childcare centers can support children through difficult family transitions. By working together, families and schools can form a network of support that promotes healthy child development.
There are four key elements of successful family-school relationships — approach, attitudes, atmosphere and action. These four categories organize ideas for how schools can support children through family transitions.
The approach is the framework used for working with families. The partnership approach emphasizes families and schools working together toward the shared goal of ensuring all students' success in school. Using a partnership model involves three things:
- Two-way communication
- Appreciating family strengths
- Mutual problem-solving
Two-way communication is essential for a successful partnership. This means that parents keep teachers informed about important events in their child's home life, and teachers keep parents informed about their child's school activities. If parents have recently experienced stressful life transitions, such as divorce or remarriage, their attention may be focused on the events in their lives. It may take extra initiative from teachers to obtain information.
Appreciating family strengths is also essential for forming a successful partnership. All families have strengths, even if they face many challenges. Some strengths of single-parent families and stepfamilies are:
Children learn to adapt to changes and to live in environments with different rules and expectations
- Multiple role models and extended kin network
Children living in stepfamilies often have several adult role models in their lives and a large network of grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins.
- Greater independence and maturity
Children living in single-parent families may be given greater responsibility for household tasks. They can gain a sense of competence and independence if they are given a reasonable number (not too many) of tasks they are capable of doing.
- Negotiation and conflict resolution skills
When parents divorce and are able to negotiate and resolve conflicts in a constructive manner, children learn from their parents' example.
- Parents who love them
Most children with divorced parents have one or more parents who nurture and support them, which is a very important resource for a child living in any type of family.
A third element of working with parents as partners is mutual problem-solving. When a problem arises, the teacher and parent work together to solve the problem. Both teacher and parent provide their perspectives on the problem and come up with solutions together.
Attitudes can foster partnership or create a barrier to partnership. Viewing parent involvement as a continuum, rather than categories (uninvolved vs. involved) helps develop partnerships with parents. This means taking the perspective that all parents are involved to some degree. Some parents are involved at a high level, acting as active partners and educational leaders at home and school, whereas others are involved at lower levels, acting as a recipients of education and support from the school. For parents experiencing transitions such as divorce or remarriage, lower levels of involvement may be all that are possible.
Attitudes are often shaped by our own experiences, professional and personal, in childhood and adulthood. For example, if your parents are divorced or you have experienced a divorce, those experiences may color your attitudes about divorced parents and their children. If you have worked with a family that had an especially hostile divorce, that experience may affect how you think about divorced parents. It is important to be aware of our attitudes about families. By knowing what our attitudes are, we can ask ourselves where those attitudes come from, and decide whether they are accurate or not. Becoming familiar with research on divorce and families can help in developing informed attitudes.
It is also important to be aware of parents' attitudes, which range from avoiding involvement with school to being overly involved. Most parents fall somewhere in the middle — they are happy to be involved on occasion if they are approached. Parents' attitudes are often influenced by their own experiences with school as a child. Those who had positive experiences at school may be more willing to be involved. Parents who understand the school system in the U.S. and come from similar cultures may be more likely to get involved than parents who are from cultures in which school personnel are viewed as authorities rather than partners. Parent involvement is also greater when parents perceive the school environment as warm, but structured, with clear limits and routines.
An essential part of supporting divorced parents and their children is creating an atmosphere that welcomes all types of families and encourages involvement of all adults that play an important role in the child's life. One of the primary ways of creating such a welcoming atmosphere is through communication with parents. Communication that creates a welcoming atmosphere includes:
Communicating with both parents
Often, mothers manage most of the communication with the other adults in a child's life, such as child care providers, teachers and coaches. After a divorce, many assume that the communications will continue to be with the mother. However, in most cases, both parents should be actively involved in communicating with other adults in the child's life. Both parents should have equal access to health and school records unless there is legal documentation, such as a protective order, prohibiting access.
The parenting plan is a document that details how the parents will provide for the care and well-being of the child, which includes the residential and legal custody arrangements as well as the financial responsibilities of each parent. Sole legal custody gives one parent the decision-making rights, responsibilities, and authority related to the health, education and welfare of the child. Joint legal custody gives parents shared decision-making rights, responsibilities, and authority related to the health, education and welfare of the child. Physical custody designates where the child will reside and who provides the care and supervision.
Involving the nonresidential parent in school activities
Nonresidential parents often feel excluded by institutions and organizations, including schools. Invite nonresidential parents to participate in school activities, programs, and field trips. Involving the nonresidential parent in school activities encourages and supports that parent's involvement in the child's life.
Sensitivity to family diversity
Avoid terms that may be offensive to some families, such as "broken home," or "real parent." Don't assume that individuals in the same family have the same last name. Be sensitive to family differences when writing invitations for family members to participate in school activities — for example, "Bring your grandparent or grandfriend."
Using a variety of formal and informal methods to communicate with families
- Parent orientation nights
Offer multiple parent orientation nights at different times and days of the week.
- Develop a system for keeping track of family changes
Collect parent information cards Sample (PDF) at the beginning of the year. Send them out again mid-year, asking parents to make changes as needed.
- Offer parent-teacher conferences at times convenient for parents
Offer opportunities for divorced parents to have separate conferences. Some divorced parents may be able to attend conferences together, but if there is hostility between parents, it is probably better for them to attend separately.
- Notes home
Make sure that the nonresidential parent receives notes, unless there is a court order that limits the parent's access. Some teachers make up a weekly packet of information that the parent can pick up. This is more reliable than expecting the child to get the information to both parents.
- Telephone calls
If possible, make calls to both the residential parent and nonresidential parent. Sending a note home at the start of the year to find out when parents are available for telephone calls may make it easier to reach parents. Call parents to share both positive information and concerns.
Schools are in a prime position to offer support to children experiencing family transitions because they reach large numbers of families. There are several ways that require minimal time investment for teachers to support children experiencing parental divorce:
Provide resources to promote positive parent-child relaitonships
You can set up a parent information center or lending library, perhaps with the help of a parent volunteer. Consider providing information or resources on the following topics:
- Stages of child development
- Children's responses to family transitions, such as divorce and remarriage
- Single parenting
- Building family rituals and traditions
- Community resources
- Basic parenting strategies
Encourage all parents to monitor their children's school progress
Children's school performance may be affected when then their parents divorce. However, if children continue to achieve in school, they are less likely to develop other problems. Parents may need information about how to help their children succeed in school. Send home a handout at the beginning and middle of the school year offering tips for improving study habits. If a child is having problems with completing homework assignments, talk with parents about using daily report cards to facilitate communication between home and school.
Encourage all parents to engage in learning activities with their child at home
This is the most effective form of parent involvement for promoting student achievement. There are a variety of learning activities parents can do with their children at home. For example, parents can be encouraged to read, explore educational websites, or play word or number games with their children, help with homework, and take their children on educational outings, such as museums or the public library.
Encourage parent networking
Rebuilding a supportive network is an important part of the process of parents' adjustment to divorce. Schools can provide opportunities for parents to interact with other parents. One way to do this is to recruit parent volunteers to coordinate events for parents, such as breakfast at school. Parents may be able to attend a breakfast meeting before work. Another idea is to ask a parent volunteer to create a parent-to-parent newsletter. Parents can contribute articles and the teacher could notify parents about upcoming events in the newsletter. Finally, a parent volunteer can recruit other parents to participate in school activities, making a special effort to reach out to single parents, nonresidential parents and stepparents.
Classroom activities and materials
There are many ways you can integrate efforts to support children with divorced parents into your daily classroom routine. You can incorporate activities that:
- Encourage understanding of different types of families
- Help children communicate about their family
- Increase self-esteem
- Help children appropriately express feelings
- Support positive parent-child relationships
Such activities benefit all children — not just those who have experienced parental divorce. You can also choose curriculum materials that portray different types of families positively. Finally, if you include activities that may make some children feel excluded or uncomfortable, such as making Mother's Day or Father's Day cards or gifts, adapt them so that all children feel included. Allow children to make items for all of the significant adults in their lives, if possible.
In conclusion, many children experience parental divorce and live in a stepfamily for part of their lives. Schools can support children through family transitions by taking a partnership approach, having informed attitudes, creating an atmosphere that welcomes all types of families, and taking action that supports all children and parents.
- Berger, E. H. (2000). Parents as Partners in Education: Families and Schools Working Together. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
- Christensen, S.L, & Sheridan, S.M. (2001). Schools and Families: Creating Essential Connections for Learning. New York: The Guilford Press.
- Coleman, M., Ganong, L.H., & Henry, J. (1984). What teachers should know about stepfamilies. Childhood Education, 60, 306-309.
- Long, N. and Forehand, R. (2002). Making Divorce Easier on Your Child: 50 Effective Ways to Help Children Adjust. Chicago: Contemporary Books.
GH6611, new November 2005

Informative Image Overview
Types of informative images include:
- Pictures and other bitmapped graphics
- Charts, examples include:
- Bar Charts
- Pie Charts
- Organizational Charts
- Flow charts
- Scatter plots
- Mathematical Equations
The type of text equivalent needed for an informative image depends on the purpose and information the image represents. For example, a news photograph of a public official is probably just highlighting or drawing attention to an article or story associated with the official, and a simple
alt text can be used to fully describe the purpose of the image. A bar chart, on the other hand, conveys numerical information; the proper text description of a bar chart is a tabular data table, probably with some additional summary information, so that speech reader users can access the numerical relationships and trends visually represented in the chart. In cases of mathematical equations, text equivalents should be available as MathML.
Text equivalents for informative images that contain additional information should be integrated into the visual rendering of the web resources so that the information is available to all users. Since everyone has a unique style of learning, making the more detailed text equivalent available to all users often yields better understanding of the content in general.
- Screen reader users can understand the purpose and content of informative images.
- Users navigating web resources with cell phone, PDA devices or text-only browsers can understand the image before it is downloaded or if the technology does not render the image.
altattributes help users identify images on your website.
- The ranking of web resources improves as search engines can better identify images that are relevant to the search topic when
altattributes are meaningful.
- W3C WCAG 1.0 Image techniques
- Cynthia Says (HiSoftware AccVerify/AccMonitor) Alt Text Quality Checks
- WebAIM alt text quality checks
- ATRC Web Accessibility Checker
- 17: Images in HTML (Opera Web Standards Curriculum)
altattribute should provide a short text equivalent to describe the purpose of the image on the web resource and orient the user to the content contained in the image.
longdescattribute pointing to internal link
longdescattribute of an img element specifies a link to a long description of the image.
- This HTML markup is not well supported in graphical browsers and therefore difficult for authors to test and users to access.
As the result, using
longdescattribute to add text equivalent information beyond the
altattribute is not recommended.
- The best way to use the
longdescattribute is to build an internal link as the content of the attribute. This internal link would direct to the content on the current resource that provides the text equivalent information (longdesc="#linktext").
- Illinois Information Technology Accessibility Standards
- 4.1 Provide appropriate "alternate text" for all images.
- 4.2 Provide full descriptions for graphs, diagrams, and other meaningful images.
- Section 508
- 1194.22 (a) A text equivalent for every non-text element shall be provided (e.g., via "alt", "longdesc", or in element content).
- W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0
- 1.1.1 Non-text Content
- Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 1.0)
- 1.1 Provide a text equivalent for every non-text element (e.g., via "alt", "longdesc", or in element content). [Priority 1]
- 3.1 When an appropriate markup language exists, use markup rather than images to convey information. For example, use MathML to mark up mathematical equations, and style sheets to format text and control layout. Also, avoid using images to represent text -- use text and style sheets instead. [Priority 2]

Kevin Bowen was drafted into the army and served in Vietnam 1968-69. He is the Director of the William Joiner Center for the Study of War and Its Social Consequences at the University of Massachusetts—Boston. He has returned to Vietnam several times and his first book, Playing Basketball with the Viet Cong, was named “Pick of the Year” by The Progressive magazine.
Temple At Quan Loi, 1969
Questions for Reflection: “First Casualty” and “Temple at Quan Loi, 1969”
- If you’ve never seen a dead body how might you describe the feeling when you did? How do you think this image would return to you at other times?
- How does the poet go about his daily routine after seeing his dead comrade? Why do you think one of the other soldier’s voices, “don’t mean nothing?”
- How does the image of the warrior follow him? Describe the phrase, “a surplice trailing the jungle floor.” What may be the importance of the image to the warrior?
- In the poem “Temple at Quan Loi, 1969,” what might the warrior and the woman have in common? How does the woman’s presence almost act as a weapon to the soldiers who see her?
- How do Bowen’s words make you feel as if you were witnessing the scene? What emotion does the poem convey?

Crowns are a cosmetic restoration used to improve your tooth's shape or to strengthen a tooth. Crowns are most often used for teeth that are broken, worn, or have portions destroyed by tooth decay.
Crowns are "caps" cemented onto an existing tooth which fully cover the portion of your tooth above the gum line. In effect, the crown becomes your tooth's new outer surface. Crowns can be made of porcelain, metal, or both. Porcelain crowns are most often preferred because they mimic the translucency of natural teeth and are very strong.
Crowns are often preferable to silver amalgam fillings. Unlike fillings which apply metal directly into your mouth, a crown is fabricated away from your mouth. Your crown is created in a lab from your unique tooth impression which allows a dental laboratory technician to examine all aspects of your bite and jaw movements. Your crown is then sculpted just for you so that your bite and jaw movements function normally once the crown is placed.

Every U.S. agency that regulates radiation exposure agrees that there is no safe dose no matter how small. There are only "allowable" doses or "legally permitted doses." Today radiobiologists all agree that “one can no longer speak of a ‘safe’ dose level.” (Ian Fairlie & Marvin Resnikoff, “No dose too low,” The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Nov/Dec 1997, p. 54)
Following are the official U.S. government assessments:
National Council on Radiation Protection
Every increment of radiation exposure produces an incremental increase in the risk of cancer.
National Council on Radiation Protection, “Evaluation of the Linear-Non-threshold Dose-Response Model for Ionizing Radiation,” NCRP report 136, Bethesda, MD, June 4, 2001, cited in Science for Democratic Action, IEER, June 2005
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Current evidence suggests that any exposure to radiation poses some risk, i.e. there is no level below which we can say an exposure poses no risk.
U.S. EPA, “Radiation Protection: Health Effects”
U.S. Department of Energy
The effects of low levels of radiation are more difficult to determine because the major effect is a very slight increase in cancer risk. However, U.S. Government regulations assume that the effects of all radiation exposures are cumulative and should be limited as much as reasonably possible.
DOE/NE-0074, “Understanding Radiation,” p. 8 & 9.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The radiation protection community conservatively assumes that any amount of radiation may pose some risk for causing cancer and hereditary effect, and that the risk is higher for higher radiation exposures. A linear no-threshold dose-response relationship is used to describe the relationship between radiation dose and the occurrence of cancer. … any increase in dose, no matter how small, results in an incremental increase in risk.
U.S. NRC, “Radiation Exposure and Cancer”
National Academy of Sciences
The National Academy of Science’s ... committee further judges it unlikely that a threshold exists for the induction of cancers.
National Academy of Sciences, “Health Risks from Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation: BEIR VII, Phase 2,” Committee to Assess Health Risks from Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation, National Research Council, June 29, 2005

Print This Page
Contribute to ReadWriteThink / RSS / FAQs / Site Demonstrations / Contact Us
Home › Email
Lesson Plan | Minilesson
Author: Kellie C. Ellis
Could some common online activities actually improve reading comprehension? Understanding RSS feeds requires inferential thinking, as students use the summary to draw conclusions about the full content.
(A link to this page will be included in your message.)
Back to this resource
Send me a copy
(Separate multiple e-mail addresses with commas. Limited to 20 addresses.)
characters remaining 300
To help us eliminate spam messages,
please type the characters shown in the image.
© 2013 IRA/NCTE. All rights reserved.
Technical Help | Legal | International Reading Association | National Council of Teachers of English

Annie Besant was born in London to Irish parents. In 1893, she left for India having been influenced by the Indian culture and civilization. She was famous as a social worker, educationalist and journalist. She became a staunch supporter of Indian Independence Movement and her contribution to India's freedom struggle was remarkable. She founded the Home-Rule League. She revived the Theosophical Society. In 1915, she chaired the Calcutta session of the Indian National Congress. She also edited 'New India'. She established Indian Boy Scouts Association. She received a prestigious award for her work for scouts. She also studied Hinduism. India is indebted to Annie Besant for her immeasurable work for freedom struggle, educational advancements and social reforms. She died at the age of 86.

Tuesday, 7 October 2008
George R. Brown Convention Center, Exhibit Hall E
Recent increases in the cost of fertilizer nitrogen have prompted producers to assess the potential to vary inputs in space and time to produce the highest marketable yield of potatoes. A study was conducted from 2005 to 2007 near Brandon, Manitoba Canada, to assess the spatial variability of potato yield in upper, middle and lower landforms on a sandy loam soil in response to a range of nitrogen fertilizer rates and split application. Petiole nitrogen, determined late in the growing season, was correlated with potato yield and was used to assess nitrogen sufficiency through the growing season. Petiole nitrogen varied with time during the growing season, from uniform levels in June across all fertilizer treatments, to those which varied with fertilizer treatment in July and August. Furthermore potato petiole nitrogen was higher in lower landforms during July and August, where higher total and marketable yields were recorded. The potential for split application of nitrogen in potatoes based on management zones or sensor readings will have to be carefully assessed to account for temporal and spatial variability.

The traditional internal combustion engine is only about 25%-30% efficient at the flywheel. After going through the rest of the drivetrain and reaching the wheels, you are looking at another 10% loss. While much of this cannot be helped, one company based in Sweden thinks that removing the camshaft may help free up some of that wasted energy.
Cargine Engineering specializes in automotive technology that is redesigned to reduce emissions and increase fuel economy. As most know, the easiest way to prolong the lifetime of your fuel is to lighten the load on your engine. By decreasing the amount of lost energy, you are freeing up more power at lower engine speeds and allowing said engine to accomplish the same amount of work while burning less fuel.
Cargine's new design uses a pneumatic valve actuation system to regulate the opening and closing of your engines valvetrain. Pressures range from 44-232PSI, depending on such things as lift and duration and the average power consumption is noticeably less than that of a traditional DOHC Inline-4 engine. It also reduces the amount of space needed by half and weights about 30% less than the standard configuration.
Of course, this isn't to say that using a Pneumatic Valve Actuation System will save you thousands of dollars every year. In reality the overall gains will be small, but in a world where every mile per gallon counts, we will take what we can get.

Tuesday, October 26, 2010
Homeopathic treatment for Lyme disease
Lyme disease is an inflammatory disease that is often misdiagnosed and mistreated. Lyme disease was first discovered in Old Lyme CT from the bite of a deer tick. Most people that are diagnosed are in the Northeast, Midwest and Pacific coast, but people are diagnosed in all 50 states. Deer ticks are often so small, that the tick bite is not seen, thus the patient never knows that they were bitten. The tick carries bacteria (Borrelia burgdorferi) that infest the body’s system when a person is bit. The CDC reports that 20,000 cases are reported each year, but they also admit that more than 10 times that may exist that are not reported or misdiagnosed.
Lyme disease is expressed in stages. Stage 1, called primary Lyme disease. Some people will see a “bull’s eye” mark from the tick bite, but many people will not see anything or remember getting bitten by a tick. In the first stages, people may feel like they have a cold or the flu. Their symptoms may include chills, fever, headache, muscle aches and pains, and weakness. Stages 2 (secondary Lyme disease) and 3 (tertiary Lyme disease) follow. Those infected may or may not have gone through primary Lyme disease first. Symptoms of secondary and tertiary Lyme disease are an effect of the bacteria infecting the central nervous system, cardiac system, skin, muscles and bones. These symptoms may include blurry vision, sensitivity to light, brain fog, headache, sleep problems, mood swings, fainting, fatigue, dropping eyelids, heart palpitations, malaise, muscle twitching, chronic joint pain and stiffness and muscle pain. Severe cases can even include facial paralysis, hallucinations, loss of muscle function, numbness, nausea and vomiting and speech impairment.
The earlier that Lyme is diagnosed and treated, the less likely it is to go into the secondary and then tertiary stages. The later the stage, the harder it is to treat, turning into a persistent and chronic illness. Lyme disease is often misdiagnosed as fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, multiples sclerosis, chronic fatigue syndrome, Parkinson’s disease, syphilis and ALS. Sufferers often go from doctor to doctor, without diagnosis, some being told that there is nothing wrong with them, it is psychosomatic or “all in their head.” Patients are given medication after medication and can spend tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of dollars in medical care, some for the wrong disease.
A blood test is used to test for the bacteria that cause this disease. Unfortunately up to 50% of people tested may initially test negative. Once diagnosed, antibiotics can be used for treatment. The type of antibiotic used, depends on stage of the disease and the symptoms. Antibiotics may need to be given through a vein for chronic infections. Other supplements, herbs, and alternative treatments maybe helpful for the treatment of these symptoms.
One form of alternative medicine, homeopathy can be of additional help. Homeopathy works by stimulating the body’s self healing mechanism. In the practice of homeopathy, we find the most specific medicine, or remedy, for each person. This is done by using both the common symptoms of Lyme, but most importantly the individualizing symptoms. The symptoms that make one persons disease different from everyone else’s is the most important focus. Once the correct remedy is found and given, the body’s ability to heal is triggered. Although homeopathy can work very quickly in many diseases, this unfortunately is not the case in Lyme disease. For the body to clear the infection and reverse symptoms, takes time and persistence. However, it is possible. With time, and continued homeopathic care, patients are able to take their lives back.
If you or someone you know has Lyme disease, Homeopathy may help. For more information on homeopathy and Naturopathic medicine, contact Dr. Natalie Ham: www.drnatalieham.com or call for a free 15 min consult at 480-456-0402.

Sikorsky H-5, HO3S-1 helicopter
The Sikorsky H-5/HO3S was a four-seat, utility helicopter used by the US Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps during the Korean War. An XR-5 prototype first flew on 18 August 1943, and the S-51 first flew on February 1946. The US Air Force acquired several dozen S-51s with the designation H5. The US Navy and Marine Corps also acquired several dozen with the designation HO3S-1.
The US Air Force 3rd Air Rescue Squadron, based in Japan, possessed 9 H-5s at the beginning of the Korean War, and they quickly proved their value for evacuation of casualties. Marine Corps Helicopter Observation Squadron 6, VMO-6, accompanied the 1st Marine Brigade when it arrived in Korea, and it began flight operations in Korea on 3 August 1950. US Navy HO3S-1 helicopters, originally intended for air-sea rescue, operated from most US aircraft carriers throughout the war.
The H-5 and HO3S-1 helicopters proved so versatile for light transport, casualty evacuation, air-sea rescue, and rescuing downed pilots from behind enemy lines that the demand for them considerably exceeded the supply.

This is a suggested teaching schedule for a 10 day class study of Thornton Wilder's The Bridge of San Luis Rey and Our Town. Lesson plans and handouts can be downloaded individually by clicking on the name of the file in the schedule below. Adobe Acrobat Reader is required to view these files.
Audio Guide CDs are available only for the communities participating in The Big Read. If your community is participating, contact the lead community organization to receive a free Audio Guide CD. Non-participating communities can listen to the full audio online.
Day One Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Culture and History
Day Two Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Narrative and Point of View
Day Three Lesson Plan [PDF]
Day Four Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Symbol and Allusion
Day Five Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Themes of the Novel
Day Six Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Reading a Play
Day Seven Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Setting the Stage
Day Eight Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: Comedy vs. Tragedy
Day Nine Lesson Plan [PDF]
FOCUS: What Makes a Writer Great?
Day Ten Lesson Plan [PDF]
Handout 1: Spain in the New World [PDF]
Handout 2: The Real World of Our Town [PDF]
Handout 3: Thornton Wilder’s Other Works [PDF]
Page numbers refer to the Perennial Classics 1998 paperback edition of The Bridge of San Luis Rey.
Page numbers refer to the Perennial Classics 2003 paperback edition of Our Town.

It all started with a fossil.
“We have this polar bear jawbone from the Svalbard archipelago in the North Atlantic,” says Charlotte Lindqvist, a professor at SUNY Buffalo and lead author of a landmark new study into the history of polar bears.
Lindqvist, along with researchers from over two dozen institutions, assembled the ancient polar bear’s genome from this 130,000 year old bone. As one of the oldest polar bear remains ever found, this toothless facial fossil opened a window for scientists to guess how the animal survived past periods of climate change.
The study, published earlier this week in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, also determined the polar bears species to be about four to five million years old–-more than seven times older than previously thought.
Another study published in Science in April pegged the age of the species at just 600,000 years.
This fossil also showed a strong genetic link between polar bears and brown bears, resulting from intermingling as recent as a few hundred thousand years ago. Researchers found the two species have shared close quarters throughout history, depending on shifting nature of glacial ice and land.
The study is the most extensive analysis to date of polar bear DNA. Scientists compared bear genomes with fossils from multiple periods of history.
“That gave us an idea of the maternal line of the polar bear and its relationship with brown bears,” says Lindqvist.
The mating of the two animals created a diversity of genes in polar bears that allowed for a greater ability to adapt to changes in habitats due to earlier periods of warming and cooling.
“During these warming periods, the polar bear population probably contracted into these smaller pockets where there was suitable environment for the polar bears to survive. Then as the climate cooled again, they expanded from the smaller populations into a larger area,” she says.
Polar bears have easily identifiable genetic differences from brown bears, like darker skin pigmentation, that allow the white-furred creates to survive the harshest of Arctic climates. Partly due to location, polar bears also pursue a different diet and produce milk with a higher fat content.
Most modern day brown bears only contain about two percent polar bear DNA. But those living in the Alaskan islands can have up to 10 percent – a vestige of when the earth’s warmer climate brought the two species together.
Yet based on a few aspects of animal classification, some doubt the notion that polar bears and brown bears are technically different species.
Still, compared to brown bears, the population of polar bears has been in decline for thousands of years. Over time, this has created a shallow gene pool, making the animals less resistant to changes to ongoing changes in the environment.
“It looks like from our study that the polar bear population in general has gone through a very drastic decline and we know today that polar bears hold very little genetic diversity,” Lindqvist says.“So even if polar bears have survived warming periods in the past, it’s certainly no guarantee that they will survive in the future."
In addition to heat and loss of habitat, increasing concentrations of heavy metal pollution in the Arctic also threatens polar bears.
“Certainly it seems like changes in the environment and the changes in climate today happens at a much faster pace than it has happened before.”
With many of the changes in the earth’s climate considered rapid and unprecedented, Lindqvist says scientists are unsure how polar bears will ultimately fare.
“I wish I could look into my crystal ball and tell you what is going to happen,” she says.

The word lesbian dates back at least to 1732 and lesbianism appears in the 1870 Oxford English Dictionary meaning sexual orientation rather than a reference to Sappho and inhabitants of Lesbos. Lesbian as an adjective is in the 1890 Oxford English Dictionary and as a noun by 1925. Until the early twentieth century lesbian was interchangeable with Sapphist.
An updated view on this wider definition has to do with the girl crush as written about by Stephanie Rosenbloom in The New York Times. Rosenbloom defines a girl crush as "that fervent infatuation that one heterosexual woman develops for another woman who may seem impossibly sophisticated, gifted, beautiful or accomplished." Such girl crushes may trigger the same kind of feelings involved in a romance; and although not sexual in nature, these feelings may sway relationship dynamics if the object of the crush learns about them. This broadening of the meaning for lesbian as any woman who bonds with another woman became known as woman identified woman. However, this usage has been criticized as desexualizing lesbians. Cheshire Calhoun wrote in 1995, "When feminist woman loving replaces lesbian genital sexuality, lesbian sexual identity disappears into feminist identity.
The earliest known written references to same-sex love between women are attributed to Sappho (the eponym of sapphism), who lived on the island of Lesbos in ancient Greece from about 625 to 570 BCE and wrote poems which apparently expressed her sexual attraction to other females. Modern scholarship has suggested a parallel between ancient Greek pederasty and the friendships Sappho formed with her students. Lesbian relationships were also common among the Lacedaemonians of ancient Sparta. Plutarch wrote "love was so esteemed among them that girls also became the erotic objects of noble women.
Accounts of lesbian relationships are found in poetry and stories from ancient China. Research by anthropologist Liza Dalby, based mostly on erotic poems exchanged between women, has suggested lesbian relationships were commonplace and socially accepted in Japan during the Heian Period. In medieval Arabia there were reports of relations between harem residents, although these were sometimes suppressed. For example Caliph Musa al-Hadi ordered the beheading of two girls who were surprised during lovemaking. During the 12th Century, Etienne de Fougères derided lesbians in his Livre des manières (about CE 1170), likening them to hens behaving as roosters, and reflecting a general tendency among religious and secular authorities in Europe to reject any notion women could be properly sexual without men.
Recent cultural changes in Western and a few other societies have enabled lesbians to express their sexuality more freely, which has resulted in new studies on the nature of female sexuality. Research undertaken by the U.S. Government's National Center for Health Research in 2002 was released in a 2005 report called Sexual Behavior and Selected Health Measures: Men and Women 15-44 Years of Age, United States, 2002. The results indicated that among women aged 15-44, 4.4 percent reported having had a sexual experience with another woman during the previous 12 months. When women aged 15–44 were asked, "Have you ever had any sexual experience of any kind with another female?", 11 percent answered "yes".
There is a growing body of research and writing on lesbian sexuality, which has brought some debate about the control women have over their sexual lives, the fluidity of woman-to-woman sexuality, the redefinition of female sexual pleasure and the debunking of negative sexual stereotypes. One example of the latter is lesbian bed death, a term invented by sex researcher Pepper Schwartz to describe the supposedly inevitable diminution of sexual passion in long term lesbian relationships; this notion is rejected by many lesbians, who point out that passion tends to diminish in almost any relationship and many lesbian couples report happy and satisfying sex lives.
Not all lesbians express their sexual orientation in their behaviors. According to a 1990 study of The Social Organization of Sexuality, out of 131 women who self-reported same-sex attraction, only 42 women (32%) had sex with another women.
In Western societies, explicit prohibitions on women's homosexual behavior have been markedly weaker than those on men's homosexual behavior. During the 1990s, dozens of chapters of Lesbian Avengers were formed to press for lesbian visibility and rights. Same-sex marriage has now been legalized in Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Canada, South Africa – and Norway (on January 1st, 2009) – but it is still not permitted by many countries. In 2004 Massachusetts became the first state in the United States to legalize same-sex marriages.
In the United Kingdom, lesbianism has never been illegal. In contrast, sexual activity between males was not made legal in England and Wales until 1967. Lesbianism was left out of the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1885; a common anecdote stating that Queen Victoria did not believe sex between women was possible is likely apocryphal. A 1921 proposal, put forward by Frederick Macquisten MP to criminalize lesbianism was rejected by the House of Lords; during the debate, Lord Birkenhead, the then Lord Chancellor argued that 999 women out of a thousand had "never even heard a whisper of these practices. In 1928, the lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness was banned for obscenity in a highly publicized trial, not for any explicit sexual content but because it made an argument for acceptance. Meanwhile other, less political novels with lesbian themes continued to circulate freely.
Jewish religious teachings condemn male homosexual behavior but say little about lesbian behavior. However, the approach in the modern State of Israel, with its largely secular Jewish majority, does not outlaw or persecute gay sexual orientation; marriage between gay couples is not sanctioned but common law status and official adoption of a gay person's child by his or her partner have been approved in precedent court rulings (after numerous high court appeals). (Marriage in Israel is heavily regulated by official religious bodies; in the case of Judaism, the body in question is traditionalist.) There is also an annual Gay parade, usually held in Tel-Aviv; in 2006, the "World Pride" parade was scheduled to be held in Jerusalem.
Western-style homosexuality is rarely tolerated elsewhere in the Muslim world, with the exception of Turkey where there are no laws or discriminative policies against lesbianism. It is punishable by imprisonment, lashings, or death in Saudi Arabia and Yemen. Though the law against lesbianism in Iran has reportedly been revoked or eased, prohibition of male homosexuality remains.
Many lesbian couples seek to have children through adoption, but this is not legal in every country. Other lesbians raise children together with their husbands.
In some countries access to assisted birth technologies by lesbians has been the subject of debate. In Australia the High Court rejected a ban on access to in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatments for lesbian and single women. Immediately after this High Court decision, Prime Minister John Howard amended legislation in order to prevent access to IVF for these groups, effectively overruling the High Court decision and enforcing the Roman Catholic position, which raised indignation from the gay and lesbian community as well as groups representing the rights of single women.
Many lesbians have been involved in women's rights. Late in the 19th century, the term Boston marriage was used to describe romantic unions between women living together, often while contributing to the suffrage movement. Lesbian feminism gained renewed popularity in North America and Western Europe during the "second wave" of the 1970s and early 1980s. By the end of the 1970s lesbian feminism was accepted as a field of study within academic institutions, although mostly as a branch of feminist disciplines. More recently, lesbian feminism has emerged as an expression of dissatisfaction with the 1970s era second wave feminist and gay liberation movements.
Lesbian feminist texts have examined the influence of institutions such as patriarchy, capitalism and colonialism on gender and sexuality with mixed success, sometimes describing lesbianism as a rational result of alienation and dissatisfaction with these institutions. In her 1980 essay Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence, Adrienne Rich characterized heterosexuality as a violent political institution making way for the "male right of physical, economical, and emotional access" to women. Other key thinkers and activists have included Rita Mae Brown, Audre Lorde, Marilyn Frye, Mary Daly and Sheila Jeffreys.
Lesbian Separatism is one specific type of Lesbian feminism.
Before the influence of European sexology emerged at the turn of the Twentieth Century, in cultural terms female homosexuality remained almost invisible as compared to male homosexuality, which was subject to the law and thus more regulated and reported by the press. However with the publication of works by sexologists like Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Havelock Ellis, Edward Carpenter, and Magnus Hirschfeld, the concept of active female homosexuality became better known.
As female homosexuality became more visible it was described as a medical condition. In Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905), Sigmund Freud referred to female homosexuality as inversion or inverts and characterized female inverts as possessing male characteristics. Freud drew on the "third sex" ideas popularized by Magnus Hirschfeld and others. While Freud admitted he had not personally studied any such "aberrant" patients he placed a strong emphasis on psychological rather than biological causes. Freud's writings did not become well-known in English-speaking countries until the late 1920s.
This combination of sexology and psychoanalysis eventually had a lasting impact on the general tone of most lesbian cultural productions. A notable example is the 1928 novel The Well of Loneliness by Radclyffe Hall, in which these sexologists are mentioned along with the term invert, which later fell out of favour in common usage. Freud's interpretation of lesbian behavior has since been rejected by most psychiatrists and scholars, although recent biological research has provided findings that may bolster a Hirschfeld-ian "third sex" interpretation of same-sex attraction.
Since the 1980s lesbians have been increasingly visible in mainstream cultural fields such as music (Melissa Etheridge, K.D. Lang and the Indigo Girls), television (Ellen DeGeneres, Rosie O'Donnell, and Portia de Rossi), sports (Martina Navrátilová, Amélie Mauresmo, Lisa Raymond and Billie Jean King) and in comic books (Alison Bechdel and Diane DiMassa). More recently lesbian eroticism has flowered in fine art photography and the writing of authors such as Pat Califia, Jeanette Winterson and Sarah Waters and Stella Duffy. There is an increasing body of lesbian films such as Desert Hearts, Go Fish, Loving Annabelle, Watermelon Woman, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, Everything Relative, and Better than Chocolate (see List of lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender-related films). Classic novels such as those by Jane Rule, Vin Packer, Ann Aldrich, and Ann Bannon have been reprinted. Moreover, prominent and controversial academic writers such as Camille Paglia and Germaine Greer also identify with lesbianism.
Lesbians: the invisible torture: while lesbians remain outside the scope of social justice reform everyone's civil and political rights remain in jeopardy.(Against the Current)
Aug 01, 2005; Torture has become a daily headline in our newspapers, and although many are shocked by the revelations of torture at Abu Ghraib,...

Theory has suggested that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet may be inherently unstable. Recent observations lend weight to this hypothesis. We reassess the potential contribution to eustatic and regional sea level from a rapid collapse of the ice sheet and find that previous assessments have substantially overestimated its likely primary contribution. We obtain a value for the global, eustatic sea-level rise contribution of about 3.3 meters, with important regional variations. The maximum increase is concentrated along the Pacific and Atlantic seaboard of the United States, where the value is about 25% greater than the global mean, even for the case of a partial collapse.
In the figure, Antarctic surface topography (gray shading) and bed topography (brown) define the region of interest. For clarity, the ice shelves in West Antarctica are not shown. Areas more than 200 meters below sea level in East Antarctica are indicated by blue shading. Notations are: AP, Antarctic Peninsula; EMIC, Ellsworth Mountain Ice Cap; ECR, Executive Committee Range; MBLIC, Marie Byrd Land Ice Cap; WM, Whitmoor Mountains; TR, Thiel Range; Ba, Bailey Glacier; SL, Slessor Ice Stream; Fo, Foundation Ice Stream; Re, Recovery Glacier; To, Totten Glacier; Au, Aurora Basin; Me, Mertz Glacier; Ni, Ninnis Glacier; WSB, Wilkes Subglacial Basin; FR, Flood Range; a.s.l., above sea level.
Citation: Bamber, J., Riva, R., Vermeersen, B., and LeBrocq, A., Reassessment of the Potential Sea-Level Rise from a Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, Science 324 (5929), 901. [DOI: 10.1126/science.1169335]

No matter whether they are writing novels, nonfiction books, articles or whatever, all writers rely to some degree at least on carrying out research, which they then use as the foundation for the written work that they produce. Typically they use numerous sources of information, so that they can check and cross-check their facts, and then they organize these details and present them in order; in context; and, of course, in their own words.
Even if you have no particular aspiration to be an author, this same process is one that works extremely well whenever you want to learn about something new, whether that something happens to be how to improve your golf swing, how to create a resume or how to run your own business.
Often when we want to start learning something new, especially if it is something complicated or in-depth like how to start a business, it can be hard to know where to start. Our thoughts are all over the place and the whole subject just feels overwhelming. By breaking it down and organizing it logically as a writer would, however, it all becomes clearer and more straightforward.
In addition, the mere fact of writing things down in your own words helps to retain information. Who knows, by the time you have learned about your subject, you might even have created a saleable “how to” book to teach others!
Until next time,

A residential area is a land use in which housing predominates, as opposed to industrial and commercial areas. Housing may vary significantly between, and through, residential areas. These include single-family housing, multi-family residential, or mobile homes. Zoning for residential use may permit some services or work opportunities or may totally exclude business and industry. It may permit high density land use or only permit low density uses. Residential zoning usually includes a smaller FAR (floor area ratio) than business, commercial or industrial/manufacturing zoning. The area may be large or small.
In certain residential areas, largely rural, large tracts of land may have no services whatever, thus residents seeking services must use a motor vehicle or other transport, so the need for transport has resulted in land development following existing or planned transport infrastructure such as rail and road. Development patterns may be regulated by restrictive covenants contained in the deeds to the properties in the development, and may also result from or be reinforced by zoning. Restrictive covenants are not easily changed when the agreement of all property owners (many of whom may not live in the area) is required. The area so restricted may be large or small.
Los Angeles County, also known as L.A. County, officially the County of Los Angeles, is a county in the U.S. state of California. As of the 2010 census, the county has a population of 9,818,605, making it the most populous county in the United States. Los Angeles County alone is more populous than 42 individual U.S. states. The county seat is the city of Los Angeles, the largest city in California and the second-largest city in the United States (after New York City).
Los Angeles County also includes two offshore islands, San Clemente Island and Santa Catalina Island. The county is home to 88 incorporated cities and many unincorporated areas. At 4,083 square miles (10,570 km2), it is larger than the combined areas of the states of Rhode Island and Delaware.
The county is home to over a quarter of all California residents and is one of the most diverse counties in the country.

Florida Southern's Frank Lloyd Wright-designed campus named National Historic Landmark
The organic design that graces the campus of Florida Southern College is the work of Frank Lloyd Wright, hailed by the American institute of Architects as "the greatest American architect of all time." As the largest collection of Wright architecture on a single site, the campus is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Child of the Sun, as the collection of Wright buildings are known, attracts more than 30,000 visitors a year. In 2007, the 45-foot Water Dome that Frank Lloyd Wright dreamed of the Florida Southern's campus finally became a reality when technology caught up with Wright's vision. (FLsouthern.edu)
"This architecture represents the laws of harmony and rhythm," Wright said in 1950. "It's organic architecture and we have seen little of it so far. It's like a little green shoot growing in a concrete pavement."
The campus features several buildings by the man known for the Guggenheim Museum in New York, Fallingwater and more than 500 other structures. Many consider him the best architect of the 20th century. The Florida Southern buildings were built between 1939 and 1958, but suffered damage over the years to the point they were named to the World Monument Fund's 100 most endangered sites in 2007.
It's the only college campus Wright designed, and the largest collection of structures by the architect in one single place. Chief among his designs are: the Water Dome, designed to be the campus centerpiece with arcs of water that can go up to 45 feet high; The Fletcher Theatre, the only theater-in-the-round Wright ever built; The Annie Pfeiffer Chapel, the tallest of the Wright buildings on campus. Also signature to the campus are the esplanade walkways.
The college was one of just 13 sites nationwide and one of only two in the Southeast to receive the designation Monday. It joins 42 other sites in Florida previously designated National Historic Landmarks.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

College Preparedness Statistics
With the ever-increasing importance of college entrance and aptitude tests in today's educational setting, we believe it's important to share our most recent PLAN, ACT, and SAT test results.
The PLAN Test Results
The PLAN test is best described as a "pre-ACT" test. PLAN is a series of 145 questions in the areas of English, math, reading and science. PLAN is typically administered to students in the fall of their sophomore year. This guidance resource helps students measure their current academic development, explore career opportunities, and is a powerful predictor of success on the ACT. The results of the PLAN test can also help schools identify which academic areas should be considered a higher priority in order to improve academic achievement for their students.
As you can see, our students score consistently score significantly higher than both the National and State averages year after year. In fact, the results from this year's PLAN test show that our students on average scored over 16% higher than the National average and 14% higher than the Minnesota average scores.
The ACT Test Results
The ACT is a series of 215 questions which act as a means for evaluating students' knowledge in relation to their counterparts all over the United States. The ACT exam tests students in four main areas; English, mathematics, reading, and science, with an optional writing test. The ACT is not an IQ test, rather the exam is meant to reflect knowledge that the student has acquired through their high school curriculum. ACT scores are required by many US universities and universally accepted for college admission. In addition, many scholarships are based, either fully or in part, on the ACT scores of a student.
Over the last three years, Saint John's Prep has also seen its ACT Composite results score significantly higher compared to the Minnesota and National averages. Over the past three years, the ACT results of Saint John's Prep students have been 9.3% higher than the Minnesota average and 14.3% higher than the National average.
The SAT Test Results
The SAT is the nation's most widely used college admission test and is accepted by virtually all colleges and universities. The SAT tests student in the subjects of reading, writing, and math skills, all of which are skills obtained through their high school curriculum. The test is also an indicator of a students' readiness to perform at the collegiate level. The SAT provides the opportunity to connect to scholarship opportunities as well as place out of certain college courses.
In keeping with the Saint John's Prep trend of attaining excellent test scores, our students have consistently scored higher than the SAT National averages year after year. From 2008-2010, our students average a score that was 100 points higher than the national average. While the class of 2011 continues taking the test, the students at Prep who have already completed the SAT test are attaining higher average scores than achieved the three years prior.
As evidenced by the above PLAN, ACT, and SAT results of the last three years, our emphasis on academic rigor and spiritual growth continues to show that we offer a strong Catholic/Benedictine education for local, national, and international students, and consistently provide the best possible preparation for college.
National Merit Scholars
- 2011-2012: Two finalists
- 2009-2010: One finalist
- 2008-2009: One semi-finalist, two commended
- 2007-2008: One finalist, three commended

THE TRADE OF LITERATURE
DEMOCRACY not only infuses a taste for letters among the trading classes, but introduces a trading spirit into literature.
In aristocracies readers are fastidious and few in number; in democracies they are far more numerous and far less difficult to please. The consequence is that among aristocratic nations no one can hope to succeed without great exertion, and this exertion may earn great fame, but can never procure much money; while among democratic nations a writer may flatter himself that he will obtain at a cheap rate a moderate reputation and a large fortune. For this purpose he need not be admired; it is enough that he is liked.
The ever increasing crowd of readers and their continual craving for something new ensure the sale of books that nobody much esteems.
In democratic times the public frequently treat authors as kings do their courtiers; they enrich and despise them. What more is needed by the venal souls who are born in courts or are worthy to live there?
Democratic literature is always infested with a tribe of writers who look upon letters as a mere trade; and for some few great authors who adorn it, you may reckon thousands of idea-mongers.

Geography of Hungary
With a land area of 93,033 square km, Hungary is a country in Central Europe. It measures about 250 km from north to south and 524 km from east to west. It has 2,258 km of boundaries, shared with Austria to the west, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia to the south and southwest, Romania to the southeast, Ukraine to the northeast, and Slovakia to the north.
Hungary's modern borders were first established after World War I when, by the terms of the Treaty of Trianon in 1920, it lost more than 71% of what had formerly been the Kingdom of Hungary, 58.5% of its population, and 32% of the Hungarians. The country secured some boundary revisions from 1938 to 1941: In 1938 the First Vienna Award gave back territory from Czechoslovakia, in 1939 Hungary occupied Carpatho-Ukraine. In 1940 the Second Vienna Award gave back Northern Transylvania and finally Hungary occupied the Bácska and Muraköz regions during the Invasion of Yugoslavia. However, Hungary lost these territories again with its defeat in World War II. After World War II, the Trianon boundaries were restored with a small revision that benefited Czechoslovakia.
Most of the country has an elevation of fewer than 200 m. Although Hungary has several moderately high ranges of mountains, those reaching heights of 300 m or more cover less than 2% of the country. The highest point in the country is Kékes (1,014 m) in the Mátra Mountains northeast of Budapest. The lowest spot is 77.6 m above sea level, located in the south of Hungary, near Szeged.
The major rivers in the country are the Danube and Tisza. The Danube also flows through parts of Germany, Austria, Croatia, Slovakia, Serbia, and Romania.It is navigable within Hungary for 418 kilometers. The Tisza River is navigable for 444 km in the country. Less important rivers include the Drava along the Croatian border, the Rába, the Szamos, the Sió, and the Ipoly along the Slovakian border. Hungary has three major lakes. Lake Balaton, the largest, is 78 km long and from 3 to 14 km wide, with an area of 592 square km. Hungarians often refer to it as the Hungarian Sea. It is Central Europe's largest freshwater lake and an important recreation area. Its shallow waters offer good summer swimming, and in winter its frozen surface provides excellent opportunities for winter sports. Smaller bodies of water are Lake Velence (26 square km) in Fejér County and Lake Fertő (Neusiedler See—about 82 square km within Hungary).
Hungary has three major geographic regions (which are subdivided to seven smaller ones): the Great Alföld, lying east of the Danube River; the Transdanubia, a hilly region lying west of the Danube and extending to the Austrian foothills of the Alps; and the North Hungarian Mountains, which is a mountainous and hilly country beyond the northern boundary of the Great Hungarian Plain.
The country's best natural resource is fertile land, although soil quality varies greatly. About 70% of the country's total territory is suitable for agriculture; of this portion, 72% is arable land. Hungary lacks extensive domestic sources of energy and raw materials needed for industrial development.
Rivers and lakes
Plains and hills
The Little Alföld or Little Hungarian Plain is a plain (tectonic basin) of approximately 8,000 km2 in northwestern Hungary, southwestern Slovakia and eastern Austria, along the lower course of the Rába River, with high quality fertile soils.
The Transdanubia region lies in the western part of the country, bounded by the Danube River, the Drava River, and the remainder of the country's border with Slovenia and Croatia. It lies south and west of the course of the Danube. It contains Lake Fertő and Lake Balaton. The region consists mostly of rolling hills. Transdanubia is primarily an agricultural area, with flourishing crops, livestock, and viticulture. Mineral deposits and oil are found in Zala county close to the border of Croatia.
The Great Alföld contains the basin of the Tisza River and its branches. It encompasses more than half of the country's territory. Bordered by mountains on all sides, it has a variety of terrains, including regions of fertile soil, sandy areas, wastelands, and swampy areas. Hungarians have inhabited the Great Plain for at least a millennium. Here is found the puszta, a long, and uncultivated expanse (the most famous such area still in existence is the Hortobágy), with which much Hungarian folklore is associated. In earlier centuries, the Great Plain was unsuitable for farming because of frequent flooding. Instead, it was the home of massive herds of cattle and horses. In the last half of the 19th century, the government sponsored programs to control the riverways and expedite inland drainage in the Great Plain. With the danger of recurrent flooding largely eliminated, much of the land was placed under cultivation, and herding ceased to be a major contributor to the area's economy.
Although the majority of the country has an elevation lesser than 300 m, Hungary has several moderately high ranges of mountains. They can be classified to four geographic regions, from west to east: Alpokalja, Transdanubian Mountains, Mecsek and North Hungarian Mountains. Alpokalja (literally the foothills of the Alps) is located along the Austrian border; its highest point is Írott-kő with an elevation of 882 metres. The Transdanubian Mountains stretch from the west part of Lake Balaton to the Danube Bend near Budapest, where it meets the North Hungarian Mountains. Its tallest peak is the 757 m high Pilis. Mecsek is the southernmost Hungarian mountain range, located north from Pécs - Its highest point is the Zengő with 682 metres.
The North Hungarian Mountains lie north of Budapest and run in a northeasterly direction south of the border with Slovakia. The higher ridges, which are mostly forested, have rich coal and iron deposits. Minerals are a major resource of the area and have long been the basis of the industrial economies of cities in the region. Viticulture is also important, producing the famous Tokaji wine. The highest peak of it is the Kékes, located in the Mátra mountain range.
|#||Name||Height||Mountain range||Geographic region|
|1.||Kékes||1014 m||Mátra||North Hungarian Mountains|
|2.||Galyatető||964 m||Mátra||North Hungarian Mountains|
|3.||Istállós-kő||959 m||Bükk||North Hungarian Mountains|
|4.||Bálvány||956 m||Bükk||North Hungarian Mountains|
|5.||Tar-kő||950 m||Bükk||North Hungarian Mountains|
|6.||Csóványos||938 m||Börzsöny||North Hungarian Mountains|
|7.||Nagy-Milic||894 m||Zemplén Mountains||North Hungarian Mountains|
|8.||Írott-kő||882 m||Kőszeg Mountains||Alpokalja|
|9.||Nagyhideghegy||864 m||Börzsöny||North Hungarian Mountains|
|10.||Tót-hegyes||814 m||Mátra||Northern Medium Mountains|
Hungary has a continental climate, with cold winters and warm to hot summers. The average annual temperature is about 10 °C (50 °F), in summer 27 to 35 °C (81 to 95 °F), and in winter 0 to -15 °C (32 to 5 °F), with extremes ranging from about 42 °C (108 °F) in summer to −29 °C (−20 °F) in winter. Average yearly rainfall is about 600 mm (23.6 in). Distribution and frequency of rainfall are unpredictable. The western part of the country usually receives more rain than the eastern part, where severe droughts may occur in summertime. Weather conditions in the Great Plain can be especially harsh, with hot summers, cold winters, and scant rainfall.
By the 1980s, the countryside was beginning to show the effects of pollution, both from herbicides used in agriculture and from industrial pollutants. Most noticeable was the gradual contamination of the country's bodies of water, endangering fish and wildlife. Although concern was mounting over these disturbing threats to the environment, no major steps had yet been taken to arrest them.
Hungary's westernmost settlement is Felsőszölnök in Vas county, the easternmost is Garbolc in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, the northernmost is Hollóháza in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén county and the southernmost is Kásád in Baranya county.
Hungary, with its plains and hilly regions, is highly suitable for agriculture.
Doubtless, one of Hungary's most important natural resources is arable land. It covers about 49.58% of the country, which is outstanding in the world (see the related map). The mass majority of the fertile soil has a good quality.
The most important agricultural zones are the Little Hungarian Plain (it has the highest quality fertile soil in average), Transdanubia, and the Great Hungarian Plain. The last covers more than half of the country (52,000 km2 in number), whereas soil quality varies extremely; the territory even contains a small, grassy semi-desert, the so-called puszta (steppe in English). Puszta is exploited by sheep and cattle raising.
The most important Hungarian agricultural products include corn, wheat, barley, oat, sunflower, poppy,[disambiguation needed]potato, millet, sugar-beet, flax, and many other plants. There are also some newly naturalized plants too, for example amaranth. Poppy seed is part of the traditional Hungarian cuisine.
The country is well known for producing high quality peppers, which are often made into paprika. There are numerous fruits reared, including many subspecies of apple, pear, peach, grape, apricot, water melon, cantaloupe, etc.
Viticulture has been recorded in the territory of today's Hungary already in the Roman times, who were responsible for the introduction of the cultivation of wines. The arriving Hungarians took over the practice and maintained it ever since.
Today, there are numerous wine regions in Hungary, producing quality and inexpensive wines as well, comparable to Western European ones. The majority of the country's wine regions are located in the mountains or in the hills, such as Transdanubian Mountains, North Hungarian Mountains, Villány Mountains, and so on. Important ones include the regions of Eger, Hajós, Somló, Sopron, Villány, Szekszárd, and Tokaj-Hegyalja.
19% of the country is covered by forests. These are mainly mountainous areas, such as the North Hungarian and the Transdanubian Mountains, and the Alpokalja. The composition of forests is various, with trees like fir, beech, oak, willow, acacia, plane, etc.
Statistics and notes
|Geography of Hungary|
|Land boundaries, total:||2,009 km|
|border countries:||Austria (366 km), Croatia (329 km), Romania (443 km), Serbia (151 km), Slovakia (679 km), Slovenia (102 km), Ukraine (103 km)|
|Coastline:||0 km (landlocked)|
|Maritime claims:||none (landlocked)|
|Climate:||temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers|
|Terrain:||mostly flat to rolling plains; hills and low mountains on the Slovakian border|
|lowest point:||Tisza River 78 m|
|highest point:||Kékes 1,014 m|
|Natural resources:||bauxite, coal, natural gas, fertile soils, arable land|
|forests and woodland:||19%|
|Irrigated land:||2,060 km2 (1993 est.)|
|Environment - current issues:||the approximation of Hungary's standards in waste management, energy efficiency, and air, soil, and water pollution with environmental requirements for EU accession will require large investments|
|Environment - international agreements:|
|party to:||Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands|
|signed, but not ratified:||Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol|
|Geography - note:||landlocked; strategic location astride main land routes between Western Europe and Balkan Peninsula as well as between Ukraine and Mediterranean basin|
- This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the Library of Congress Country Studies.
- This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the CIA World Factbook.
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Geography of Hungary|

Mastering color in painting is often a matter of combining a
willingness to experiment with mixing colors as well as understanding the color
wheel and color theory. Most artists develop their own color mixing chart—or
several—and work on recognizing color relationships (primary, secondary,
tertiary; complementary colors; warm vs. cool colors) and how colors vary in
tone and intensity. Color is one of the most expressive aspects of painting, as
well as one of the most subjective.

Design a control system to manipulate the position of a spring driven cart.
A solid aluminum cart is driven by a rack and pinion mechanism using a 6V DC motor, ensuring consistent and continuous traction. The cart slides along a stainless steel shaft using linear bearings. The cart position is measured using a sensor coupled to the rack via an additional pinion. The powered cart (input cart) is coupled to a non-powered cart (output cart) using a compression spring. Both cart positions are measured using encoders.
The ability to vary parameters is also available should you wish to change the cart mass and or spring length. The desired outcome is to design a controller such that the output cart tracks a command with minimum overshoot and maximum speed. The system is supplied with a state feedback controller. You may design any other controller you wish.
Undergraduate – second course
Flexible Joint with Inverted Pendulum
Linear Double Inverted
Linear Flexible Inverted Pendulum
Linear Flexible Joint on Seesaw

Lisa Alcalay Klug
Deep in the heart of Barcelona’s Old City, street signs with Catalan names such as Carrer de Montjuic, Jewish Mountain Street, speak of a Jewish presence. Certain walls contain barely decipherable Hebrew inscriptions from eroded Jewish tombstones. And an elegant stone tablet displays beautiful Hebrew letters commemorating the 12th century rabbi Shmuel HaSareri.
View Barcelona Slideshow
Although some 4,000 Jews lived there in the Middle Ages, Barcelona has been slow to recall its Jewish past. Unlike its counterparts in nearby Girona and other Catalan cities, Barcelona’s Call is largely neglected. There are few signs of commerce or habitation. Many streets are dirty and the stench of sewage wafts through the air.
Multi-lingual guides such as Dominique Blinder Thomasov of Urban Cultours help make a visit worthwhile, however. I appreciated her expertise during a recent visit hosted by the Spanish Board of Tourism and several Catalan organizations.
At its peak during the 13th century, Barcelona’s Jewish population represented about 15 percent of its total inhabitants. As immigrants from around the Mediterranean, these Jews filled the streets with Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Spanish, Catalan and Arabic. And they also served as liaisons between East and West, helping transmit the latest advances in science and recent philosophic works from the Arab world.
One of their synagogues, which dates back to the 11th century, is being restored. Scholars recently discovered its remains under the basement of 17th century building within the Call. Sadly, no external signs reveal its significance.
During the pogroms of 1391 — marking the beginning of the Inquisition — many Barcelona Jews converted to Catholicism. Some adopted the surname of a Christian patron offering them protection as “new Christians.” By 1492, when King Ferdinand of Castille and Queen Isabella of Aragon ordered the expulsion of all Jews living on Spanish soil, most traces of Barcelona’s Jewish community began to disappear. In an effort to erase their presence entirely, locals added the names of Catholic saints to street signs. Unlikely combinations such as Sant Domenec del Call, which evokes a patron saint over the Jewish Quarter, now mark pathways where Jews walked for centuries.
View Barcelona Slideshow
Nearly 500 years after the Expulsion, during the 1950s, a Jewish community formed again in the Iberian Peninsula. A small group of Jewish arrivals organized the Comunidad Israelita de Barcelona. Orthodox in practice, the Comunidad currently employs both an Israeli rabbi to service the Sephardi community and a Chabad rabbi for its Ashkenazi members. Today, Barcelona’s Jews again number close to 4,000.
In addition to its Jewish sites, a visit to Barcelona wouldn’t be complete without a look at some of its fascinating architecture. Much of it is within a short distance of the Comunidad. After morning services, I attended a Shabbat lunch at the Chabad rabbi’s home in the company of other international travelers. There I met a Breslov musician, his wife and their fellow band members, all adorned in chasidic attire. They were hired to perform at a bat mitzvah after Shabbat at the Comunidad and were visiting from Mea Shearim in Jerusalem.
Later in the afternoon we reconvened to walk together to see some of Barcelona’s greatest “modernista” landmarks. Spectacular buildings such as the Sagrada Familia, an unfinished work by Antonio Gaudi, and his Casa Mila (a k a the Pedrera house) are fine examples of Catalan Modernism. This artistic movement vindicated the Catalan national identity and promoted Europeanization of the country through urban planning.
Sagrada Familia is often referred to as a sandcastle because its massive towers appear to be dripping concrete.
And with its landmark undulating facade, Casa Mila represents a legacy of “modernisme” unique to Barcelona. Its public spaces, which combine exuberant colors and forms, are swathed in dreamlike, psychedelic swirls of reds, greens, yellows and blues.
And compared to the Call, these structures display a startling contrast between old and new.
View Barcelona Slideshow
When you go:
• Dominique Thomasov operates Urban Cultours, www.urbancultours.com.
• The Comunidad Israelita de Barcelona is located at Carrer de Avenir 24; phone: 34-93-200-8513. Kosher meals are available with advanced notice.
• Chabad of Barcelona is located on Calle Joan Gamper 27; phone, 34-93-410-0685; chabadbarcelona.org
• We stayed a few blocks from the Comunidad at the three-star Hotel Condado, a simple, clean hotel located on Carrer de Aribau 201; phone, 34-93-200-23-11.
• Another site of Jewish interest is Montjuic, the site of a medieval Jewish cemetery. Montjuic is home to an impressive athletic facility that hosted the 1992 Olympics.
Frequent contributor Lisa Alcalay Klug has written for the New York Times, Forward and many other publications. She is the author of the forthcoming Cool Jew: The Ultimate Guide for Every Member of the Tribe. To learn more visit www.lisaklug.com

There is a bright side to the plunge in solar panel prices that has brought down some U.S. and German manufacturers which relied too heavily on subsidies for green energy - solar power costs have fallen faster than anyone thought possible. Solar is now nearly as cheap as conventional sources in Germany's electricity grid.
The falls in prices for photovoltaic components, pushed down by economies of scale and fierce competition from China, have made solar nearly as cheap as conventional sources in Germany's electricity grid.
The boom in Germany, the world's biggest photovoltaic market with 24,000 megawatts of installed capacity, has also helped to drive down costs worldwide, making solar a more viable and accessible alternative to fossil fuels in places ranging from India and the Middle East to Africa and North America.
The unexpectedly rapid drop in global solar prices has nevertheless hit some equipment makers hard - producers like Solyndra in the United States and Solon in Germany that failed to keep pace and ended up in bankruptcy protection.
The demise of Solyndra, which had got $535 million in loans from the U.S. government, is sometimes cited by sceptics as evidence of the dangers associated with supporting the industry with incentives. They argue subsidies waste public money.
"Everyone's missing the real story and it's amazing how brain dead some people are," said Jeremy Rifkin, an adviser to the German government and European Union on climate change and energy security. "It's absolutely a positive thing that solar prices are dropping faster than anyone thought they could.
"It's actually a great success," the U.S. economist told Reuters. "Those criticising solar for that are being ignorant or disingenuous. It's a winnowing out process similar to what the computer and communications sectors went through. More companies that can't stay ahead of the curve will go belly up."
CHEAP SOLAR POWER
Germany is the biggest market for solar power despite its heavy clouds and northern latitude. A robust legal framework that forces utilities to buy solar power at above-market rates has more than negated these disadvantages, turning Germany into the world's top testing ground for photovoltaic energy.
Yet due to plunging prices for components, solar power prices in Germany have been halved in the last five years and solar now generates electricity at levels only a few cents above what consumers pay. The subsidies will disappear entirely within a few years, the German BSW solar association says, when solar will be as cheap as conventional fossil fuels.
Germany has added 14,000 megawatts capacity in the last two years alone and now has 24,000 MW in total - enough green electricity to meet nearly 4 percent of the country's power demand. That is expected to rise to 10 percent by 2020. Germany now has almost 10 times more installed capacity than the United States.
Germany's government-mandated "feed-in tariff" (FIT) is the engine of growth. The FIT is the guaranteed fee utilities are obligated to pay a million producers of solar power for a period of 20 years. It fell to 24 euro cents per kWh for new plants in 2012 from 57 cents in 2004. Since 2010 semi-annual cuts in the incentives have accelerated, dropping the FIT from 43 cents.
"The growth of solar in Germany in the last few years has been just incredible," said Martin Jaenicke, head of environment policy research at Berlin's Free University, noting solar power is the world's most abundant source of energy.
"People sometimes call solar power expensive. But once the capital equipment is paid off, it's an unbelievably cheap source of energy. Ideally, subsidies eventually eliminate themselves and that is exactly what is happening in Germany."
Yet solar remains a relatively expensive source of power, even in Germany where consumers are forced to pay a surcharge of some 7 billion euros annually on their electricity bill to pay for the above-market rates that solar power producers get.
The incentives pay for the costs of the 1 million rooftop power plants installed in the last decade. The German government that wrote the Renewable Energy Act in 2000 had had more modest ambitions. They hoped to have 100,000 rooftop power plants.
"It's important that electricity remains affordable," said Economy Minister Philip Roesler, who argues new installations should be capped at 1,000 MW per year. "We need to tackle the causes of rising costs and it is above all photovoltaic."
Tom Mayer, chief economist of Deutsche Bank, said it was reasonable to support the sector before but it's now "high time" to cut the subsidies by 30 to 40 percent with prices falling to about 15 cents per kWh -- 8 cents below the retail price.
"Now that the technology is mature, high subsidies are no longer needed," Mayer said in a research note. Even if some firms will perish, he said: "Leading producers on the world market can cope with (lower) prices."
SURVIVAL OF FITTEST
"It's remarkable how fast photovoltaic prices fell towards grid parity," said Peter Ahmels, head of renewable energy at the German Environmental Aid Association (DUH). "Germany will hit grid power parity next year -- three years faster than thought."
As solar gained popularity in Germany and market prices for components fell, the government reacted by speeding up cuts in the FIT and is now mulling plans to cut the incentives faster to under 20 cents later this year.
Claudia Kemfert, an energy expert at the DIW economic think-tank, said economies of scale from Germany's boom and technology innovations are behind the fall in solar prices. But she agreed Germany's FIT should fall faster.
"The competition is getting tougher all the time," she said. "That's why some German solar companies might not survive."
Falling prices for solar power have hit the earnings and the stocks of many solar firms. Along with Solon and Solyndra, Solar Millennium, Evergreen Solar and SpectraWatt have sunk into insolvency.
Rifkin, the U.S. economist, said more firms that cannot keep up will fail.
"This is disruptive but it's a success and it's moving so quickly," he said. "Germany is leading the way. Solar prices will keep falling. Grid parity is going to be reached in many countries between now and 2015 and that's a good thing. I don't think the world will need any more subsidies for solar by 2020." (Reporting By Erik Kirschbaum; editing by Stephen Brown and Anthony Barker)

March 2005: Part I of III. A camp in Darfur, Sudan. By early 2005, 1.6 million Darfur residents remain displaced, having fled their villages following attacks that included killings, abductions, gang rapes, looting and burning. UNICEF, working with the authorities and other relief groups, provides shelter, education, special protection and other basic services in the camps.
April 2009: The Vietnamese Government, with support from UNICEF and IKEA, is working to improve primary education for ethnic minorities.
February 2008: ‘Albania Reads’ is a UNICEF and IKEA-supported Government initiative to restore a culture of reading among the country’s youth.
March 2007: Part II of IV: Education is essential for the elimination of discrimination and violence against girls and women.
August 2006: 'Child-friendly’ schools offer free, quality education in safe environments that promote gender equity and diversity.
June 2006: Before Medina Humed Ahmed started school, she was silent on the subject of her future. Now, she says, she wants to learn to fly.
October 2008: World-renowned pianist and UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador Lang Lang launched a new foundation to help support young musicians.
August 2007: The government’s 'Go to School' initiative has increased enrolment to over 850,000, with over one-third of all students being girls.
October 2006: The workshops for Pakistani children affected by the 2005 earthquake introduced them to basic photography skills to document their lives.
May 2006: In early 2006, several students at Amar Jyoti School in New Delhi, India, participated in a UNICEF photography workshop.

white blood cell Component of the blood that functions in the immune system. Also known as a leukocyte.
wood The inner layer of the stems of woody plants; composed of xylem.
X-chromosome One of the sex chromosomes.
xerophytic leaves The leaves of plants that grow under arid conditions with low levels of soil and water. Usually characterized by water-conserving features such as thick cuticle and sunken stomatal pits.
x-ray diffraction Technique utilized to study atomic structure of crystalline substances by noting the patterns produced by x-rays shot through the crystal.
xylem Tissue in the vascular system of plants that moves water and dissolved nutrients from the roots to the leaves; composed of various cell types including tracheids and vessel elements. Plant tissue type that conducts water and nutrients from the roots to the leaves.
zebroid A hybrid animal that results from breeding zebras and horses.
Z lines Dense areas in myoÞbrils that mark the beginning of the sarcomeres. The actin Þlaments of the sarcomeres are anchored in the Z lines.
zone of differentiation Area in plant roots where recently produced cells develop into different cell types.
zone of elongation Area in plant roots where recently produced cells grow and elongate prior to differentiation.
zone of intolerance The area outside the geographic range where a population is absent; grades into the zone of physiological stress.
zone of physiological stress The area in a population's geographic range where members of population are rare due to physical and biological limiting factors.
zygomycetes One of the division of the fungi, characterized by the production of zygospores; includes the bread molds.
zygospore In fungi, a structure that forms from the diploid zygote created by the fusion of haploid hyphae of different mating types. After a period of dormancy, the zygospore forms sporangia, where meiosis occurs and spores form.
zygote A fertilized egg. A diploid cell resulting from fertilization of an egg by a sperm cell.
Back to Table of Contents | Back to Main Glossary Page
Tuesday May 18 2010
The URL of this page is:

See the librarian for a monthly reading log and get started today.
Purpose: To encourage the reading of fiction and nonfiction books to enhance reading enjoyment and comprehension. Fiction Component: Choose from 10 Virginia Readers' Choice nominated books. These 10 books have been nominated for the 2011-2012 Virginia Readers' Choice Award. Students are encouraged to read as many of these books as possible. To be eligible to vote in April, a minimum of four books must be read. Nonfiction Component: Choose any nonfiction book of your liking (80 pages or more--see librarian for
"Those who don't read have no advantage over those who can't ...Mark Twain
Last Modified on September 15, 2011
J. L. Simpson Middle School • 490 Evergreen Mill Road SE Leesburg, VA 20175 • P:(571) 252-2840 • F: (703) 771-6643

Nearly three quarters (72%) of adults are quite attached to following local news and information, and local newspapers are by far the source they rely on for much of the local information they need. In fact, local news enthusiasts are substantially more wedded to their local newspapers than others. They are much more likely than others to say that if their local newspaper vanished, it would have a major impact on their ability to get the local information they want. This is especially true of local news followers age 40 and older, who differ from younger local news enthusiasts in some key ways.
One-third of local news enthusiasts (32%) say it would have a major impact on them if their local newspaper no longer existed, compared with just 19% of those less interested in local news. Most likely to report a major impact if their newspaper disappeared are local news followers age 40 and older (35%), though even among younger local news followers 26% say losing the local paper would have a major impact on them. In contrast, just 19% of adults who do not follow local news closely say they would feel a major impact and fully half (51%) say they would feel no impact at all from the loss of their local paper. Only 34% of local news enthusiasts feel this way.
These local news and information consumers stand out from other adults in several respects related to community attachment, general interest in all types of news, use of sources for local news and information, and the particular topics of interest to them on the local scene.
As a whole, local news enthusiasts do not stand out from other adults in their use of technology or in the way they use technology to participate in local affairs, such as sending around links or posting comments on websites. However, among local news enthusiasts there are considerable differences in technology use across generations.
These are among the main findings in a nationally representative phone survey of 2,251 adults by the Pew Research Center’s Project for Excellence in Journalism and Internet & American Life Project, produced in association with the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation. It focused on the ways people get information and news about 16 different topics, ranging from breaking news to weather to crime to schools information. The survey was administered from January 12-25, 2011 on landline and cell phones. It has an overall margin of error of plus or minus 2 percentage points. And here are some of the main findings, as they apply to the group who identified themselves as local news enthusiasts:
Local news enthusiasts are more connected to their community
Adults who follow local news closely are fairly diverse in their age, though they skew older, more female, and more African-American as a group when compared with adults who do not follow local news as closely. They are also more likely to describe themselves as politically conservative and to attend religious services on a weekly basis when compared with those who are not consistent local news consumers.
Local news consumers are more connected to their communities than others, both in length of time in the community and in their connection with neighbors, and more likely to think they can improve their communities. Roughly three in 10 have lived in their community 20 years or longer (32% vs. 20% of others), and thus not surprisingly are more likely to know all of their neighbors. This is driven largely by local news enthusiasts age 40 and older. As a whole, local news enthusiasts are also slightly more likely than other adults to believe they can have a big impact on making their community a better place to live.
Local news enthusiasts’ news consumption habits differ from other adults
In addition to local news, this group is more actively engaged than others in following news in general, and international and national news specifically. Sixty-three percent enjoy keeping up with news “a lot” compared with 35% of other adults. This is especially true of older local news enthusiasts (age 40 and older), 72% of whom say they enjoy keeping up with new “a lot.”
Six in 10 local news followers (63%) also follow international news closely most of the time regardless of whether something is happening or not and 78% follow national news this closely. In comparison, 39% of other adults follow international news this closely and 46% follow national news this closely.
When it comes to sources of local news and information, 35% of local news enthusiasts say that local news sources give them all of the information that matters to them, 10 percentage points higher than those less interested in local news. They also use more sources of local news and information per week than others (mean of 3.77 vs. 2.84). The youngest local news enthusiasts, those age 18-39, use the greatest number of local news sources weekly, with a mean of 4.38.
Local news enthusiasts are interested in many local topics. This group is more likely than other adults to follow 12 out of 16 local news topics asked about – including weather, breaking news, politics, crime and schools/education. In many cases, interest in particular topics is driven by older local news enthusiasts (weather, politics, crime, traffic, taxes, and local government activity, social services and zoning), while interest in other topics lies mainly with younger local news followers (job openings, restaurants).
For 14 of these 16 topics, the local newspaper is local news enthusiasts’ preferred source of information (or tied at the top with another source). Overall, local television news is the preferred source for just four topics, while the internet is preferred for just three of the 16 asked about.
While this seems to be positive news for newspapers, in many cases the reliance on newspapers is heaviest among older local news enthusiasts, while younger local news followers rely more heavily on other sources.

Quapaw (kwôˈpô) [key], Native North Americans, also called the Arkansas, whose language belongs to the Siouan branch of the Hokan-Siouan linguistic stock (see Native American languages). The Quapaw were essentially of the Plains culture, but they had other distinctive traits; they built temple and burial mounds and lived in longhouses. They once lived with the Omaha, the Kansa, the Ponca, and the Osage in the Ohio Valley, but when the groups separated the Quapaw migrated down the Mississippi River. Jacques Marquette, who arrived at their village in 1673, was the first of many French explorers to visit the Quapaw. They made a large land cession to the United States in 1818, and later moved to Oklahoma, where they lived on a reservation. In 1990 there were some 1,400 Quapaw in the United States.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
More on Quapaw from Infoplease:
See more Encyclopedia articles on: North American indigenous peoples

Results 1 to 3 of 3
What is the actual difference between a NAT and Proxy. Please help in this context......
Enjoy an ad free experience by logging in. Not a member yet? Register.
- 05-11-2007 #1
- Join Date
- Oct 2006
NAT and PROXY
What is the actual difference between a NAT and Proxy.
Please help in this context...
- 05-11-2007 #2
A proxy usually only forwards stuff one one protocal like http. Sometimes it adds headers and stuff so that the destination knows that it's gone through a proxy.
A computer running NAT rewrites all packets sent to it so that they are from itself, so to the outside world it looks like it is from the IP of the router, not the original computer. This is protocol independant although some might have issues.
- 05-12-2007 #3
At a first glance a proxy has the same functionality as nat: You have one system which acts as a relay and which accepts NW requests from an internal site and acts as a relay such that the destination of the request sees the IP address of the relay host and the internal IP isn't visible to the destination. That's usually used when you have local IP networks (192.168, ... , 10.0., ..., 172. ...) which can't be visible in the internet.
nat is much faster because it's handled in the IP stack of the relay host. A proxy is a dedicated piece of SW which handles all the relay stuff. But there are some benefits of the proxy which nat doesn't have:
1) Caching of requests - useful in big local networks
2) Authentication - a user has to provide userid and PW in order to be able to access the internet
3) Access restrictions - allow access only in the working hours, restrict access to a small set of websites only, deny access to special websites, e.g. porn sites
4) Modify data streams, i.e. masquerade or hide the identity of the client application (suppress http referrer, ... )
Hope this helps."Really, I'm not out to destroy Microsoft. That will just be a completely unintentional side effect." Linus Benedict Torvalds

What may be the world's toughest job - good parenting - may have become just a tiny bit easier as of last week.
It's not that anyone discovered a simple way to enforce bedtimes or to get kids to like broccoli. But parents and other caregivers did gain access to powerful new tools that can help them keep children safe online.
Online safety is a real worry for families these days. The Internet opens a wide world of learning opportunities for young people, but it also can open the door to inappropriate words and images - and to contact with unsavory individuals. Studies of the online habits of children have found that many take troubling risks, such as divulging personal information to strangers. Yet, short of hovering nearby all the time, it can be difficult to supervise and limit children?s Internet use very effectively.
That?s changing with last week?s release of Windows Vista, the next-generation operating system for personal computers. Along with many other innovative improvements that make it easier to find and use information and make for a more secure and enjoyable user experience overall, Windows Vista provides much easier and more comprehensive parental controls.
The controls are designed to let parents manage exactly what children can do on the computer ? which games they can play, which programs they can use, and which Web sites they can visit. Different, age-appropriate limits can be set for each child in the family. And all settings are managed from a single, central control panel.
Parents also can decide when children are allowed to use the computer and for how long, simply by blocking out specific times and days on the control panel?s weekly grid. If time runs out before a child logs off the computer, Windows Vista suspends the session so that others can use the computer, but the session stays active in the background and resumes the next time the child logs on. No work is lost.
Windows Vista even provides easy-to-read activity reports that show how children have been using the computer, so that parents can know what kids are seeing, hearing and doing. This accurate record can provide a basis for parents and children to talk about what content and activities are appropriate, and why.
Such discussions remain vitally important, because family communication is still the best way to teach children how to stay safe, online or otherwise, on their own. Recognizing that the challenge has many dimensions, Microsoft is working to help keep kids safe not only through technological innovations such as Windows Vista, but also by working with others for Internet safety education, industry standards, beneficial legislation and law enforcement.
We?re glad to be of some small help with what is still the world?s toughest job.

During the summer of 1944, while British and American troops stormed through France toward the German border, Soviet armies swept just as rapidly toward Germany from the east. Between June and August their 600-mile front advanced more than 300 miles, destroying more than seventeen German divisions and inflicting more than 300,000 casualties.
The Soviet advance was relentless—and also brutally cynical. In August, the Soviets encouraged the lightly armed Polish Home Army to rise against the Germans occupying their nation and promised to assist them if they did. When the Polish patriots in Warsaw rebelled, the Soviets just watched while the Germans slaughtered more than a quarter million Poles. By the time the Soviets moved into the destroyed city, the Polish nation they intended to occupy following the war was decimated.
By the end of the year, the Soviets had all but driven the Germans from Eastern Europe. In December, Russian armies began to cross the border in Germany.
Faced with Allied armies on both borders, Hitler decided to take the offensive in December 1944. Germany’s situation was grim, but he recognized that the Allies’ extended supply lines gave him time for one desperate action. An attack on the western front against American and British forces in Belgium could accomplish several things. It could reclaim the critical port at Antwerp, further disrupting Allied supply lines. A jolt to the British and American forces might also encourage them to accept a negotiated peace—separate from the communist Russians who, he realized, scared the British and Americans as much as they did him. Moreover, with a little more time, he might be able to develop new weapons, in particular even heavier tanks and jet airplanes.
Therefore on 16 December, German forces launched an attack at the relatively thin Allied lines in the Ardennes Forest. Almost inconceivably, more than 250,000 men and 1400 tanks hit the American lines by complete surprise. Eisenhower rushed re-enforcements to the forest, but by then the Germans had forced a 70-mile wide “bulge” in American lines.
Toughness in the trenches, brilliant leadership from General George Patton, and limited German resources combined to stall the Nazi attack. American troops tenaciously held the line at the tip of the bulge. Patton whipped his army abruptly to the north and crashed the bulge along its left flank. And by Christmas, the German tanks were running on fumes. Stopping dead in their tracks, the mighty panzers turned into sitting ducks for the American gunners.
The simple fact was that while Allied supply lines were stretched, their supplies were not. The German army befitted from interior lines; but since Allied planes dominated the skies and were wreaking havoc on Germany’s industries, Germany’s capacity to restock its desperate army was broken.
In January 1945, Hitler ordered a surprise attack on the Allied airfields in Belgium. He had great success, destroying more than 500 planes. But while American manufacturers in Long Beach, Wichita, and Oklahoma city could spit out replacement craft in relatively short order, Hitler’s decimated industries could not replace the 300 planes he lost in the raid.
These last ditch German offensives took a deadly toll. At the Battle of the Bulge, the Allies suffered close to 70,000 casualties, most of them American. But the effort cost the Germans far more: 200,000 men, and 800 tanks and 1500 planes that could not be replaced. To add salt to their wound, the Germans gained virtually nothing; by February, the bulge had been flattened.
In the spring of 1945, the Allies unstoppable advance across Germany resumed. British and American forces swept north taking the heavily industrialized Ruhr Valley and critical ports along the North Sea. Another army swung further to the south mopping up along the Danube River. American General Omar Bradley’s army advanced across central Germany, but after considerable debate, did not march on Berlin. The German capital was left to the Soviets who were dead set on reaching Berlin first.
Bradley was willing to let the Soviets have the glory of eating the heart of the Third Reich. He correctly estimated that capturing the city would take more than 100,000 lives. But British and American politicians debated the post-war consequences of ending the war with only Soviet troops in Berlin. As the Russians had advanced across Eastern Europe, they had left a heavy footprint. Anxious to build a string of Pro-Soviet governments along their border, they had installed communist puppets in every country they “liberated.” On each occasion Roosevelt had challenged Soviet Premier Stalin, but Stalin reminded the American president that he had not been consulted before the British and Americans had decided to leave Darlan in power in North Africa or Badoglio in power in Italy. In other words, they had set the precedent that the liberator of a territory determined the political disposition of that territory.
It was a hard argument to refute, and therefore the stakes attached to the capture of Berlin were huge. Would Stalin impose a communist government in Berlin? Would he refuse to allow the British and Americans to join in determining Germany’s future? Ultimately, the Russians did turn over sectors of the German capital to other Allies. Despite bearing the brunt of the casualties in its capture, they did agree to the formation of joint Allied council for Germany. At this stage in the conflict, in other words, there still seemed room for compromise.
All of this meant more to the politicians than the military commanders in the field. What mattered most to them was by the last week in April, most of Germany was under Allied control and Berlin was sinking fast. On 28 April, Hitler married his mistress, Eva Braun. After a two day honeymoon, the two committed suicide. One week later, the next and last president of the Third Reich, Karl Dönitz, surrendered.

Union General Irvin McDowell
Army of the Potomac
Born 1818 Died 1885
After graduating from the U.S. Military Academy, McDowell served with the 1st Artillery and then returned to the academy as the adjutant. During the Mexican War he was brevetted a captain for gallant and meritorious conduct. From then until the outbreak of the Civil War, McDowell was employed in various staff duties in Washington, New York, and Texas, being promoted to brevet
major on 31 March 1856.
In 1861, at the
urging of his close friend Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase, McDowell was promoted three grades to brigadier general in the Regular Army and assigned commander of the
newly organized army at Washington. Although he requested more time to prepare his force, McDowell was ordered to advance immediately against the Confederate force at Manassas Junction. In the ensuing Battle of First Bull Run (21 July 1861
), he dashed around the field, trying personally to encourage his men. Although the morning phase of the battle saw
the Confederates driven back, by afternoon the Southern forces had counterattacked and routed the Federal forces. Northern officials and the public blamed McDowell for the defeat, and he was relieved of army command.
Afterward appointed commander of a division, he was later promoted to major general of volunteers (14 March 1862) and assigned command of the I Corps, Army of the Potomac. Officials in Washington, fearing for the safety of the capital, retained McDowell's command, redesignated it the Army of the Rappahannock, and placed it along that river. Subsequently, McDowell's army was
consolidated with troops in the Shenandoah Valley to create a force known as the Army of Virginia under Maj. Gen. John Pope. McDowell's command was redesignated the III Corps.
The defeat at First Bull Run continued to haunt McDowell, and his officers and enlisted men generally disliked him. When he was injured in a riding accident in the summer of 1862, it was said that a portion of his command gave three cheers for the horse that threw General McDowell.
In the Battle of Second Bull Run (2930 August 1862), the Army of Virginia was defeated and fell back into the defenses of Washington. Pope accused McDowell of not fully supporting him during the campaign, and McDowell was relieved of command. Although a court of inquiry found nothing to warrant a court-martial, a strong prejudice remained against McDowell in the public mind,
and he held no further field command during the war. After commanding various military departments to 1882, McDowell retired from the service, with the rank of major general in the Regular Army.
Civil War Soldier 102 Piece Playset
- 25 Union and 25 Confederate Soldier Figures, 18 Horses, 10 Cannon
- 2 Covered Wagons, 2 Tents, 2 Canoes, 2 Flags, 16 Fences
- Size: Figures Stand up to 2-1/8 inches tall
- Scale: 1/32nd, Wagons and Horses slightly smaller
Balls Bluff: A Small Battle and Its Long Shadow
Confederate troops scored what was probably the most complete victory by either side in the Civil War at a place called Ball's Bluff, thirty-five miles west of Washington, DC, on the Virginia bank of the Potomac River. Union
soldiers were driven in a panic off the high bluff into the river, where many of them drowned
Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History
Definitive Reference Work, this volume, rich with over 500 illustrations, 75 maps, and 250 primary source documents, offers more than 1,600 entries that chart the war's strategic aims, analyze diplomatic and political maneuvering, describe key military actions, sketch important participants, assess developments in military science, and
discuss the social and financial impact of the conflict.
Battleground 7: Bull Run
July 21, 1861 The earliest large-scale engagement of
the Civil War, the First Battle of Bull Run found J.E. Johnston's outnumbered Rebels fighting a desperate delaying action versus the powerful Union army of Irvin McDowell. It was in this battle that General Thomas J. Jackson earned his famous nickname "Stonewall"
Civil War Battles
You decide the outcome of a duel between two determined generals in the American Civil War. It's 1864 and the Union forces are ready to make a final drive into the Deep South. General William T. Sherman advances to destroy the Confederate Army of Tennessee & capture the city of Atlanta. Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston
planned on using Georgia's difficult terrain to inflict heavy losses
Civil War Battles
A defining moment in the Civil War -- one that could have spelled victory for the South if things had been slightly different. At Chickamauga Creek near Chattanooga, TN there was a battle that earned it a new nickname: "River Of Blood." Chattanooga was a vital rail station at the time and had fallen to Union General Rosecrans
History Channel Civil
There are about a half-dozen different small arms types, but the Henry is the best for rapid repeating fire and least reloading. The shotgun they give you is useless: you must aim spot-on to affect an enemy, so why not just use the rifle? Grenades are useful at
United States Army Archieves
More To Explore

WASHINGTON, DC — More than half of Americans say they are trying to lose weight, and a majority of them say they are trying to improve the healthfulness of their diet and increase their level of physical activity. However, nine out of 10 Americans do not know how many calories they should consume in a day.
The conflicting findings on calories represent just one of six consumer “diet disconnects” found in the second annual Food & Health Survey conducted by the International Food Information Council (IFIC) Foundation. The survey of 1,000 American adults was conducted over three weeks in February and March.
“This survey is an important snapshot highlighting the gap between Americans' desire to have a more healthful diet and the reality of converting this desire into day-to-day behavior,” says Susan Borra, IFIC Foundation president.
For more details on the study, visit www.ific.org.

Alabama Beach Mouse
ALABAMA BEACH MOUSE
Photo Credit: Nick R. Holler
SCIENTIFIC NAME: Peromyscus polionotus ammobates (Bowen)
DESCRIPTION: Smallest (adults, total length =122-153 mm [4.8-6.0 in.]; weights =10.0-17.0 g [0.35-0.60 oz.]; pregnant females reaching 22-25 g [0.78-0.88 oz.]) species of Peromyscus in North America (Hall 1981b). Tail short, usually 55-65 percent of body length. Males generally smaller than females. Brown to pale gray above, with pure white undersides and feet. A dark brown mid-dorsal stripe is common. Tail bicolored, with variable (10-80 percent of tail length) dark brown stripe on dorsal surface and pure white underneath (Howell 1939; Hall 1981b).
DISTRIBUTION: Historic distribution was along the coastal dunes of Baldwin County, Alabama, from the western tip of Fort Morgan Peninsula eastward to the Perdido Bay inlet, including Ono Island. The type locality was a sand bar immediately west of Perdido Key inlet (Alabama Point, Bowen 1968). Type locality has been heavily developed and no longer exhibits natural characteristics. Because of extensive development throughout the Alabama Gulf Coast, the present-day distribution of the Alabama beach mouse is greatly reduced (Holliman 1983). Active populations are known to exist in areas of public ownership at Fort Morgan and within the Perdue Unit of the Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge (Swilling and Wooten 2002). Discontinuous occupation of dune and scrub habitat between these two sites also occurs. Have been re-established at Gulf State Park. Trapping and visual surveys suggest extirpation from all areas east of Gulf State Park.
HABITAT: Typically includes primary, secondary, and scrub dunes of the coastal strand community (Bowen 1968, Rave and Holler 1992). Densities often greatest in sparsely vegetated areas within the primary dune zone. Recent research indicated that scrub habitat is more important than previously thought. Recognition of the value of this habitat as refugia from hurricanes and other storm events has prompted formal redesignation of the Critical Habitat limit for this subspecies. Only rarely found associated with human dwellings.
LIFE HISTORY AND ECOLOGY: Monogamous; pair bonding strong and parental cooperation in rearing has been noted (Blair 1951, Margulis 1997, Swilling and Wooten 1992). Litter sizes range from two to eight (mode = four) (Caldwell and Gentry 1965, Smith 1966). Gestation period averages 28 days with a postpartum estrus common. Reproduction occurs throughout the year, but typically slows during summer and peaks during late fall/early winter in correlation with availability of forage seeds. A semifossorial, nocturnal rodent that digs distinctive burrows in sandy soils. Burrows typically consist of an entrance tube up to one meter (three feet) deep leading to one or more chambers (Hayne 1936, Smith 1966). An escape tunnel is normally present from the nest chamber to just below the surface. Nests of dried grasses and other fibers are found in the central chamber. Burrow openings are frequently located within vegetation. A fan-shaped plume of expelled sand is characteristic of active burrows. Entrance tunnels are blocked several centimeters (three to five inches) below surface by sand plugs, presumably for predator defense. Granivorous-omnivorous, with a majority of diet being seasonal seeds (Smith 1966, Gentry and Smith 1968, Moyers 1996). Wind-deposited seeds such as sea oats and bluestem important components of diet; acorns eaten when available. Also consumes a variety of animal foods, including both insects and vertebrates. Insects reported in diet include beetles, leaf hoppers, true bugs, and ants. Nocturnal, with daytime activity rare; nightly movements directly affected by weather conditions. Radio tracking indicates activity throughout the night, with peaks occurring shortly after dusk and again after midnight (Lynn 2000). Capable of dispersing over five kilometers (3.1 miles) (Smith 1966) and commonly traverse 0.5 kilometers (0.31 miles) of habitat per night, but most observations indicate that individuals settle within a few hundred meters (200-1,000 feet) of their natal sites. Juveniles disperse an average of 160 meters (500 feet), effectively one home range, away from the natal site (Swilling and Wooten 2002). Dispersal distances for juvenile males and females not reported to differ. Home range size varies according to season and reproductive state. Average values reported for Alabama beach mice were 4,086 -5,512 square meters (43,981-59,330 square feet) from trapping data and 6,783-7,000 square meters (73,011-75,347 square feet) from telemetry data, but ranges as small as 389 square meters (4,187 square feet) and as large as 29,330 square meters (315,715 square feet) have been observed (Lynn 2000). Home range sizes do not differ significantly between males and females. In general, populations show little evidence of intraspecies competition with increasing densities yielding increased compaction of home ranges. This combination of tolerance and dispersal results in the formation of spatial "neighborhoods" within populations. For Alabama beach mice, approximate size of these spatial units is 550 meters (1,800 feet; linear) with occupancy by 40-70 mice. Average life span in natural populations less than nine months although common to encounter mice more than one year of age. Captures of mice known to be two years old have been reported and captive mice have reached four or more years of age. Preyed upon by the red and gray fox , great horned owl, great blue heron, weasel, striped skunk, raccoon, various snakes including coach-whip and pygmy and eastern diamondback rattlesnakes, and domestic dogs and cats.
BASIS FOR STATUS CLASSIFICATION: Habitat loss and fragmentation associated with residential and commercial real estate development single most important factor contributing to imperiled status. Existing or proposed beachfront development will substantially alter all Alabama beach mouse habitat not in public ownership. Reduction of available habitat and isolation of the remaining populations substantially increases vulnerability to the effects of tropical storms, weather cycles, predation, and other environmental factors. Substantial disagreement exists as to the current status and appropriate management protocol for the Alabama beach mouse. Various researchers have argued it is in immediate jeopardy of range-wide extinction if habitat loss is allowed to continue. This position is supported by evidence of widespread extirpation from all developed areas in the eastern portion of the historic distribution. Similar levels of development are occurring throughout the Fort Morgan Peninsula and real estate development on all private areas is proceeding rapidly. In addition, Population Viability Analyses indicate that extinction of even the largest remaining populations is likely within 50 years if current trends continue (Oli et al. 2001). Listed as endangered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1986.
Author: Michael C. Wooten

Five-Year, $3.5 Million Study Aims to Promote the Health of People With Disabilities
02/24/05 Portland, Ore.
The grant from the U.S. Department of Education's National Institute on Disability Rehabilitation Research was given to the Rehabilitation Research and Training Center (RRTC) on Health & Wellness in the OHSU Child Development and Rehabilitation Center (CDRC). The center focuses on health and wellness for children and adults with disabilities.
The researchers are charged with three outcomes:
- Identifying strategies to overcome barriers that impede access to routine health care.
- Identifying interventions that promote health and wellness, such as exercise, nutrition, pain management, or complementary and alternative therapies.
- Developing a method for measuring the health status of people with disabilities.
People with a variety of physical and cognitive disabilities are more likely to experience early deaths, chronic conditions; have some of the highest rates for oral disease; and have higher rates of diabetes than adults without disabilities, according to recent studies.
"Research has shown that for adults with disabilities, physicians provided less attention to a number of preventive care services and less counseling on high-risk behaviors. At the same time, people with disabilities report that they receive cancer screening tests less often or have their cancers diagnosed later than people without disabilities. We need to find out why this is and how to change it. We want to help people with disabilities and health care providers know what they need to know identify and overcome any barriers," said RRTC Director Gloria Krahn, Ph.D., M.P.H., associate professor of pediatrics, OHSU School of Medicine, and principal investigator.
"There are a number of health promotion interventions specifically geared to people with disabilities. We now have the opportunity to see what evidence basis there is for effectiveness of programs to promote the health of people with disabilities," said Charles Drum, J.D., Ph.D., assistant professor of public health and preventive medicine, OHSU School of Medicine; RRTC center co-director; and co-principal investigator.
Some of the barriers to getting necessary and preventive health care for people with disabilities include: transportation, economics, cognitive and cultural differences, according to center coordinator, Laura Hammond, M.P.H..
CareOregon will partner with OHSU researchers on accessing patients and clinics, and on Medicaid issues and data collection. Other partners include experts on health promotion and health status from across the country and other disability advocates and organizations.

Companion planting means arranging the plants in a garden in such a way that they enhance the growth and quality of nearby crops, provide maximum ground cover, and, if possible, improve the soil.
Companion plants are also a way of controlling insect populations. Fragrant flowers and herbs drive away pest insects. For example, an annual with a strongly fragranced leaf and blossom that many insects find unattractive is the marigold. Not only does its strong odour confuse pests looking for their favourite plants, but their roots give off a substance which repels nematodes. Planting a couple of rows of marigolds around the edge of your garden will add both beauty and a measure of protection for your vegetables.
Antagonist plants as their name implies have negative effects when planted together, and should therefore be grown apart from each other.
Plants may be good Companions because:
They like the same soil and weather conditions
One helps the other by loosening the soil for its roots
One gives welcome shade and protection to its companion
One attracts an insect that is beneficial to the other
One deters a pest that habitually attacks the other for instance sage, rosemary, thyme
repel the cabbage butterfly; onions and leeks repel the carrot fly.
One may leave a residue in the soil that benefits its companion.
Plants with strong odours do confuse, deter, and often stop some pests.
Some plants hide other certain plants we dont want detected.
Some plants (especially herbs) are considered nursery plants for beneficial insects,
providing shelter, nectar, pollen, and even dark, cool moist spots.
Listings of companions and antagonists are given. To interpret the lists:
CABBAGE FAMILY: includes Broccoli, Brussels Sprouts, Cauliflower, Kohlrabi
MARROW FAMILY: includes Courgette, Cucumber, Pumpkin, Squash
ONION FAMILY: includes Chives, Garlic, Leek

Educational programs empower patients with lung diseases
(BPT) - Complications associated with lung diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and cystic fibrosis (CF) account for millions of emergency room visits each year. Many of these complications occur because the diseases are not being properly managed, which many - including several advocacy groups -- believe may be related to a lack of understanding and knowledge on behalf of the patient. For this reason, patient education has become increasingly important in managing lung diseases.
Lung, or pulmonary, disease is any disease or disorder that occurs in the lungs or that causes the lungs to not work properly, including asthma, COPD and CF. When not properly managed through regular measurement and monitoring, symptoms associated with these diseases sometimes become life threatening.
"Asthma is a controllable disease. When asthmatics start experiencing symptoms, it's a clear indication their asthma is not in good control," said Carol Jones, registered nurse and certified asthma educator, a consultant for the Allergy and Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics (AANMA). "However, proper management is dependent on patients having the necessary self assessment information and monitoring tools. Asthma education is critical to help those living with the condition learn how to keep their disease under control and avoid urgent doctor visits or trips to the emergency department."
Research shows that communication between doctors and patients has an impact on health outcomes and that patients who are informed are able to take a more active role and have better results.
"It's my belief that you can't be too knowledgeable about your illness," said Laura Tillman, president of the United States Adult Cystic Fibrosis Association (USACFA), publisher of CF Roundtable, a newsletter for adults who have cystic fibrosis. "Patient education programs are a great resource to help those living with diseases further understand their illnesses. In order to be your own advocate, you have to be informed."
Healthcare companies, such as PMD Healthcare, are also taking note of the importance of education. The company, who manufacturers Spiro PD personal spirometer, a novel new lung health monitoring device, is hosting a series of webinars to provide those living with lung diseases, including patients and caregivers, with valuable information about how to manage these illnesses. Jones and Tillman will serve as co-hosts of two upcoming online seminars, also known as webinars, discussing the impact of allergies on asthma and growing older with CF, respectively.
"PMD Healthcare, through Spiro PD, a personal spirometer, helps patients manage their diseases by allowing them to monitor lung function and medication therapy anytime and anywhere and improves doctor-patient communication because data can be uploaded and directly shared with a physician," said Rebecca Russell, patient education specialist at PMD Healthcare. "However, we recognize there are still additional components necessary for proper disease management and that it is critical for patients to understand all aspects of controlling their disease. Through our free patient educational webinars, we hope to help empower patients living with these chronic illnesses and equip them with the knowledge to anticipate and prevent life threatening exacerbations."
For more information about PMD Healthcare's upcoming educational webinars, or to learn more about Spiro PD visit spiropd.com/get-more-information/

Growers in the South Valley are now spraying pesticides to fight a citrus pest.
The spraying is mandatory for some homeowners and growers because of the Asian citrus psyllid, which has been discovered in the Strathmore-Lindsay area.
The Asian citrus psyllid is an aphid-like insect that feeds on the leaves and stems of citrus trees and other citrus-like plants.
The reason for concern is that the pest can carry a bacteria known as Citrus Greening Disease that is deadly to citrus plants.
A mild pesticide is now being used in the affected area.
Tulare County Ag Commissioner, Marilyn Kinoshita said, "Within the 800 meters around the psyllid find northeast of Strathmore there's an eradication area and the treatments are mandatory."
Transporting citrus fruit and plants is also restricted in a 163 square miles area of Tulare County.
Click the related link for more information on the restrictions and spraying.

Podcasts & RSS Feeds
Most Active Stories
The Environment Report
Tue January 8, 2013
New Michigan law widens uses for treated sewage product
A new law in Michigan will make it easier for sewage treatment plants to sell or give away their leftovers.
All the water we use in our houses and businesses goes down a municipal drain and ends up in a wastewater treatment plant. It's processed and decontaminated and eventually becomes something called a biosolid.
Some of it then goes into landfills, and some is used as agricultural fertilizer.
A law signed last week will allow Michigan's sewage treatment plant to sell or give away what's called "exceptional quality," or EQ biosolids.
Mike Person with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality says other states have allowed this for years. In fact, Michigan's been buying a product called Milorganite that's been generated and bagged by the city of Milwaukee.
"It's often used on golf courses and things of that nature. It's pelletized and what it does is provide a nice, slow-release form of organic nitrogen," said Person.
The new Michigan regulations eliminate a layer of bureaucracy. It means these biosolids could be used in public parks, athletic fields, cemeteries, plant nurseries, and on your lawn and garden.
Person says that's an environmentally smart thing to do rather than putting biosolids in landfills or incinerating them.
In order for these biosolids to be given or sold to the public, they have to meet certain criteria.
Dawn Reinhold, an assistant professor in biosystems and agricultural engineering at Michigan State University, says pathogens like E. coli, salmonella and viruses have to be eliminated, and so do harmful metals.
Reinhold says she's researching another aspect of biosolids: What happens to all those personal care products when they get into the water system?
"When you use things like antimicrobial soaps, and you're washing your hands, that antimicrobial chemical is actually going down the drain, ending up in your wastewater treatment plant," said Reinhold. "A lot of that chemical actually ends up on the biosolids."
Reinhold's studies looked what would happen if you were to eat only fruits and vegetables grown in a garden amended with biosolids. She says the health risks would be a thousand to 10,000 times less than from using things like antimicrobial soap in the first place.
But there's one area that still needs work. Reinhold says all those pharmaceuticals Americans use also end up in those treatment plants.
"And so we're starting to understand what is occurring with these chemicals, but as far as being able to completely 100 percent answer that there's no risk from pharmaceuticals in these biosolids, we're not there yet," said Reinhold.
So Reinhold says using biosolids for landscaping limits your exposure to pharmaceuticals to just about nil.
And if you're not comfortable using biosolids in your veggie garden? Go organic.

In general relativity Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates are named for Arthur Stanley Eddington and David Finkelstein, even though neither ever wrote down these coordinates or the metric in these coordinates. They seem to have been given this name by Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler in their book Gravitation. They are a pair of coordinate systems for a Schwarzschild geometry which are adapted to radial null geodesics (i.e. the worldlines of photons moving directly towards or away from the central mass). The outward (inward) traveling radial light rays define the surfaces of constant "time" while the radial coordinate is the usual area coordinate so that the surfaces of rotation symmetry have an area of 4π. One advantage of this coordinate system is that it shows that the apparent singularity at the Schwarzschild radius is only a coordinate singularity and not a true physical singularity. (While this was recognized by Finkelstein, it was not (or at least not commented on) by Eddington, whose primary purpose was to compare and contrast the spherically symmetric solutions in Whitehead's theory of gravitation and Einstein's.)
 Schwarzschild Metric
The Schwarzschild coordinates are , and the Schwarzschild metric is well known:
Note the conventions being used here are the metric signature of (− + + +) and the natural units where c = 1 (although the gravitational constant G will be kept explicit, and M will denote the characteristic mass of the Schwarzschild geometry).
 Tortoise coordinate
Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates are founded upon the tortoise coordinate.
The tortoise coordinate is defined:
so as to satify:
The tortoise coordinate approaches −∞ as r approaches the Schwarzschild radius r = 2GM.
When some probe (such as a light ray or an observer) approaches a black hole event horizon, its Schwarzschild time coordinate grows infinite. The outgoing null rays in this coordinate system have an infinite change in t on travelling out from the horizon. (This is why information would never be received back from any probe that is sent sufficiently close to such an event horizon, despite that the probe itself can nonetheless travel past this horizon. It is also why the metric, expressed in Schwarzschild coordinates, becomes singular at the horizon - thereby failing to be able to fully chart the trajectory of the infalling probe.) The tortoise coordinate is intended to grow infinite at the appropriate rate such as to cancel out this singular behaviour in coordinate systems constructed from it.
The ingoing Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates are obtained by replacing the coordinate t with the new coordinate . The metric in these coordinates can be written
where is the standard metric on a unit radius two sphere.
Likewise, the outgoing Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates are obtained by replacing t with the null coordinate . The metric is then given by
In both these coordinate systems the metric is explicitly non-singular at the Schwarzschild radius (even though one component vanishes at this radius, the determinant of the metric is still non-vanishing and the inverse metric has no terms which diverge there.)
Note that for radial null rays, v=const or =const or equivalently =const or u=const we have dv/dr and du/dr approach 0 and ±2 at large r, not ±1 as one might expect if one regarded u or v as "time". When plotting Eddington-Finkelstein diagrams, surfaces of constant u or v are usually drawn as cones, with u or v constant lines drawn as sloping at 45 degree rather than as planes (see for instance Box 31.2 of MTW). Some sources instead take , corresponding to planar surfaces in such diagrams. In terms of this the metric becomes
which is Minkowskian at large r. (This was the coordinate time and metric that both Eddington and Finkelstein presented in their papers.)
The Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates are still incomplete and can be extended. For example, the outward traveling timelike geodesics defined by (with τ the proper time)
has v(τ)-> -∞ as τ->2GM. Ie, this timelike geodesic has a finite proper length into the past where it comes out of the horizon (r=2GM) when v becomes minus infinity. The regions for finite v and r<2GM is a different region from finite u and r<2GM. The horizons r=2GM and finite v is a different horizon (the black hole horizon) from that with r=2M and finite u (the white hole horizon) .
The metric in Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates covers all of the extended Schwarzschild spacetime in a single coordinate system. It's chief disadvantage is that in those coordinates the metric depends on both the time and space coordinates. In Eddington-Finkelstein, as in Schwartzschild coordinates, the metric is independent of the "time" (either t in Schwartzschild, or "u" or "v" in the various Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), but none of these cover the complete spacetime.
The Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates have some similarity to the Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates in that both are time independent, and penetrate (are regular across) either the future (black hole) or the past (white hole) horizons. Both are not diagonal (the hypersurfaces of constant "time" are not orthogonal to the hypersurfaces of constant r.) The latter have a flat spatial metric, while the former's spatial ("time" constant) hypersurfaces are null and have the same metric as that of a null cone in Minkowski space ( in flat spacetime).
 See also
- Schwarzschild coordinates
- Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates
- Lemaitre coordinates
- Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates
- Vaidya metric
- Eddington, A.S. (Feb. 1924). Nature 113 (2832): 965–967.
- Finkelstein, David (1958). Phys. Rev 110: 115–117.

posted on November 09, 2006 |
Environmental engineers design and supervise systems to prevent and control pollution in water, in the air, on land, and in ground water. Pollution can occur in the chemical processing of goods or with the disposal of waste material as a result of the processing and its use. Industrial wastes and spent or utilized materials disposal must be designed by the environmental engineer in a manner that will prevent contamination to our air, land, and water resources.
Environmental engineers must translate physical, chemical, and biological processes into systems to help prevent or destroy toxic substances, remove pollutants from water, reduce non-hazardous solid waste through waste minimization and recycling systems, eliminate contaminates from the air, and prevent ground contamination. A major objective for an environmental engineer is to protect the public's health and safety.
Careers in Environmental Engineering
Generally, most environmental engineers begin their careers by working in supporting roles. As expertise and judgment is acquired through experience, more substantive and leadership roles become available.
To browse Environmental Engineering Jobs, please visit the ENGINEERING.com Jobs & Careers page.

Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center
The undersides or plastrons of false map turtles are cream to yellowish in color. The juveniles have an intricate pattern, whereas in the adults this pattem is absent. They mate in the spring and lay a clutch of 6-13 eggs.
These turtles are extremely rare in North Dakota, and they are very wary. The best opportunity to observe these turtles is during the first two weeks in June as they come out of the water in the afternoon to lay their eggs in the sand. Keep in mind that these will be adult female turtles often 12-16 inches long.
False map turtles eat aquatic vegetation, insects, worms, crustaceans, minnows, and mollusks.

At the 2010 Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver, 20 lasers were used in a
nightly light show in which people from around the world controlled the beams
through public Internet access.
mirror—which was made of
aluminized Mylar and spanned
90 feet across. In the main hall,
visitors could see their reflections hanging upside down
above their heads. To get to that
hall, they walked through a dark
clam-shaped room illuminated
by sound-activated laser beams
shining downward and tracing
Lissajous figures on the floor.
E.A. T. commissioned Cross and
Jeffries to design the laser-and-sound display.
An estimated 2 million
people visited the Pepsi Pavilion during the six months of
Expo ’70. However, according to Cross’s website, company officials were not able to
maintain the technical exhibits
to the artists’ standards, and
the building was demolished
soon after the exposition ended.
Cross moved to the University of Iowa and created a mixed-gas argon-krypton ion laser show—complete with symphony
orchestra, soloists and electronic music—for the opening of a
new campus auditorium in 1972.
Scientist Elsa Garmire pioneered the use of textured lenses to create these artistic “lumia” effects for Laserium.
Garmire explores her artistic side
Toward the end of the 1960s, Elsa Garmire, a postdoc at
Caltech who had received her doctorate at MIT under OSA
Honorary Member Charles H. Townes, found that her
research into ultra-short laser pulses had become stalled. So,
for a few years, she turned her attention to experiments that
brought art and technology together.
As part of Caltech’s celebration of the first moon landing
in 1969, Garmire designed a laser light “wall” that people
could walk through. In another experiment, she and her
friends hauled an argon laser all the way to the top of the
campus library and staged a light show. Garmire was assisted
by a graduate student who held a mirror to reflect the beam.
Although she knew how to make Lissajous figures, Garmire
was more interested in creating abstract diffraction patterns
through textured glass and plastic. “I wanted to be a pure
artist,” she said. Through her experimentation, she discovered
that Duco household cement
formed bubbles when it dried
on glass and made the most
interesting patterns when a
laser shone through those
At an E.A.T. conference
at the University of Southern California in November
1970, Garmire displayed
photographs of her artwork
and invited the filmmaker
Ivan Dryer to visit her lab.
Dryer set up a 16-mm movie
camera, but when he saw
the brilliant patterns of laser
speckles on the wall, he realized that “film would not
cover the intense color and
scope” of the laser effects and
became convinced that live
lasers would be better than
any motion picture.
A onetime college astron-
omy major, Dryer had volunteered off and on for a decade
as a guide at Griffith Observatory, a public science center in
downtown Los Angeles. So, using a single He-Ne laser and
one of Garmire’s lumia for creating interference patterns that
made an “undulating, kind of organic image among the stars,”
he prepared a demonstration show for Griffith officials and
proposed calling the show Laserium, or “house of the lasers.”
Undaunted by Griffith’s initial rejection, in January 1973
Dryer formed a company called Laser Images Inc., with
Garmire as president. The company provided some laser
effects for a rock-music documentary called Medicine Ball
Caravan, as well as some live concerts by Alice Cooper and a
building’s grand opening.
Garmire eventually decided to return to scientific research.
After her stint at Caltech, she spent two decades at USC—
during which she served as OSA’s 1993 President. She is now an
OSA Fellow and engineering professor at Dartmouth College
in New Hampshire.
In June 1973, the Laserium team borrowed a 1-W krypton
laser from SpectraPhysics and set up another demonstration in a vacant Caltech lab. Of the 120 invitees, only two
showed up—but one was the new Griffith director, William J.
Kaufmann III, a young science popularizer and a “pretty hip

Robot technology is on the brink of yet another major advancement. The goal is increased cooperation between robotic and human workers. Find out what this will mean for robot technology and robot users.
Reasons for Heading in the Direction of Collaboration:
Robots and humans bring different strengths to the table. Industrial robots are capable of performing with precision and repeatability. They are also extremely strong. Humans, on the other hand, offer the ability to reason and to adapt to ever changing scenarios and challenges.
If robots and humans can work together safely, their respective strengths will definitely compliment one another. Such collaboration will open up new horizons for manufacturing. Thanks to advancements in technology, it won't be long before this dream of robot and human cooperation becomes a reality.
Previously, the technology has not been sufficiently advanced to accommodate safe robot and human collaboration. Robots have been restricted to heavily safeguarded cell enclosures (workcells).
A safer, adaptive industrial robot will be able to work alongside a human -- feeding parts back and forth, holding something steady while it is worked on, etc. Plus, programming could become more adaptive and quick if humans could interact directly by physically guiding the robotic arm to teach it.
How the Robot Will Evolve:
Changes to the robot manipulator, tooling, sensors, programming, software, and vision hardware, will be necessary before robots can work alongside humans. Some of these developments have already taken place.
Already, several robot manufacturers have developed safer robots capable of working in closer proximity with humans. KUKA Robotics created the LWR (lightweight robot) and ABB Robotics built FRIDA, a dual-arm robot. It's just a matter of time before other robot manufacturers create additional manipulators. Researchers at the Technical University at Munich have made significant headway with a project called JAHIR: Joint-Action for Humans and Industrial Robots.
In addition, advancements in EOAT, such as the Robotiq Adaptive Gripper, are leading the way to more versatile robotic abilities and human-robot collaboration. A number of different vision hardware and software options have appeared on the market recently (for example: Motoman's MotoSight 3D).

(This post is part of the series on postsecondary education.)
+ + +
There are some really great comments on the original post about post-secondary education. If you haven't been there yet, check it out and add your two cents.
+ + +
Yesterday and this morning I dug into the Catechism and two other Catholic documents: Gaudium et Spes (a Vatican II document "On the Church in the Modern World") and Familiaris Consortio (an exhortation by Pope John Paul II "On the Role of the Family in the Modern World"). The Catechism is, of course, a sort of handbook of Catholic doctrine, while the other two are basically practical application of Catholic faith to particularly modern problems.
I was seeking some guidelines to these questions:
- What is the nature of the vocation that education must prepare us for?
- What is the necessary content of education?
- What are the responsibilities of parents toward their offspring?
- What are the responsibilities of offspring toward their parents?
- How do things change when children are emancipated?
I took copious notes all morning, with the intent of assembling my findings into neat bulleted lists. The point was not, by the way, to find the answers to the question of how parents should support postsecondary education -- just to see if there existed some lines that should not be crossed, or duties that should not be neglected. (Gaudium et Spes says: "The Church guards the heritage of God's word and draws from it moral and religious principles without always having at hand the solution to particular problems" [GS33].)
Without further commentary, let's jump into this. If it gets too late, I'll hit "publish" and finish another time. Numbered citations labeled "CCC" come from the paragraph of the same number in the Catechism of the Catholic Church; those labeled GS, from Gaudium et Spes; those labeled FC, from Familiaris Consortio. I paraphrased quite freely.
What is the vocation that education must prepare us for?
The point of education is to enable the human being to live out his or her vocation, so it's sensible first to ask what this vocation is.
We can think of vocations on several levels. Our ultimate vocation is to heaven. "God put us in the world to know, to love, and to serve him, and so to come to paradise." [CCC1721]
But there's also the dyad of state-of-life vocations, marriage or celibacy: "Either vocation is, its in own proper form, an actuation of the most profound truth of man, of his being created in the image of God" [FC11]. Each requires a certain specific preparation.
And the vocations of men and women are different, implying some difference in their respective preparatory educations. The vocations are equal in rights and dignity. The documents stress that equality does not mean that women must renounce femininity or imitate the male role, and that femininity can and should be expressed in all activities, not just domestic ones [FC23].
Christians living in the world have a political vocation too [GS75]:
- to set an example of responsibility and service of the common good;
- to show the compatibility of authority with freedom, of personal initiative with social solidarity, and of unity's advantages with diversity's fruits;
- to recognize the legitimacy of different opinions about solutions;
- and to respect citizens who honestly defend their points of view.
Vocations of Christian work in the modern world, it seems, include [GS15]:
- by intellect to surpass the material universe, sharing in the light of the divine mind;
- to employ human talents, making progress in sciences, technology, and the arts;
- to observe data, but also to attain to reality itself as knowable, even if obscured;
- to acquire wisdom that "gently attracts...to a quest and love for what is true and good";
- to humanize the discoveries made by man;
- to assimilate the wisdom of the nations;
- to contemplate and appreciate the divine plan;
- to join with other men "in fidelity to conscience" "in the search for truth" and in the solution to human problems
- to care for truth and goodness, and to avoid habitual sin that obscures the light of conscience
More practically, the vocation of all men and women is "to provid[e] the substance of life for themselves and for their families," thereby "performing their activities in a way which appropriately benefits society...unfolding the Creator's work, consulting the advantages of [others], and are contributing by their personal industry to the realization in history of the divine plan." [GS 34]
(If I recall correctly, you could go to Laborem Exercens if you want to read more on human work and perhaps relate this to vocational preparation.)
To sum up, then, education must prepare the human being to support a family or community; to enter the responsibilities either of marriage or of celibacy; to choose good ways of serving the human community; to participate properly in civic life; to express authentic and unique masculinity or femininity; and to attain heaven. No small order, that.
What is the necessary content of education?
I think I'm particularly interested in teasing apart education within the family and self-education. That is, the education that parents owe their children, and the education that people have a duty to seek for themselves. Both are mentioned in the documents, but it isn't always clear where one starts and the other ends -- in some cases the process must be begun by the parents and completed by the grown young person (or even continuing throughout life). I'll try to distill out the themes as I see them.
The "most basic element" of parental education is parental love. The task of education fulfills parental love, completing and perfecting the service of that love to life. "All concrete educational activity," in fact, gets its inspiration and guidance from parental love, and be enriched by love's "kindness, constancy, goodness, service, disinterestedness, and self-sacrifice." [FC36]
Education must put "subjects" in proper perspective: "We must learn that true happiness is not found in riches or well-being, in fame or power, in any science, technology, or art, but in God alone, the source of every good" [CCC1723] Education must "oppose the mentality which considers the human being not as a person but as a thing, as an object of trade, at the service of selfish interest and mere pleasure" [FC24]. In the family atmosphere of love, "children learn the correct order of things" [GS61]. "Parents should teach their children to subordinate the material and instinctual dimensions to interior and spiritual ones" [CCC2223]. Training must include "the correct attitude of freedom with regard to material goods... that man is more precious for what he is than for what he has" [FC37]
Education must integrate the person into solidarity and communal responsibilities. The family is a community, an initiation into life in society, "a complex of interpersonal relationships... through which each human person is introduced into the human family and into... the Church." [CCC2207, 2224; FC15] "The family should live in such a way that its members learn to care and take responsibility for the young, the old, the sick, the handicapped, and the poor" [CCC2208]. Education must develop "a sense of true justice, which ... leads to respect for the personal dignity" of persons, and "a sense of true love, understood as sincere solicitude and disinterested service" [FC37].
Education must pass along human culture, but teach how to discriminate between good and bad influences. In the family atmosphere of love, the developing adolescents learn "proper forms of human culture" [GS61]. "Parents should teach children to avoid the compromising and degrading influences which threaten human societies" [CCC2224].
Education in the home must teach virtue. This "requires an apprenticeship in self-denial, sound judgment, and self-mastery--the preconditions of all true freedom" [CCC2223]
Parents must teach their children to pray and worship and to make use of the sacraments. "Family catechesis precedes, accompanies, and enriches other forms of instruction in the faith" [CCC2226]. Parents must pray with their children, read the word of God to them, and introduce them through Christian initiation into the Body of Christ [FC39]. They have the responsibility of introducing children to personal dialogue with God, and should teach children to know God, to worship, and to love their neighbor [FC60]. Parents announce the Gospel to their children [FC2].
Education is the development of the right use of reason and the right use of freedom [CCC2228]; conscience, a judgment of reason [CCC1778], enables one to assume responsibility for the acts performed [CCC1781]. Thus parents must begin the formation of the child's conscience: The education of the conscience "from the earliest years" "awakens the child to the knowledge and practice of the interior law" [CCC1784]. But the development of conscience is a lifelong process. The person must be "sufficiently present to himself in order to hear and follow the voice of his conscience," so the person has to have cultivated a skill of interiority: reflection, self-examination, introspection [CCC1779] A formed conscience "enjoins" the person "to do good and to avoid evil"; "judges particular choices, approving...good and denouncing...evil"; "bears witness to the authority of truth in reference to" God; "welcomes the commandments" [CCC1777].
Education prepares for vocation. "Children should be so educated that as adults they can follow their vocation... with a mature sense of responsibility and can choose their state of life; if they marry, they can thereby establish their family in favorable moral, social, and economic conditions" [GS52] "The family must educate the children for life in such a way that each one may fully perform his or her role according to the vocation received from God" [FC53]. Education helps to discern vocation [FC2]. Education must help the person understand "the meaning of work in the Christian life... the fundamental bond betweeen work and the family." Work is originally in the home and originally to the purpose of rearing children, and that has not changed. Education must "make it clear that all people, in every area, are working with equal rights and responsibilities," and eliminate at the root "discrimination between the different types of work and professions" [FC23]. "Clear recognition must be given to the value of [young women's] maternal and family role, by comparison with all other public roles and all other professions" and to the principle that "these roles and professions should be harmoniously combined" [FC23].
Education should include sexuality education in the context of self-giving: a clear and delicate education, aimed "firmly at a training... that is truly and fully personal; for sexuality is an enrichment of the whole person...and it manifests its inmost meaning in leading the person to the gift of self in love" [FC37]. Every effort must be made to render knowledge about licit means of family planning accessible ...to all young adults before marriage, through clear, timely, and serious instruction and education given by married couples, doctors, and experts. Knowledge must then lead to education in self-control; hence the absolute necessity for permanent education in the virtue of chastity. Chastity signifies spiritual energy capable of defending love from the perils of selfishness and aggressiveness, and able to advance it towards its full realization. [FC33] "Special attention and care" must be given to "education in virginity or celibacy as the supreme form of that self-giving" [FC37]. Education must include "a knowledge of and respect for the moral norms" for "responsible personal growth in human sexuality."
Education also includes remote and proximate preparation for marriage and basic home economics: "Remote preparation begins in early childhood, in training which leads children to discover themselves as being endowed with a rich and complex psychology and with a particular personality with its own strengths and weaknesses... when esteem for all authentic human values is instilled... for the control and right use of one's inclinations, for th manner of regarding and meeting people of the opposite sex..., also necessary is solid spiritual and catechetical formation that will show that marriage is a true vocation and mission, without excluding the possibility... of priestly or religious life." Proximate preparation "involves a more specific preparation for the sacraments... [and] a preparation for life as a couple... This preparation will present marriage as an interpersonal relationship of a man and a woman that has to be continually developed...." It includes the nature of "conjugal sexuality and responsible parenthood, with the essential medical and biological knowledge connected with it." "It will also acquaint those cocerned with correct methods for the education of children, and will assist them in gainig the basic requisites for well-ordered family life, such as stable work, sufficient financial resources, sensible administration, notions of housekeeping" [FC66]
Part of education is in the proper use of leisure. Leisure is properly used "to relax, to fortify the health of soul and body through spontaneous study and activity, through tourism which refines man's character and enriches him with understanding of others, through sports activity which helps to preserve equilibrium of spirit even in the community, and to establish fraternal relations among men of all conditions, nations, and races" [GS61]
Education in the proper use of media and social communication: Parents must "train the conscience of their children to express calm and objective judgments which will guide them in the choice or rejection of programs available" [FC76]
Most of that had to do with the kinds of educational preparation one could receive in the home. A few notes seemed to be about self-education. One might assume that education in the home, here, prepares one to prepare oneself:
If the vocation is to a lay profession or to secular politics, education must prepare them to gain expertise in it while retaining perspective. Laymen should "keep the laws proper to each discipline, and labor to equip themselves with a genuine expertise in their various fields" [GS43] . Although people's skills and knowledge are becoming more specialized, "it remains each man's duty to retain an understanding of the whole human person in which the values of intellect, will, conscience, and fraternity are preeminent" [GS61]. "Great care must be taken about civic and political formation... Those who are suited or can become suited should prepare themselves for the ... very noble art of politics, and shold seek to practice this art without regard for their own interests or for material advantages" [GS75]
More on this topic next time, when I take on the mutual and reciprocal responsibilities of children and parents, and how these change as the children grow into adulthood. UPDATED: I continue here.

A brief history of Milwaukee and City Hall
The City of Milwaukee arose from a collection of scattered settlements on a site familiar to the Native American tribes in what is now eastern Wisconsin.
Local historians attribute the name to a word derived from the Potawatomi Tribe. The Potawatomis pronounced it Mahn-ah-wauk, meaning council grounds.
The first written mention of a word closely resembling Milwaukee was recorded in 1761. A British officer stationed in Green Bay, Lt. James Gorrell, transcribed the name of the area as Milwacky. A traveling companion of the French explorer LaSalle, Father Zenobe Membre, wrote in 1697 of a river called Mellioke.
The first immigrants to Milwaukee were French and French Canadian traders and trappers. During the 1830s, settlement occurred rapidly, and in earnest. Families established themselves here, bringing the population to several hundred by 1837.
That year, under a mandate from the Wisconsin Territorial Legislature to incorporate, Milwaukee and other settlements in the state became villages.
A City Charter was adopted in 1846, and Solomon Juneau was elected the first mayor. Juneau was a French Canadian trader who had settled his family in Milwaukee. The original aldermen numbered 15, from 5 districts, and received no salary.
The first Common Council met in a Methodist church at the corner of what is now Wisconsin and Plankinton Avenues. After two years there, it moved to the second floor of a livery stable. Fire leveled the stable in 1850. The Council then met successively in a hotel, a produce market, two commercial buildings and the old courthouse.
Another fire ravaged city quarters. So, until 1889, City offices were scattered around town in rented rooms. Then, on January 22, 1889, the Common Council authorized the sale of $1.25 million in bonds to finance the land acquisition and construction of a permanent city hall on Market Street, the site of the present building.
In 1891, Council members held a design contest, which drew 11 applicants from around the country. After considerable controversy over cost and aesthetics, the plans of architect Henry C. Koch and Company were selected, and the contracting firm of Paul Riesen was chosen.
The cornerstone was laid on February 24, 1894, but dedication ceremonies were not held until nearly two years later, on December 23, 1895. The cost of the building itself totaled $945,311. An additional $71,624 was spent on fixtures and furniture.
The building is designed in Flemish Renaissance style. The basement and first two floors are constructed of granite. The remaining six floors consist of pressed brick and terra cotta. Approximately eight million bricks went into the building's construction. Of those, almost half were used in the bell tower alone.
City Hall contains 107,270 square feet of office space. An open well, 20 by 70 feet, occupies the center. The balcony of the bell tower rises 320 feet above the sidewalk; the flagpole atop the tower stands 393 feet above the street level.
The tower bell is named Solomon Juneau, in honor of the City's founder. It was cast from spare fire bells produced for the City by the local firm of G. Campbell and Sons. Solomon Juneau first chimed on New Year's Eve, 1896.
The clock in the bell tower contains numerals of opaque glass that measure two and a half feet high and eight inches wide. The face of the clock is 18 feet in diameter. It was designed and installed by the Johnson Electric Company in 1896. At its completion, the clock was believed to be the third largest in the world.
The flagpole astride the bell tower stands 40 feet high, and measures one foot across the base. It is topped by a copper ball three feet wide.
City Hall Continues Its Restoration
The City Hall fire of 1929 partially destroyed the bell tower. At the time, the City did not own fire equipment which could reach the tower from the adjoining roof. The damage was repaired from the architect's original blueprints.
Before World War I, auditorium facilities on the fifth and seventh floors were converted into office space. The third floor Council Chamber was remodeled in 1931. A wrought iron balcony was removed, and a stencil design for the ceiling created. The design decorates the anteroom and adjoining chambers. The stencil is the work of a former alderman, Carl Minkley.
Between 1973 and 1974, a thorough exterior renovation was completed at a cost of $1.8 million. The repairs included replacement of the roof, gutters and downspouts, flashings and deteriorated masonry and structural steel. The exterior surface was cleaned and sealed. The wood and copper in the north tower also were renovated.
Interior restoration was begun in 1974. Some of the wire meshing of the central well was removed. The remaining wire mesh was removed in 1988. Walls, ceilings, balconies and decorative grillwork were restored. While interior and exterior maintenance continues, the integrity of the building itself is always preserved.
The 1976 renovation of the Council anteroom coincided with the nation's Bicentennial celebration. The repairs were designed an official Bicentennial observance by the Milwaukee American Revolution Bicentennial Commission, which assisted in the planning. The renovation was a joint venture of the Mayor's Beautification Committee, the Office of the City Clerk, and the departments of Public Works and City Development. The Henry Uihlein mansion contributed most of the furniture, plus all the wainscoting and chandeliers. Gretchen Colnick donated the wrought iron plant stand, candelabra and brass candlesticks. She is the daughter of noted Milwaukee metal artisan, Cyril Colnick, whose work was popular in the early 1900s.
Two magnificent stained glass windows, created as a WPA project in the 1930s, were restored and installed in the Council Chamber in 1978. One window incorporates an image of City Hall and the City Seal, while the other portrays the Great Seal of the State of Wisconsin. These windows were acquired through the cooperation of the boards of trustees of the Milwaukee Public Library and the Milwaukee Museum.
As City Hall neared its 100th birthday in 1995, the Common Council decided that the meeting room complex on the 3rd floor needed a complete overhaul, to enhance its utility and make modern technology more accessible. The renovation is a skillful blend of 21st Century technology and 19th Century architecture, giving the complex the look and feel of City Hall at the turn of the century. The space includes two large hearing rooms for Common Council committees, a conference room for use by various city departments, spacious waiting areas and increased city office space outfitted with state of the art telecasting and recording equipment for City Channel 25.
In 2005, City Hall was designated a National Historic Landmark. Shortly thereafter, an extensive 3-year restoration of the exterior of the building began. External renovations included upgrading 1,900 windows, repairing sandstone, replacing hundreds of thousands of deteriorating bricks and replacing the copper roofing on the building's two spires. The biggest challenge was repairing the bricks, as the original bricks were shaped and constructed differently than those used today. Also, near identical replications of terra cotta sculptures on the building were created to replace those that have deteriorated. All restorations were completed in December of 2008 and a Restoration Celebration showcased the historic building with a series of events open to the public.

Notes and Communications: Faith and Truth
John A. Tvedtnes
One of the clearest and most precise definitions of faith is the one given in the Book of Mormon by Alma: "If ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21). Faith and truth are often listed together in the scriptures (e.g. Mosiah 27:14; Helaman 15:7). The Book of Mormon even has the term true faith (Enos 1:14, 20; Alma 44:4; 3 Nephi 6:14).
To gain a full appreciation of this definition, we must understand that the Hebrew words for faith and truth are related, both coming from the root *MN. Hebrew emunah means "belief" or "faith," while emet means "truth." Both are related to yamin, "right hand," and to amen, "established," the word with which prayers are ended. In Egyptian (which is distantly related to Hebrew) we have imn, "enduring, faithful," also "right hand," as the name of the chief God. In this connection, it is interesting that Jesus is called the "Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God" (Revelation 3:14; cf. 9:11; 22:6) and also "he that is true" (Revelation 3:7; 1 John 5:20).
Joseph Smith is said to have indicated that the name Ahman was a title of God the Father, while Jesus is called "Son Ahman." Old Testament prayers end simply with the word Amen (=confirmed, true), and hence in the name (title) of Jesus Christ.
Alma spoke of faith in the "true God" (Alma 5:12–13; cf. John 17:3). True faith is hence a belief in God and Jesus, who are true. We are to worship God "in spirit and in truth" (John 4:23–24; Alma 43:10). The Lord is also called the "God of truth" (Isaiah 65:16, where the Hebrew reads elohe amen; Ether 3:12 [referring to Jesus]).
Nephi wrote, "I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus" (2 Nephi 33:6). This is an authentic parallelism (such as is found in typical biblical poetry), wherein the word "truth" parallels the name "Jesus," making them synonymous. In support of the idea that "truth" is one of the titles of Jesus, we note that he is called "the way, the truth and the life" (John 14:6). In Mosiah 27:36, the knowledge of the truth is equated with the knowledge of Christ. A similar idea is found in Helaman 15:13: "they shall again be brought to the true knowledge, which is the knowledge of their Redeemer, and their great and true shepherd" (cf. D&C 39:1; Nephi 10:14; 2 Nephi 1:10; 10:2; Mosiah 4:12; Alma 18:34).
The scriptures also speak of the truth which is in Christ (1 Nephi 13:24–25; 14:26; Enos 1:26; 1 Timothy 2:4, JST) and of the truth of Christ (2 Corinthians 11:10). He is said to be "full of grace and truth" (John 1:14; Moses 1:32; 5:7; 6:52; 7:11; D&C 84:102; 93:11; 2 Nephi 2:6; Alma 5:48; 9:26; 13:9). In Helaman 15:7, a knowledge of the truth is equated with faith on the Lord, while to reject truth is, according to Helaman 8:25, to rebel against God.
In D&C 93:24, we have a definition of truth: "And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (cf. Jacob 4:13). In the Bible, Jesus is called he "which is, and which was, and which is to come" (Revelation 1:4, 8; 4:8; cf. John 1:1; 1 John 2:13–14, 24), thus defining him in the same manner as truth. Indeed, the title rendered in English as Jehovah means "he exists" and is the third person equivalent of the "I am" of Exodus 3:14 (cf. 39:1).
In the Bible, Jesus is also called the "Alpha and Omega, the first and the last" (Revelation 1:8, 11, 17; 2:8; 21:6; 22:13; cf. also Isaiah 41:4; 44:6; 48:12, and see D&C 19:1; 35:1; 38:1; 45:7; 54:1; 61:1; 63:60; 68:35; 75:1; 81:7; 84:120; 95:17; 112:34; 132:66; 110:4). He is "the beginning" (Colossians 1:18) and is "the Word" which was "in the beginning with God" (John 1:1–2). The title the Word is also an important one (John 1:1; 1 John 1:1). Jesus, speaking to the Father, said, "Thy word is truth" (John 17:17; cf. 1 Thessalonians 2:13). The same expression is used in the Hebrew text of several biblical passages, where we read that the word is "verified" or "confirmed" (Hebrew amen, for example, 1 Kings 8:26; 2 Chronicles 1:9; 6:17; Psalms 19:8; 89:29; 111:7). Jesus is also called the "word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15; James 1:18; Alma 38:9).
The word is truth and is also light, these being titles of Jesus (D&C 84:45). Christ is called the "light of truth" (D&C 88:6; cf. verse 7) and the "true light" (1 John 2:8; John 1:9). He is also the "Spirit of truth" (D&C 93:9, 26; John 14:17; 15:26; 16:13; 1 John 4:6; 5:6; D&C 50:14, 17, 19, 21, where he is also called the Word), and Spirit and truth are likewise equated in 1 John 5:6.
It is through truth that we are sanctified according to John 17:17, 19 (see also verse 3), allowing Paul to write of the "sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth" (2 Thessalonians 2:13). In his prayers offered in the presence of the Nephites, Christ used the word believe five times and added that it was through faith that one could be "purified" (3 Nephi 19:20–23, 28–29). When Jesus said "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:32), he was evidently referring to himself and to the atonement which he alone brought.
Returning to Alma's definition of faith as a hope in that which is true, we can perhaps better understand why the first principle of the Gospel is "faith in the Lord Jesus Christ" (Article of Faith 4). It is faith in the atoning power of Jesus which starts us on our pathway to salvation. Faith in anything less than this truth—Jesus Christ—has no power to save.
When, therefore, we read that Jesus is the "Amen, the faithful and true witness," the "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end" (Revelation 3:14; 21:5–6), we must understand these titles in light of Alma's definition of faith, which has primary reference to faith in Christ.
2. The expression is found in Jeremiah 42:5, while in Proverbs 14:25 we read of the "true witness." In D&C 1:37, we read that the revelations given to Joseph Smith are "true and faithful," indicating their divine source.
4. While some of the references from John 14 can be applied to the Holy Ghost, they are said in D&C 93:9, 11, 26, to refer to Jesus. Joseph Smith similarly indicated that John 14:16–18, 21, 23, refer to Jesus (HC 3:380–81). Both Jesus and the Holy Ghost operate by means of the "light of Christ," and in at least one passage the Holy Ghost speaks for Jesus in first person (Moses 5:9).

Throughout Medieval Europe, people didn't drink water unless they had no other option - there was too great a chance of it being polluted. Instead, they drank beer, wine, or mead with every meal. That's because the fermentation process kills off all harmful bacteria. And in at least one part of Europe, that practice still holds true - Czechoslovakia, where their national beer is the world's finest pilsner, Pilsner Urquell. If you have never had it before, I suggest you treat yourself.
Czechs apparently drink their Pilsner Urquell in such quantity that, based on economies of scale, it is cheaper to buy a Pilsner Urquell in Czechoslovakia than it is to get bottled water. This from Fox News:
In most restaurants and taverns across the Czech Republic, a mug of beer is, literally, cheaper than water. The country's health minister wants to change that as he tries to put Czechs on a lower-hops diet.
It won't be easy. Here in the birthplace of pilsner, beer is known as "liquid bread." Czechs drink an average of 37 gallons of the stuff per person per year, the highest per capita consumption in the world and more than double U.S. levels.
Pub patrons go through the sudsy amber liquid so fast that the nation's largest brewer, SABMiller unit Plzensky Prazdroj, maker of famed Pilsner Urquell, delivers beer with the kind of tank trucks used to haul gasoline, and pumps it into bars' storage vats. . . .
"Beer is like mother's milk for adults," said Marek Gollner, a 36-year-old computer programmer and regular customer at the U Zelenku pub in the Prague suburb of Zbraslav. . . .
"Beer is really widespread, with very deep roots…It's a well-anchored, important part of everyday life," said Jiri Vinopal, director of the Czech Academy of Sciences' Public Opinion Research Center. "It's always been that way. Since the Middle Ages people here have made beer their primary drink." . . .
For at least a thousand years, beer has been a staple in the Czech lands, and the country's native hops are renowned for being aromatic and bitter. St. Wenceslas, a martyred 10th-century Czech nobleman [and the subject of the Christmas carol, Good Kin Wenceslas], is a patron saint of brewing and malting, in addition to being the patron saint of the nation.
I doubt the Health Minister in Czechoslovakia is going to be winning any popularity contests. At any rate, Czechoslovakia is now on my bucket list of places to go before I leave this mortal coil. The thought of spending a week or so quaffing down dirt cheap Pilsner Urquell sounds like it would be well worth the effort.

Experimentalists have shown that carbon nanotubes are among the most electrically conductive materials known. It also has been shown that individual carbon nanotube molecules can be used to make electrical switches and wires. Building upon these discoveries, this presentation first will display and discuss explicit novel designs for electronic digital logic circuits that might be made from such carbon nanotube switches and wires. That is, it will be shown how carbon nanotubes might be employed to design a carbon-based molecular-scale electronic digital computer. To implement these designs, though, it is necessary to have new techniques in nanotube chemistry that will permit the mass fabrication of precisely designed nanostructures. To that end, the presenters also will discuss a new chemical technique that has been designed for this purpose. Computer simulations of this macroscopically controlled nanofabrication technique indicate that it should produce nanopatterned circuit-like carbon structures in quantity. Taken together, these proposals for new molecular-scale circuit designs and molecular-scale fabrication techniques provide a possible route to the mass fabrication of ultra-dense molecular-scale computer circuits embedded in a carbon-based nanostructured material.
James C. Ellenbogen, Ph.D.
Principal Scientist, Nanosystems Group, The MITRE Corporation, Mailstop W635
1820 Dolley Madison Boulevard, McLean, VA 22102
Phone: (703) 883-5930; FAX: (703) 883-5963/1396
E-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org; WWW: http://www.mitre.org/technology/nanotech

|© UN Photo|
|Eleanor Roosevelt holds a copy of the Declaration in 1948.|
By David Koch
NEW YORK, USA, 10 December 2008 – Six decades ago the United Nations brought the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to life. Today, the rights enshrined in the Declaration are considered, simply, universal values. In 1948, however, the idea of universal rights for all was nothing short of revolutionary.
The Declaration was the world's first expression of the inalienable rights shared by all, regardless of colour or creed, gender or age. It established a common set of standards for human achievement for all people: freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect and shared responsibility.
Many of UNICEF's key principles derive directly from the Universal Declaration:
|© UNICEF Video|
|Archbishop Desmond Tutu appears in a new PSA demanding rights be realized for all.|
A timeless document
The Declaration has withstood the test of time and remains the foundation of international human rights law, and a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations. As the Declaration turns 60, it's important to emphasize the living document's enduring relevance and universality. Indeed, in an increasingly complex and dangerous world, the Declaration is more relevant than ever.
"On this Human Rights Day, it is my hope that we will all act on our collective responsibility to uphold the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration. We can only honour the towering vision of that inspiring document when its principles are fully applied everywhere, for everyone," proclaimed UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Today, the Declaration is the most translated document in the world, available in some 360 languages.
Archbishop Tutu calls for rights to be realized
To reinvigorate awareness about the Declaration, Archbishop Desmond Tutu has recorded a public service announcement to support the 'Every Human Has Rights' campaign, a partnership initiative which aims to encourage global conversation about human rights and the values that unite us all.
Human beings around the world can sign a petition of support for human rights and the Declaration by visiting http://www.everyhumanhasrights.org/
Broadcasters can access the 30-second PSA – in HD or SD – via via http://www.thenewsmarket.com/ free of charge.

Reconstructive Skin Cancer Surgery
What is Reconstructive Skin Cancer Surgery?
While cancer is a disease that can unfortunately affect any organ in the body, skin cancer is the most common type of cancer. The three most prevalent types of skin cancers are basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma, and these commonly affect prominent parts of the body including the face, head, and neck. In many cases, the definitive treatment for these cancers is surgical excision, and the concern for scars or disfigurement is one that most patients share. Depending on the location and extent of the cancer, the result from removal of the tumor may range from a scar to total disruption of a facial structure such as the nose, lips, eyes, or ears.
Who is a good candidate for Reconstructive Skin Cancer Surgery?
Candidates must be in good health, have no active diseases or serious, pre-existing medical conditions, and must have realistic expectations of the outcome of the surgery. Talk to your surgeon about your goals and expectations for this procedure.
How is the procedure performed?
Reconstructive cancer surgery encompasses a variety of procedures, ranging from basic scar revision, to local rearrangement of tissue, to skin grafts, to complex transfer of tissue or muscle flaps from more distant places on the body in order to reconstruct and restore function as well as aesthetic appearance. Talk to your USF Health plastic surgeon about what procedure you should consider. Having this procedure will not prevent a recurrence.

Leonidas is located in the center of Leonidas township. The soil of this locality was very fertile and the prairie land with the heavier timbered parts made it ideal. Large maple sugar camps were located in the northern parts. It abounded in large "white-wood" trees which were used in all old buildings where large timbers were necessary. It grew to great size but is now extinct. In the early days it was considered a nuisance and many log heap fires or wind-rows of white-wood logs were burned up.
The township was first settled by Thomas HATCH, an Indian trader of the 1830ís. He married an Indian squaw named MARCHEE-O-NO-QUA and raised several children. He traded with the Indians all over the county and finally left his squaw and family and moved on, later marrying another squaw. George MATTHEWS and family of New York state was the next white family. A large orchard of apple trees, very old, was located at Leonidas when the first white settlers landed there. According to the Indians of that time, a legend of their ancestors, a "heap big medicine man CHEMOCOMAN" meaning missionary had planted them. Romance! We wonder who that missionary was-what stories he could tell!
The original village plat was laid out in December 1846, by E. G. TERRY at the intersection of the Washtenaw Trail road and Mendon and Colon roads. A number of saw-mills and grist-mills were built around Leonidas because of the wonderful power sites. Arks of grain was floated down the river through Three Rivers and Constantine to the mouth of the river at St. Joseph. Some of the grain and wood was even shipped to Chicago by water. Some of the men who built early saw-mills or grist-mills were James COWEN, Isaac BAILEY, James B. DUNKIN, A. C. FISHER, Phillip CLIPFELL and Jerry McDONALD were interested in a cooper shop. Arnold HAYWARD opened the first Tavern and Capt. WATKINS built the next "Farmers Home" in 1836. The first white child was a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. George MATHEWS, who died the following year. The first marriage was William ORCUTT and Esther WATKINS, daughter of Capt. Levi WATKINS. The cemetery was laid out in 1836 although there were several burials before this on various family plots on farms.
In 1837 Justus L. VOUGHT opened the first store. Later some of the early merchants were Lester and Chester BUCKLEY, HEWITT & ESTES, W. H. CROSS, HEWITT & RAMSDELL, George BUTLER, William LITTLE, KADD & GALLOWAY, E. L. YAPLE, DUNCAN & ALLEN. About this time a Methodist, Baptist, and Presbyterian churches were formed. A school house was built and post office opened in 1836. The Indians of the community were very friendly with the settlers and exchanged provisions, held wrestling matches and hunted together. The only trouble they ever gave the settlers was when drunk. Leonidas is a thriving little village today on a main road, M. 60. It has three grist-mills yet. So many human interest stories are told of the early days that we regret we have not space to repeat them.
This page was last modified < Sunday, 25-Mar-2007 21:25:31 MDT >
This website is created and copyrighted 2007 by Joel Newport

One of President Obama’s first actions has been to announce his intentions to build a ‘smart grid’ for the US energy infrastructure. WorldChanging explains the concepts behind the buzzphrase, and I’ll paraphrase their five broad categories here:
- End-user smart metering to use energy more efficiently
- Systems to integrate electricity generation with electricity storage
- A communications network that shares data on performance, demand and availability of power
- An ‘application platform’ that allows third-party utilities to connect the above systems together in useful ways
- Monitoring and controlling systems that allow the grid to respond to service interruptions in a self-healing manner
In other words, it’s a lot like an internet for power, if you will – not to mention a far cry from the crude lacework of cables and substations we have at the present time. There’s a lot of work to be done, but the benefits of investing the time and money promise to be immense. I wonder what our lot in Whitehall are doing about the UK grid at the moment? [image by C P Storm]
If you’re interested in seeing the sixty odd discreet technologies that break down into the five groups above, the US Department of Energy has made a big old PDF report on smart grids.

Document for February 2nd:
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
This treaty, signed on February 2, 1848, ended the war between the United States and Mexico. By its terms, Mexico ceded 55 percent of its territory, including parts of present-day Arizona, California, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Nevada, and Utah, to the United States.
Read more at Our Documents...
Share, comment and suggest new documents at the Today's Document Tumblr Blog

Many high school and college seniors are beginning to count the days until they hear those final sounds of Pomp and Circumstance.
Many parents are thinking about graduation parties and who they will invite and what they will serve. Many educators are beginning to look at the roster of potential graduates and discern who will and who will not make it. Unfortunately 15,000 Minnesotans will join 3 million other high school students in the United States that will not reap the pleasure of having a graduation party. They will drop out. Of the three million students that enrolled in college this year, 40 percent will not finish. There is no easy answer to improving the graduation rates for high school and college students. Lots of people are trying to improve the odds. One small thing that is overlooked is for each teacher, K through college to ask themselves, “What did I do today to help my students graduate?” Teachers and professors don’t just teach a grade or class, it’s much more than that. What they do is part of a plan and the plan leads to graduation. They need to see themselves as an integral part of that plan. Here are just a few things that can be done to improve the numbers of our high school and college graduates. 1. Because the No. 1 reason for high school students dropping out of school is lack of parental support, educators need to be relentless in their efforts to engage parents. 2. Another major reason for students dropping out of high school is teen pregnancy. Schools that have a high percentage of student pregnancies should offer teen parenting programs and encourage teen mothers to enroll. 3. K-12 teachers can post their high school diploma on the wall and college teachers can post their bachelor diploma on the wall and talk to students about their journey to graduation. 4. When students dedicate their class to someone they care about, they are more likely to feel the class has more meaning. 5. Remind students that someone who has a high school and college diploma is more likely to live longer. 6. Remind students that someone who has a high school and college diploma is more likely to have children who will graduate. 7. Remind students that a high school and college diploma will mean that they are likely to earn significantly more money over a lifetime than someone who drops out of school. 8. Identify the special gifts or talents of students. Often students who experience too much failure feel they do not have a special gift(s). If students do not know their gifts, help them to discover one. 9. Remind students that a high school and college diploma will mean that they are less likely to use drugs and alcohol. 10. All students need to be reminded about how to go to school. Remind them again and again what it takes to be successful in school. Don’t assume they know. 11. Tell students about your educational career including your mistakes and success stories. Some of you may even be thinking, “If I made it anyone can make it.” 12. If a student has few or no positive role models in his or her life, try to find a mentor for him or her. Maybe it could be you. 13. Make an effort to get to know the student and greet all students daily. You shouldn’t be surprised what an impact just being noticed can have on someone. 14. Talk about the relationship between culture and education. Knowing about one’s culture can be the foundation for success, it could be the X-Factor. 15. Remind your students that they have the same potential to succeed as any other student. We all have about the same number of brain cells. 16. When a student has a number of absences, find out why. Be the first one to intervene. 17. When students do fall behind in reading or math make sure that the student gets immediate help and is brought up to grade level as quickly as possible. 18. Do your best to keep parents informed of your students’ progress or lack of progress. 19. Relentlessly encourage students to participate in events outside of the classroom. 20. Find ways to engage students in your classroom and school. 21. When possible, find incentives for high school graduation. Yes, even dollars. 22. Offer college credit to at-risk high school kids for taking a class that helps them understand the importance of having a high school diploma. 23. Remind students that if they do have a college degree, they are more likely to get the kind of job they want and be happier with their life. 24. When students get their high school diploma they don’t have to think about when or if they should begin GED classes. 25. Tell students that when they have a high school or college diploma their dreams are more likely to come true. Every teacher has a role to play in helping every student graduate. When a student drops out, we all fail. When one student graduates, we all succeed. JOHN R. EGGERS of Bemidji is a former university professor and area principal. He also is a writer and public speaker.

Countries in Africa should promote maternal, infant and child health and report on progress, in order to curb high death rates on the continent, according to the African Union. There are continents where women give birth and it is a pleasant experience because they are bringing life, said AU Commissioner for Social Affairs Bience Gawana. In our continent, unfortunately, that is not always the case. Women also bring death to themselves and their children. Progress on the promotion of maternal, infant and child health featured during the 12th African Union Heads of State and Government Summit, which ended on Wednesday. Ms Gawana said the AU had agreed to launch a continent-wide campaign to address the issue.
mothers2mothers (m2m) is a peer support program that aims to provide education and psychosocial support to HIV-positive pregnant women and new mothers, help women access existing health care services to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV (PMTCT), and follow up with mothers and babies to ensure they receive appropriate medical care after delivery. While there has been much interest in innovative psychosocial support programs that complement PMTCT clinical services, only a few such programs exist, and there is very little data about their effectiveness. Although m2m is a well known program with anecdotal accounts of successfully supporting HIV-positive women, the program had yet to undergo an external evaluation. The Horizons Program of Population Council, in collaboration with Health Systems Trust, completed the first evaluation of m2m as part of its introduction in KwaZulu-Natal Province, South Africa.
Explain to interested patients that premature infants are at a significant risk for severe lung disease, and that giving corticosteroids to the expectant mother has been shown to reduce the risk of lung complications in the baby.
Women who give birth by Caesarean are putting themselves and their child at risk, medical experts have warned in a new report.
Researchers from the Johns Hopkins University and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development have learned that, contrary to popular belief, mild to moderate levels of maternal psychological stress during pregnancy may actually enhance fetal maturation.
Preeclampsia, the development of high blood pressure and protein in the urine during pregnancy and its more severe complications such as eclampsia, can threaten the lives of both mother and child. While there is no therapy to prevent preeclampsia, a link to calcium deficiency has been suggested. In a study published in the March issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, researchers across the globe, under the auspices of the World Health Organization (WHO), investigated whether a calcium supplement could reduce the complications and mortality from this condition.
The biological clock ticks for men as well as women, suggesting it is not just females who should be aware of the consequences of starting families later in life, according to research published recently.
A first-trimester screening test can reliably identify fetuses likely to be born with Down syndrome, providing expectant women with that information much earlier in a pregnancy than current testing allows, according to a major study being released today.
Deaths of mothers due to pregnancy complications have increased in Tanzania, according to an official from the Ministry of Health in the country.
Hundreds of millions of women and children have no access to potentially life-saving care with often fatal results, the World Health Organization (WHO) says in a report published today.

Aloha from Maui!
The landfill on Maui is a great example of kuleana (responsibility). Though we can proclaim that it is a digusting eyesore, all of us have contributed to its ever growing destruction. Taking responsibility for the trash you create by consuming a product, should be made of the utmost priority. Everyone needs to understand proper disposal methods to limit the waste that ends up in landfills or scattered amongst our lands and seas. The gasses and chemicals released from landfill sites are harmful. As rain washes through dumpsites, solids dissolve and mix with liquids which creates an acidic and contaminated fluid that can pollute and contaminate drinking water. The bacteria from the breakdown of organic matter in landfills, such as fruit scraps and vegetable peelings, create a lethal greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming. These are just a few harmful effects of waste mismanagement.
Individuals can sort the components of their trash and discard materials properly, to severely reduce the millions of tons of trash that is produced each year by the nation. Home recycling does take a trivial dedication of time, but offers more than sufficient benefits to the homeowner and the environment. Recycling in the home can make a difference on both a local and global level.
The basics of recycling should be reviewed. The category of Papers and Carboard include newspapers, magazines, glossy printed flyers, phone books, envelopes, computer paper and paper packaging. Remove any rubber bands or plastic wrapping. Carbon paper, stickers and laminated materials should not be included in this category. Effort should be made to recycle all plastic waste. Plastic goods, bottles, grocery bags and polystyrene packaging should be carefully separated by the specific type of plastic. Glass containers are recycled according to color: clear, green and brown. Light bulbs, sheet glass, mirrors and pyrex should be kept separate from traditional glass jars and bottles. Aluminum, Steel and Copper recyclables include food cans, aluminum cans, aluminum foil, foil packaging, copper, bronze and brass. Paint cans and aerosol are recyclable but are hazardous and need to be kept separate from other metals. Electronic goods like printers, computers and hardware along with cell phones and rechargeable batteries should be deposited at appropriate e-cycling centers.
Some tips for home recycling; Visit your local recycling center to find out what is accepted at which specific centers on the island. Set up your home recycling bins according to these categories. Once a bin system is established at home, recycling becomes an easier chore. Labeling these bins will ensure materials are separated correctly. Rinsing recyclables will reduce pests and dirty work when its time to transport to the recycling center. Composting is the solution for household green scraps.
To reduce your production of waste overall, purchase products with the highest percentage of “post-consumer” recycled content. Post consumer means the materials used in the manufacturing process were returned by consumers and successfully recycled. The Freecycle movement is a great idea as well, you can give away for free what you have and don’t need and you receive for free what you need, but don’t have. This exchange of goods keeps lots of useful stuff out of the landfill. We must reduce consumption and demand products made primarily with recycled content. This will ensure that the materials we recycle are put to use, and these markets are sustained.
KeanaeMaui.com is excited, to introduce our followers to TheR2H. Today's best guide to The Road to Hana. We are impressed with the clarity and quality of the audio, map and itinerary that is included in your adventure package. This guide provides new and even seasoned Hana Hwy. travelers with great suggestions, noting all of the most important highlights found along The Road to Hana. visit TheR2H.com
at Hana Ball Park weekly
We are the proud sponsors of this summer's softball team from Keanae. The only outside team participating in Hana's community summer co-ed league, includes five girls and five boys from our town 18 miles away. Games happening every Tuesday and Thursday evening at Hana Ball Park, unless of course it is raining.. which happens quite often on this side. Here we go Iwa's!
check out pictures from the games on Keanae Landing's facebook
Clearing the 'Auwai
It is amazing what a small group of hard working people can do. In half a day, community members eradicated cane grass, banana trees and shrubbery that severely overgrew one of the many streams that feed Wailua Nui Valley. Na Moku 'Aupuni o Ko'olau Hui is a non profit representing the concerns of residences within the Ko'olau region. Water quality and quantity remains an ongoing issue, so their organization continues a long standing legal battle against various A&B subsidiaries. Though East Maui Irrigation has claimed to have released over a handful of streams from being diverted, the results are barely apparent. The group stresses that releasing more water for their taro patches is just the first step. The health of all stream life should be accommodated for. In order to achieve a healthy aquatic ecosystem, an abundance of water should be returned to provide comfortable living environments for the fish, prawn and various stream life. Until the water is restored to respectable stream flow levels, Na Moku volunteers work to clear their 'auwai systems. Cleaning out the waterways will ensure nothing will be wasted, once rightfully returned. Folow Ko‘olau Hui

The DNS record that Google had you add "to prevent spam" is a type of
TXT record called an
SPF (for "Sender Policy Framework"). However, it has nothing to do with email that you receive, only email that you send. The SPF basically tells other email servers that only certain locations are authorized to send email on your behalf, in this case, only Google servers.
Wikipedia has a good explanation of SPF records.
There are several possible reasons that email would not come to your
- You have forwarding to another address set up. You may also have it set that after messages are forwarded, they are archived or deleted. Check your
All Mail and
Trash folders to see if there are messages there.
- You may have a filter that is deleting or archiving some messages. To check this, go to the Settings page and open the
- It is possible that mail is not reaching Google's servers. This could be due to several things, including a typo in any of your DNS records, an old MX record that was not removed when you set up Google Apps, or possibly some other reason.
None of these cases has anything to do with Google's spam filter. As far as I know, Google does not make decisions about putting mail in your spam folder or throwing it out. I think that they put it all in the Spam folder and let you handle where ti goes from there (or it gets deleted automatically when it has been there for 30 days).

WebMD Medical News
Louise Chang, MD
Jan. 14, 2010 -- Cancer-causing human papillomavirus (HPV) spreads readily
and quickly among partners in new sexual relationships, new research
Scientists at McGill University, reporting in the journal
Epidemiology, say they detected the virus in 64% of couples who reported
engaging in vaginal sex for a median of 3.9 months.
In 41% of 263 college couples studied, both partners had the same type of
HPV, a surprising finding “far more frequent than [the 11%] expected by chance”
even though the virus is the most common sexually transmitted infection, the
“[D]etection of the same type in persons initiating a sex relationship would
be rare given type-specific prevalence rates,” says the study, whose lead
author is Ann N. Burchell, PhD, of the division of cancer epidemiology,
departments of oncology and epidemiology and biostatistics at McGill University
Along with colleagues from the University of Montreal, Burchell and Eduardo
Franco, DrPH, MPH, director of McGill’s Cancer Epidemiology Unit, analyzed
self-reported data from partners of 263 couples.
The women, college students between 18 and 24, enrolled in the study with
their male partners. Women were sexually active with their male partners for no
more than six months. Most used condoms, but 9% never used condoms.
Self-collected vaginal swabs and clinician-collected swabs from the penis and
scrotum were tested for 36 strains of HPV.
Among 169 couples for whom at least one partner was infected, the scientists
identified 583 type-specific HPV infections. Twenty-five percent of monogamous
partners had the same virus type after engaging in vaginal sex for less than
two months, the authors write.
That rose to 68% among those who’d been having sex for five to six
“Due to its sexually transmitted nature, the study of HPV at the level of
sexual partnership is fundamental to our understanding of the epidemiology of
these infections,” the researchers write. “The observation that HPV occurs more
commonly in sexual partners than expected by chance provides evidence for the
sexual transmission of HPV.”
Transmission is likely early in sexual relationships, and having a new sex
partner is an important risk factor for infection in both women and men, the
HPV causes cervical cancer, as well as cancers of the vulva, vagina, anus,
penis, and head and neck. HPV also causes genital warts. Although HPV
infections are extremely common, with at least 50% of sexually active women and
men contracting this type of infection at some point, most have no symptoms and
clear the infection on their own, according to the CDC.
Another article from the researchers using data from the same group of
participants was published in the January 2010 issue of the journal Sexually
The second analysis found that the greatest risk factor for genital HPV
infection was infection in a person’s current sexual partner. Condoms were tied
to a more protective effect for men than for women.
“These results build on our knowledge that HPV infection is very
common among young adults, and underline the importance of prevention programs
for HPV-associated diseases,” Burchell says in the McGill news release. “Our
results also suggest that HPV is an easy virus to get and to transmit.”
Francois Coutlee, MD, a professor at the University of Montreal’s department
of microbiology and immunology and co-author on both articles, says the results
suggest that many HPV transmissions occur at the start of new relationships,
“which reinforces the need for prevention.”
SOURCES:News release, McGill University.Burchell, A. Epidemiology, January 2010; vol 21.Burchell, A. Sexually Transmitted Diseases, January 2010; vol 37.CDC web site: “Genital HPV Infection - CDC Fact Sheet.”
Here are the most recent story comments.View All
The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of NewsSource 16
The Health News section does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.

Democracy in Tea Party America
project-syndicate.org — When the French politician and moral philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville published the first volume of his Democracy in America in 1835, he did so because he thought that France was in big trouble and could learn much from America. So one can only wonder what he would have made of the Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida. Nearly two centuries have passed since Tocqueville wrote his masterpiece. The connection between the general interest and the private interest of individual Americans has, if anything, become much stronger, even if their private interest is tied to a post office box in the Cayman Islands. But the mechanisms that individuals can use to join with their immediate neighbors in political action that makes a difference in their lives have become much weaker.

A.C. or A.C.N.
From Latin Ante Christum or Ante Christum Natum, meaning "Before Christ" or "Before Christ (was) Born." B.C. and B.C.E. are equivalents.
From Latin Anno Domini, meaning "in the year of the Lord." C.E. is equivalent.
From also known as.
From Latin Ante Meridiem, meaning "before midday."
From as soon as possible.
From absent without leave.
From Before Christ. A.C.N. and B.C.E. are equivalents.
From Before Common Era. A.C.N. and B.C. are equivalents.
From Common Era. A.D. is equivalent.
From confer, meaning "compare" or "consult." Cf. refers to additional material or ideas providing further information.
From edited, edition, or editor(s).
From Latin exempli gratia, meaning "for (the sake of) example." E.g. introduces one or more examples.
From established or estimated.
From Latin et alii, meaning "and others."
From Latin et cetera, meaning "and so forth."
From Latin inter alia, meaning "among other things."
From Latin ibidem, meaning "the same place." Ibid. refers to an endnote or footnote citation that was cited in the preceding endnote or footnote.
From Latin idem, meaning "the same (man)." Id. replaces the name of a repeated author in academic citations and refers to the previously cited source in legal citations.
From Latin id est, meaning "that is" (to say). I.e. precedes a clarification or restatement and can also be used to mean "in other words" or "in this case."
From Latin in fine, meaning "in the end." I.f. may be used with a citation to indicate the cited material's location at the bottom of the page or "at the end."

ALGEBRA 2Lesson 39 of 95
Students learn to solve a system of linear equations by graphing. The first step is to graph each of the given equations, then find the point of intersection of the two lines, which is the solution to the system of equations. If the two lines are parallel, then the solution to the system more...
Elementary / Middle
High School Math
*Also referred to as Elementary Algebra or Beginning Algebra.
Search our lessons

"I never saw more simplicity," recorded the famous evangelist George Whitefield in 1740, after preaching at Skippack in southeastern Pennsylvania. Had he ridden fifteen miles back through the woods to Germantown, and viewed the Mennonite meetinghouse there, he would doubtless have mused further. For even the successor of that log building of 1708, built of stone in 1770, greets a twenty-first century eye as a statement of simplicity.
More than that, as this guidebook explains, Germantowns Mennonite meetinghouse is an expression of continuity. It was children and grandchildren of European Mennonites who gathered here along the towns only major street, in the first of their peoples congregations to endure in America. The location was the site of a homestead bought by a Dutch-speaking paper-maker four years after the towns founding in 1683.
Willem Rittinghuysen (William Rittenhouse) had immigrated from Amsterdam with his wife Gertruid and three children. The first paper-maker in the English colonies, he was also elected in 1698 as its first Mennonite minister. By then he and his partner-son Nicholas had already moved out of town to the site of their mill along the nearby Wissahickon Creek. It was in his Lower Rhenish accent, in the house of Mennonite neighbor Isaac van Bebber, that the slowly accruing congregation heard the scriptural message for a decade.
Willem himself never saw the log meetinghouse built in the months following his unexpected death in 1708. Nor will we see it. What we can visit is the sturdy stone replacement that served the congregation for two centuries after 1770. "Simple, substantial and beautiful," to use the phrase of a Lancaster County Mennonite preacher, it has become an icon of American Mennonite memory, even while its surroundings have changed beyond the imagination of its first users.
Location can speak. Standing in the doorway and looking outward, one faces, across the urban horizon, in the direction of the paper mill site on a branch of the Wissahickon Creek. A tiny village of buildings there, one bearing the date of 1707, evokes physicallyunlike the written-only records of earlier and temporary Mennonite dwellings in Manhattan or along the Delaware Baythe earliest permanent Mennonite dwelling outside of Europe. The quiet stream running through the dell still called Rittenhousetown reminds us of the mill it once powered. And back in the heart of the main town, the north-south angle of Germantown Avenue recalls the Indian trail along which a lot fell to the communitys first Mennonite couple, Jan and Mercken Lensen, at the towns very beginning in the late fall of 1683.
The earliest stones clustered next to the meetinghouse do not reach far enough back to include Jan and Merckens names. But names such as Cassel, Funk, Keyser, and Rittenhouse declare that this Mennonite community was a convergence. The hearts that beat here came from at least four different regions of Europe, both urban and rural. Some names are Palatine, suggesting spiritual origins in Zurich, while others witness to the heritage of Menno Simons of Friesland. This realization flavors our recognition of the varieties of the present residents of this historic community. It also reminds us that the church of Christ will always be about bringing together a family that transcends nations, cultures and languages.
History is here in layers. Native Americans visited in the first huts; schoolmaster Christopher Dock held summer schools here; peach trees once picturesquely lined the street running by Dirk Keysers gracious residence; George Washingtons troops met in confused shock with British redcoats in front of the Meetinghouse; a congregation struggled for two centuries after most of their people had moved into the country. It was after 1960 when a flock surprisingly regathered from many points to worship in this modern urban setting with a long memory.
The miraculously enduring meetinghouse along Germantown Avenue has become a place to meditate on how spiritual concerns leave their testimony. Those miscellaneous Mennonites living in a straggling village three centuries ago had come from a variety of motivesincluding persecution and economic opportunity. But in this rustic village of linen-weavers they brought to common focus what they believed. Instead of merging their identities in a generic spirituality, they insisted on being responsible to their parental church fellowships in Europe. Even before electing a preacher, "they tried to instruct each other," meeting in homes. They waited twenty-five years to celebrate a communion which they believed was an accountable one. Then they chose leaders from all four of the main communities of their European backgrounds. And built a meetinghouse. In that remarkable, scrupulous convergence, they became the departing point, and an example, for a fellowship that would spread across North America.
May this careful guidebook, in both word and image, instruct our imagination, helping us to be intelligent and appreciative pilgrims as we come back to visit Germantown.
John L. Ruth
Colonial Germantown Mennonites orders:
|Click here to explore joining InnerCircle readers club and receiving occasional updates and special discounts.|
© 2006 by Cascadia Publishing House

Variations in how the Earth is tilted and its orbit around the sun make for a pattern of planetary warming phases followed by cooling phases across the millennia.
The team's research shows the Earth's overall temperature curve dipping down over about the past 4,000 years, but the downward plod comes to an abrupt halt in modern times.
"If you were to predict -- based on where we are relative to the position of the sun and how we are tilted -- you would predict that we would be still cooling, but we're not," Marcott said.
Instead, the planet is warming up. It hasn't been quite this warm in thousands of years. And it's getting hotter.
By 2100, the Earth will be warmer than ever before, Marcott said. If emissions continue as currently predicted until then, global temperatures will rise "well above anything we've ever seen in the last 11,000 years."
That could be a rise of 2 to 11.5 degrees Fahrenheit, according to the NSF.
What a long-range study means
To get a view on global temperatures that long ago, the researchers studied 73 sediment and polar ice samples, taken from all over the globe. Chemicals found in fossils deep down in the samples span the ages and are good indicators of historic temperatures on Earth, Marcott said.
The scientists did the study to put the global temperature trends into a long-range perspective, Marcott said. Critics of climate change research, which has generally covered the last 1,500 to 2,000 years, have complained that it has been too short-sighted.
They argue that the shorter studies have not taken into account that the warming Earth is seeing today could have happened before naturally -- thousands of years ago.

Developing Computer Science in KS2 Computational thinking and programming with Logo & Scratch
Providing basic skills to enable the use of Scratch. This is a simple programming language that can be used as a tool in the classroom for developing and exploring ideas.
Course code: IT084
Provided by Hampshire Teaching and Leadership College
An one day course for
Primary ICT coordinators and teachers. (KS2)
Knowledge and understanding
- How to use the Scratch application and create sequences of instructions to make events happen on screen.
- Awareness of the logical thinking and problem solving involved in using the application.
Participants will learn how to
- Program and sequence instructions.
- Use Scratch in the classroom.
Course content and methodology
- Demonstration of the application.
- Practical exploration of the application.
- Discussion of how this can be used to support learning.
- Planning Scratch into your curriculum.
Intended impact on practice
Providing more stimulating and challenging opportunities for pupils while covering some of the Developing Ideas and Making Things Happen element of the NC ICT Programme of Study.

On January 3, 2008, more than a hundred thousand people gathered at the Sri Durga Malleswara temple in southern India, setting the stage for disaster. When the crowd surged forward to garland a statue of the goddess Durga, six were trampled and killed.
Disasters like this kill hundreds of people a year and have typically been hard to prevent. But now an intervention may be at hand, thanks to crowd simulations developed by Paul M. Torrens, a geographer at Arizona State University. Torrens’s computer simulations let planners drop a few thousand virtual people into a burning building, then sit back and take notes—with heat coming only from the computer itself. The specific scenarios Torrens creates could show firefighters how to save the most people, tell architects where to place exits or barriers in stadiums, and guide police forces in corralling unruly mobs.
Most traditional methods for simulating the movement of crowds treat individuals as purely physical, with no social or emotional reactions. Torrens’s model, on the other hand, turns each individual into an “avatar” with an artificial mind. Avatars can plan their own route, adjust their path on the fly, and even respond to the body language of fellow cybercitizens who may be jostling them.
Each avatar’s awareness in Torrens’s simulations derives from a “vision cone”—a field of view—that projects into the world of the simulation itself. As the simulated crowd moves, an avatar reacts to anything that comes within its cone, whose dimensions may change depending on how quickly that avatar is moving or whether it is panicked—both speed and panic will make the cone narrower. Also influencing the dimensions of the cone are personal attributes like age, disabilities, and body type. The system relies mostly on the autonomy of the avatars, enabling Torrens to create realistic computerized simulations for almost any situation or length of time.
The model is already functional, but Torrens, who is funded by the National Science Foundation to the tune of $1.15 million, is busy upping the avatars’ IQs. He is also in talks with a few interested parties, including the Scottsdale, Arizona, police department, which may want the system customized for its internal use. Even the U.S. Department of Justice is reviewing a proposal.
Torrens thinks this is just the start. He sees the day when his simulations could be modified to model disease transmission through casual contact, shopping on a crowded street, or pedestrian safety at a traffic intersection. His latest project: a riot module to test ways of containing civil turmoil.
Click the image below to view our web-exclusive gallery:

- Published on Dec 07, 1995
- Contact Bernie DeGroat
ANN ARBOR—A new University of Michigan study lends further credence to the belief that rear-seat passengers are better off than their front-seat counterparts in car crashes.
In an analysis of frontal collision data from 1980-91, researchers Donald Huelke and Charles Compton of the U-M Transportation Research Institute found that, when comparing front-seat occupants and rear-seat passengers—both belted and unrestrained—in the same crash, those in the back seat more often than not sustain less severe injuries than those in the front seat.
"The rear seat is a much safer area in frontal crashes than the front," Huelke says. "Lap-belted rear-occupants have a higher level of injury severity less often than lap/shoulder- belted front-seat occupants in the same crash. In fact, it appears that unbelted rear passengers fare as well as lap/shoulder-belted front-seat occupants in the same frontal crashes."
Using the Maximum Abbreviated Injury Scale (MAIS), which measures severity of vehicle crash injuries, Huelke and Compton found that, in direct comparisons, 21 percent of belted front- seat occupants suffered greater injuries than belted rear-seat passengers, while 8 percent of the latter fared worse than those wearing safety belts in the front. The remaining 71 percent had about the same level of injury.
In comparing unbelted occupants, the injury rates were 29 percent for those in the front seat and 11 percent for those in the back. The remaining 60 percent sustained the same level of injury.
"Our data disagree with prior research that the injury severity for unbelted front and rear-seat occupants is similar," Huelke says. "Our findings indicate that the unrestrained rear-seat occupant injury frequency is about 63 percent lower than unrestrained front-seat occupants."
While 31 percent of front-seat occupants not wearing lap/shoulder belts received greater injuries than belted rear- seat passengers (only 6 percent of the latter fared worse than unbelted persons in the front seat and 63 percent had the same level of injury), the rates were the same for those wearing safety belts in the front compared with those not wearing them in the back—17 percent of each group suffered greater injuries (66 percent had the same level of injury).
Huelke found that children, ages 5-14, are more likely to sustain injuries in crashes when seated in the front compared with the back, regardless of safety belt use.
In comparing children seated in the back with adults in the front, 7 percent of the former and 20 percent of the latter received more severe injuries in cases where both were belted (73 percent had same level of injury). When both were not wearing safety belts, 31 percent of those in the front seat and 8 percent of those in the back suffered greater injuries (61 percent had same level of injury).
Corresponding injury rates for those passengers unbelted in the front compared with children wearing lap belts in the rear seat is 25 percent (front), 5 percent (back) and 70 percent
Ironically, 36 percent of belted front-seat occupants sustained greater injuries than unrestrained children in the back, while just 14 percent of the latter had greater injuries than those in the front (50 percent had same level of injury).
"Overall, the bottom line is you're better lap-belted in the back seat than being unrestrained," Huelke says. "Everyone should always wear the available belts. People in the back seat, whether they be adults or children or infants in child-restraint systems, should always be appropriately buckled up."

Hydrogen Sulfide Testing With Black and White Film
Following is a procedure for Hydrogen Sulfide testing using Ilford Multigrade IV RC Deluxe MGD.1M B&W Paper which has been borrowed from the procedure published in Evaluation of a Novel Passive sampling Technique for Monitoring Volcanic Hydrogen Sulfide by Horwell, Allen, Tamsin and Patterson.
Treated sections of photographic paper are exposed to atmospheric Hydrogen Sulfide. "H2S reacts with free radicals including the hydroxyl (OH) and4 nitrate (NO3) radicals, ultimately forming sulfur dioxide, with an H2S lifetime in the troposphere of several tens of hours." - Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) is the sole tarnishing agent for silver.
Achieving a uniform distribution of silver is difficult to achieve and essential for accurate test data (results). This method utilizes Ilford Multigrade IV RC Deluxe MGD.1M B&W Paper - a chemically developed black and white photographic film - containing a uniform distribution of silver halide retained in a thin surface layer (~0.005mm) of gelatin.
Materials - (with links)
Ilford Multigrade IV RC Deluxe MGD.1M B&W Paper (35 sheets $18)
-as it should seem that Glycerol and Glycerine are roughly the same compounds we will use Glycerine as it is more readily available. (8oz $1)
Kodak Photoflo 200 (16oz $8)
Preparation of the samplers may be summarized as follows:
. In a darkened room, cut black and white resin-backed photographic paper into strips.
. Use plastic tweezers to place the strips face down in the glycerol solution (to reduce the effects of any light in the darkened room) for five minutes.
. Remove the strips from the solution and let them drain onto a paper towel. Leave strips to drain for five minutes before transferring to a dark place to allow drying to occur (at least 12 hours).
. Place strips in labelled black cylindrical photographic film containers. Replace container lids during storage. The samplers remain inactive until exposed to H2S-laden air.
. Expose the samplers in the field for a set length of time. Collect the samplers.
. Fix the samplers using a photographic fixing solution (e.g. Kodak UNIFIX powder or solution and water) in subdued light. Leave in the solution for five minutes before thoroughly washing twice in cold water.
. Drain the samplers as before and leave to dry for at least 12 hours.

Understanding How Neurons Learn
John’s Hopkins researchers have shown that interactions between the PICK1 protein and another group of proteins known as AMPA receptors are important for allowing certain nerve cells to learn.
These nerve cells, called Purkinje cells, become desensitized in response to signals from neighboring cells in a process known as long-term depression (LTD.).
It is this process that allows them to learn certain motor skills such as the vestibulo-ocular reflex which coordinates eye movements with head movements.
According to Richard L. Huganir, Ph.D., a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator and chair of the Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience at Hopkins, "we’ve long known that LTD underlies responses like the vestibulo-ocular reflex.
This study gets at the heart of how LTD occurs, specifically how PICK1 controls the Purkinje cell’s response to the signaling molecule, glutamate."
From Wire and RedOrbit Editors

psalmos: a striking (of musical strings), a psalmOriginal Word: ψαλμός, οῦ, ὁ
Part of Speech: Noun, Masculine
Phonetic Spelling: (psal-mos')
Short Definition: a psalm
Definition: a psalm, song of praise, the Hebrew book of Psalms.
From psallo; a set piece of music, i.e. A sacred ode (accompanied with the voice, harp or other instrument; a "psalm"); collectively, the book of the Psalms -- psalm. Compare oide.
see GREEK psallo
see GREEK oide

(A) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives storage units must be designed and operated with containment systems, controls, and monitoring, that:
(1) Minimize the potential for detonation or other means of release of hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, hazardous decomposition products, or contaminated run-off, to the soil, ground water, surface water, and atmosphere;
(2) Provide a primary barrier, which may be a container (including a shell) or tank, designed to contain the hazardous waste;
(3) For wastes stored outdoors, provide that the waste and containers will not be in standing precipitation;
(4) For liquid wastes, provide a secondary containment system that assures that any released liquids are contained and promptly detected and removed from the waste area, or vapor detection system that assures that any released liquids or vapors are promptly detected and an appropriate response taken (e.g., additional containment, such as overpacking, or removal from the waste area); and
(5) Provide monitoring and inspection procedures that assure the controls and containment systems are working as designed and that releases that may adversely impact human health or the environment are not escaping from the unit.
(1) Earth-covered magazines. Earth-covered magazines must be:
(a) Constructed of waterproofed, reinforced concrete or structural steel arches, with steel doors that are kept closed when not being accessed;
(b) Designed and constructed:
(i) To be of sufficient strength and thickness to support the weight of any explosives or munitions stored and any equipment used in the unit;
(ii) To provide working space for personnel and equipment in the unit; and
(iii) To withstand movement activities that occur in the unit; and
(c) Located and designed, with walls and earthen covers that direct an explosion in the unit in a safe direction, so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(2) Above-ground magazines. Above-ground magazines must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(3) Outdoor or open storage areas. Outdoor or open storage areas must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(C) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be stored in accordance with a standard operating procedure specifying procedures to ensure safety, security, and environmental protection. If these procedures serve the same purpose as the security and inspection requirements of rule 3745-65-14 of the Administrative Code, the preparedness and prevention procedures of rules 3745-65-30 to 3745-65-37 of the Administrative Code, and the contingency plan and emergency procedures requirements of rules 3745-65-50 to 3745-65-56 of the Administrative Code, then these procedures will be used to fulfill those requirements.
(D) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be packaged to ensure safety in handling and storage.
(E) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be inventoried at least annually.
(F) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives and their storage units must be inspected and monitored as necessary to ensure explosives safety and to ensure that there is no migration of contaminants out of the unit.

The commonest problems we see affecting horse eyelids are listed at right. Entropion is commonly seen in foals and is a leading cause of corneal ulceration. Eyelid lacerations seem to result from horse's propensity to get tangled up in anything which could be a hazard in a stall or on a fence.
Abnormal eyelid cilia (hairs/eyelashes) which may grow from the eyelid margin (distichiasis) or the back of the eyelid (ectopic cilia) and abrade the cornea occasionally are seen in horses. They may be seen in young horses or older animals associated with eyelid scarring (from injuries). These problems are easily corrected surgically. Simply plucking or cutting the hairs is not effective - they can grow back and cause even more corneal irritation.
Apart form these conditions most of the other eyelid problems seen are tumors affecting the lids (and often other adjacent parts of the eye). These tumors often can quite challenging to treat effectively - but there are various new treatment approaches which we are using at Equine Eye Vets.

Leghorn chicken, relatively small, white-colored breed of poultry that currently dominates the American egg-producing class. The bird, as bred today, produces a good number of chalk white eggs, a feature which has brought it to the forefront of modern commercial egg production. Although only the "single comb" variety is popular today, many other strains with large egg, better shell, better interior egg qualities, or other desirable traits, are retained as breeding stock.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright © 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.
More on Leghorn chicken from Infoplease:
See more Encyclopedia articles on: Agriculture: Animals

Dunmore Cave is located 10km from of Kilkenny City. History and geology blend here to give the visitor a unique learning experience. The cave has been known to man for many centuries and contains some of Ireland's finest calcite cave formations.
History and geology blend at Dunmore Cave to give an interesting and unique insight into this County Kilkenny landmark. Consisting of a series of chambers formed over millions of years, the cave contains some of the finest calcite formations found in any Irish cave. The cave has been known to man for many centuries and is first mentioned in the 9th century Irish Triads. The most interesting reference however, comes from the Annals which tells of a Viking massacre at the cave in the year 928 AD. Archaeological finds within the cave confirm Viking activity.
The visitor centre features an exhibition area, audio-visual presentation and the Cupcake Café tearoom which is open daily during the peak season. The audio-visual presentation covers four main topics aimed at all ages and interests: geology and evolution over 350 million years, animated formation of Dunmore Cave, ecology of the cave and its surrounds, and the myths and history of the cave. There is also an interactive Virtual Museum consisting of the several treasures found in the Cave including one of the most significant Viking finds in the country. Admission to Dunmore Cave is by guided tour only. The Cave is open all year round and has no wheelchair access but the visitor centre is fully accessible.

Today, January 24th …
Lobster Thermidor is an extravagant, indulgent, classical dish, a dish that no-one makes at home anymore - the reasons for which will become obvious shortly, but have nothing to do with the level of culinary difficulty. A popular story which may be history or myth, says that the dish was invented on this very day in 1894 at the restaurant Maire in Boulevard Saint-Denis in Paris, in honour of the first night of the play “Thermidor”, by Victorien Sardou. Its subject was the French Revolution, which was still a politically sensitive issue 100 years later, and the play was banned after only three performances.
There are other stories of course, but whatever the route, the dish is ultimately named after the month of that name in the short-lived French Revolutionary calendar, one of the warm summer months (now July 19 to August 17). The play’s name was a reference to the political machinations called the “Thermidorean reaction” which occurred on 9 Thermidor 1794, and led to the end of the Reign of Terror and the execution by guillotine of Robespierre the following day.
The lobster must think this explanation is particularly apt, in view of its own last moments and method of execution.
Split a live lobster in two, lengthwise. Crack the shell of the claws and pick out the meat. Season both halves of the lobster with salt. Pour oil over them and roast them in the oven for 15 to 20 minutes.
Dice the lobster flesh coarsely. Make a stock of white wine, fish fumet [stock] and meat gravy, flavoured with chervil, tarragon, and chopped shallots. Boil it down to a concentrated consistency. Add to this concentrated stock a little very thick Bechamel sauce and some English mustard.
Boil this sauce for a few seconds, then whisk in fresh butter (one third of the volume of the sauce).
Line the two halves of the carcases with a little of this sauce. Fill them with the flesh of the lobster, cover with the remainder of the sauce, sprinkle with grated Parmesan and melted butter and brown quickly in the oven. (Larousse Gastronomique).
If this method of lobster execution makes you squeamish, please do use the standard method of death by immersion in boiling water – in which case a name change to “Lobster Plûvoise” would be doubly apt, since January 24th fell in the wet month of that name.
Tomorrow: And so the Lord be thankit.

In February of 1894, a feeble, one-armed man walked into the offices of Dr. W.T. Delaney in Bristol. His name was James Keelan, and though he was never one to take charity, he was in a bit of a pinch. His wife had died, and Keelan was the sole guardian of three granddaughters. And at age 76, he had no reasonable option for employment. However, the Tennessee legislature had funded a pension for former Confederate soldiers, and Keelan—claiming he was a veteran of the Civil War—was there to request his rightful payment. But when Delaney began to question the man about his service, he uncovered one of the most incredible and heroic stories he’d ever heard…which would forever earn Keelan a place in American Military history. This is his story:
James Keelan was born in Virginia in 1818. The son of farmers, Keelan learned to hunt, fish, and farm at a young age. He led a relatively quiet existence until the onset of the Civil War. By that time, he was 43 years old, but still enlisted in the Confederate Army within the Will Thomas Legion.
In October of 1861, unbeknownst to the Confederates, the pro-Union William B. Carter devised a plan to invade East Tennessee via the Cumberland Gap (a crucial crossing point for the Confederate Army). Without hesitation, the plan was approved by President Lincoln, General William Sheridan and General George Thomas. As the invasion started, some unexpected moves by the Confederates separated the Union regiments, and Carter’s army was left alone to invade Tennessee, burning bridges and destroying infrastructure. They were successful, to a point, until they reached the Strawberry Plains Bridge over the Holston River outside Knoxville. And as it turns out, the regiment assigned to protect the Strawberry Plains Bridge was none other than the Will Thomas Legion.
On November 8, the only member of the Will Thomas Legion standing guard was Private James Keelan, and through the bitter cold wind, he heard the footsteps of nearly a dozen soldiers headed his way. From his post, he could see the invaders without being seen…and his heart raced as he saw the flicker of a match being struck and lighting pine splinters. He fumbled for his rifle, but couldn’t find it in the dark. Instead, he found his pistol, and slowly took aim.
Then, in a flash, he fired the pistol and hit one intruder directly in the chest, killing him. As the intruders returned fire, Keelan grabbed his Bowie knife and began to swing furiously at the Union soldiers. Blood was shed, men fell, Keelan had shots fired at his chest and sabers swung at his head. Suddenly, the Union soldiers noticed burning lights at the nearby Stringfield residence, and knew their plan had been foiled. And those who were still alive quickly retreated, leaving Keelan alone.
The years of hard labor and strong constitution had given Keelan a strong constitution and he managed to stay conscious, so he drug himself inch by inch off the bridge and towards the lights. And even though he was near death, Keelan kept crawling to the Elmore residence (afraid he would scare the ladies at the Stringfield residence). When William Elmore discovered Keelan, he was astounded that the man was still alive.
“Jim,” said Elmore, “you’ve been drunk or asleep and let the train run over you!”
“No Billy,” was Keelan’s reply. “They have killed me, but I saved the bridge.”
A doctor was summoned, who treated three severe saber cuts to Keelan’s scalp, a gunshot wound in the right hand, right arm, and an inoperable bullet in his left hip. Keelan’s left hand, however, was the worst. It was removed and the bloody stump stitched up.
The next day, Confederate investigators discovered the bodies of three young men, and estimated that another six or seven had been severely wounded.
And more than 30 years later, in the office of W. T. Delaney, two of Keelan’s compatriots corroborated his story. Delaney sat back in shock, at what must surely have been one of the most amazing and heroic stories of the Civil War.
After Keelan’s remarkable story had been made public in 1895, he passed away in Bristol and was laid to rest in the East Ridge Cemetary. And on his headstone, they carved a Confederate battle flag with the inscription:
“James Keelan, Defender of the Bridge—The South’s Horatius.”

1. to dim [verb] [dimde, gedimd] ['dim-mun']
The literal translation "dimmen" is not very exciting: to dim… However, in Dutch, "dimmen" is not only used to describe lowering the intensity of light(s), but also to describe lowering the intensity of certain (human) behaviour, see 2.
- "Lezen bij gedimd licht is slecht voor je ogen."
("Reading with dimmed light is bad for the eyes.")
- "Frank, kun jij het licht dimmen, zodat we de presentatie beter kunnen zien?"
("Frank, can you dim the lights so we can have a better view of the presentation?")
- "Dimmer": dimmer(-switch).
- "Donker": dark, gloomy.
- "Verduisteren": to darken, to obscure, to embezzle.
2. to cool it [verb] [dimde, gedimd] ['dim-mun']
In this context, "dimmen" is used to describe lowering the intensity of certain (human) behaviour, hence the translation: "to cool it".
You may see the following phrase a lot: "Effe dimmen!" ("Cool it!"). "Effe" is informal spoken language for the Dutch word "even", written phonetically. "Even" is used a lot in Dutch! It translates to "for a moment" or "just", but cannot always be translated like that literally. Sometimes "even" is omitted in the translation, as is the case in the first example.
- "Effe dimmen, makker! Dit is niet leuk meer."
("Cool it, pal! This is not funny anymore.")
- "Die gast moet nu dimmen, anders sla ik hem op zijn bek!"
("That dude should cool it right now, or I’ll punch him in the face!")
- "Die topmannen moeten gewoon effe dimmen met die bonussen." – "Ik weet niet of ik dat met je eens ben."
("These captains of industry should just cool it on the bonuses." – "I don’t know if I agree with you on that.")
- "Kalmeren": to calm (down).
- "Rustig": calm, peaceful, quiet.
- "Ontspannen": to relax.

Contact: Morwenna Grills
University of Manchester
Caption: Professor Leigh’s molecular machine is based on the ribosome. It features a functionalized nanometre-sized ring that moves along a molecular track, picking up building blocks located on the path and connecting them together in a specific order to synthesize the desired new molecule. First the ring is threaded onto a molecular strand using copper ions to direct the assembly process. Then a “reactive arm” is attached to the rest of the machine and it starts to operate. The ring moves up and down the strand until its path is blocked by a bulky group. The reactive arm then detaches the obstruction from the track and passes it to another site on the machine, regenerating the active site on the arm. The ring is then free to move further along the strand until its path is obstructed by the next building block. This, in turn, is removed and passed to the elongation site on the ring, thus building up a new molecular structure on the ring. Once all the building blocks are removed from the track, the ring de-threads and the synthesis is over.
Credit: Miriam Wilson
Usage Restrictions: Please credit Miriam Wilson
Related news release: Molecular machine could hold key to more efficient manufacturing

Posted by KatNip on September 17, 1998 at 02:54:31:
“[...] American law is closer to the [Roman] civil law than the English common law.” Roscoe Pound, The Formative Era of American Law (Little, Brown and Company. 1938), p. 138.
“Examinations of witnesses upon Interrogatories,” he [John Adams for Hancock’s counsel] added, “are only by the Civil Law. Interrogatories are unknown to the common Law, and Englishmen and common Lawyers have an aversion to them if not an Abhorrence of them.” Adams’s argument in “Sewal v. Hancock,” in Wroth and Zobel, II, 194-207. Leonard W. Levy, Origins of the Fifth Amendment (Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986), p. 398.
. . . That the trial by jury, which is the grand characteristic of the
common law, is secured by the constitution, only in criminal cases. 2. That the appeal from both law and fact is expressly established, which is utterly inconsistent with the principles of the common law, and trial by jury. The only mode in which an appeal from law and fact can be established is, by adopting the principles and practice of the civil law; unless the United States should be drawn into the absurdity of calling and swearing juries, merely for the purpose of contradicting their verdicts, which would render juries contemptible and worse than useless. . . . Minority of the Pennsylvania legislature, December 18, 1787, in opposition to the Constitution.
Trial, following the civil-law tradition with which the maritime law is closely connected, was to the judge rather than to a jury, and procedure was rather non-technical and simple, though perhaps no more so than under any modern code. Grant Gilmore and Charles L. Black, Jr., The Law of Admiralty (N.Y.: Foundation Press, Inc., 1975), p. 35.
Bishop Stubbs said (Letter, p. 159), the Roman law has been “a most pliant tool of oppression . . . no nation using the Civil Law has ever made its way to freedom . . . wherever it has been introduced the extinction of popular liberty has followed sooner or later.” Philip P. Wiener, ed., Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973), vol. 3, p. 686.
“Under the Roman Civil Law, which postulates the State as of divine origin, all-wise and all-powerful, it becomes the duty of the State to seek to achieve happiness for all its subjects, in such manner as it may dictate, and, to that end, its own wisdom must override all private judgment in prescribing regulations for the whole range of human endeavor. Under this latter policy, an extensive system of admistrative law, with its particular and varied regulations, enforced by innumerable agents, boards and commissions, becomes necessary and inescapable. Under the Common Law, which denies the divinity, omniscience and omnipotence of the State, which concedes no privileges, which accords to every man the right to work out his own happiness free from intermeddling by government, save where his actions may impair the like right of others, and which recognizes but one system of general law for all, rich and poor alike, high and low, enforced in ordinary courts, there is no function for administrative law to perform and no reason for its existence.
“While we may still think ourselves living under the free common law system, there has nevertheless developed in the United States, and in England as well, an omnious body of practice containing the same features, now open referred to as ‘administrative law.’ It has gotten its foothold in very recent years, mainly through the increasing number of boards, bureaus and commissions created by Congress, to which Congress had delegated the authority to make rules and regulations having the force of the law, to sit in judgment under them and enforce them.” Sterling E. Edmunds, The Federal Octopus in 1933: A Survey of the Destruction of Constitutional Government and of Civil and Economic Liberty in the United States and the Rise of an All-Embracing Federal Bureaucratic Despotism, 3rd. ed., (The Michie Company, 1933), pp. 30-31.
“A free society has always put limits on the authority and power of civil law; our Bill of Rights indicates that our Founding Fathers knew of limits to the law.” A. C. Germann, Frank D. Day and Robert R. J. Gallati, Introduction to Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, rev. ed., 25th Printing (Springfield, Illinios: Charles C. Thomas Publisher, 1976), p. 22.
“An appeal is a process of civil law origin, and removes a cause entirely, subjecting the fact, as well as the law, to review and re-trial. A writ of error is a process of common law origin; and it removes nothing for re-examination, but the law.” Joseph Story, A Familiar Exposition of the Constitution of the United States (1840), (Regnery Gateway, Inc., 1986), §379, p. 272.
Appeal borrowed from civil law.——The appeal as practiced in the English courts of equity, admiralty and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is borrowed from the civil law. The effect of such appeals is to remove the whole proceeding, and generally, though not always, to open both the law and the facts for re-examination. Republic of Texas v. Thomas I. Smith, No. XVI Dallam’s Decisions 407 (1841).
“Jus emmins” is a term of the civil law used to designate the supreme power of the state over its members and whatever belongs to them. Gilmer v. Lime Point, 18 Cal. 229, 250 (S.Ct. 1861).
jus eminens. (Civil law.) The supreme power of the state over its members and whatever belongs to them. Ballentine’s Law Dict., 2nd ed. 1948.
“The judicial power, under the proposed constitution, is founded on well-known principles of the civil law, by which the judge determines both law and fact, and appeals are allowed from the inferior tribunals to the superior, upon the whole question; so that facts as well as law, would be re-examined, and even facts brought forward in the court of appeals; and to use the words of a very eminent civilian—‘The cause is many times another thing before the court of appeals, than what it was at the time of the first sentence.’
“That this mode of proceeding is the one which must be adopted under this constitution, is evident from the following circumstances: 1st. That the trial by jury, which is the grand characteristic of the common law, is secured by the constitution only in criminal cases. 2d. That the appeal from both law and fact is expressly established, which is utterly inconsistent with the principles of the common law and trials by jury. The only mode in which an appeal from law and fact can be established, is by adopting the principles and practice of the civil law, unless the United States should be drawn into the absurdity of calling and swearing juries, merely for the purpose of contradicting their verdicts, which would render juries contemptible and worse than useless. 3d. That the courts to be established would decide on all cases of law and equity, which is a well-known characteristic of the civil law, and these courts would have cognizance not only of the laws of the United States, and of treaties, and of cases affecting ambassadors, but of all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, which last are matters belonging exclusively to the civil law, in every nation in Christendom.” The Pennsylvania Minority: The Address and Reasons of Dissent of the Minority of the Convention of the States of Pennsylvania to their Constituents, Cecelia M. Kenyon (ed.), The Antifederalist (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1985), pp. 49-50.
THAT'S ALL FOR NOW FOLKS...I NEED TO POLISH SOME SILVERWARE...BBL
Post a Followup

Classic Corner is a feature on Books Worth Remembering where I review classic titles to raise awareness for old books which are just as awesome as new ones.
Title: Lord of the Flies
Author: William Golding
Publication Date: 1954
Lord of the Flies was the book I had to read for my English literature exam last year, I initially was a little disappointed for other classes were doing To Kill a Mockingbird or Of Mice and Men but I needn’t have been.
Lord of the Flies is an intricately woven tale, tackling huge questions such as are humans inherently evil? Is evil predetermined? Are we destined to do bad things? Is there darkness in every man’s heart? The chilling events that take place really make you look at the nature of the human condition and to seriously question how you would react in this desert island situation.
A common misconception about Lord of the Flies is most people think that it is about cannibalism, it isn’t. It tackles lots of other dark topics instead such as murder (I bet you’re interested now :P)
Another common misconception when it comes to books you have to read and study is that the author never intended his books to be analysed in such a way, this is also not true for Lord of the Flies. William Golding wrote an essay, ‘Fable’ in which he discusses the reasons behind his story. Don’t worry you don’t have to go read that as well, I’ll tell you - he decided to write the book to write his opinion on the conflict in society between savagery and civilisation. Also how we pass on our hatred and intolerances to our children and through the generations. Another top message Golding was trying to send was that there is this darkness that is in humans, he based this on what he had seen and heard of first hand due to the Second World War in which men had done unspeakable things to one another.
Still not convinced about Golding meaning these deep and complex meanings? Well Lord of the Flies is also an allegory, meaning everything means something. And by everything I mean everything. Which was great for me in my exam but also great for reading, I loved finding these meanings and looking at the text more complexly.
Readers also need not worry about how it is written, it is simple and easy to understand and soon you’ll find yourself absorbed into the story even if you aren’t reading it because of an exam or because you’re looking for the answers to the metaphysical questions Lord of the Flies is throwing at you!
I hope more people will read this book, I whole heartedly recommend it. Not only for it’s great plot and characters but because it is a truly interesting topic that will continue to be important in modern society.

History of Western Theatre: 17th Century to Now/Spanish Romantic
Leandro Fernández de Moratín (1760-1828) continued excellent probing of social and psychological insight from the previous century with "La mojigata" (The prude, 1804) and "El sí de las niñas" (The maidens' consent, 1806). Another important figure of the Romantic Movement is Ángel de Saavedra, duke of Rivas (1791-1865), who wrote "Álvaro, o La fuerza del sino" (Don Álvaro, or the force of fate, 1835). Following interpretations by Tirso de Molina and Molière on the Don Juan legend, Josée Zorilla (1817-1893) wrote his own "Don Juan Tenorio in two parts (1844).
"The prude". Time: 1800s. Place: Toledo, Spain.
"The prude" text at ?
Clara has so often been punished by her father, Martino, that instead of religion she has learned dissimulation. She intends to enter a convent. Her uncle, Luis, and Perico, servant to Claudio, whom he intends should marry his daughter, Ines, but is rejected by her, learn that Martino will inherit a large fortune from a dying cousin should Clara enter religious orders. From Perico Clara learns that Claudio loves her, not Ines. Though the news is pleasing, yet she intends to continue to dissimulate. "In this world, whoever does not cheat does not succeed," she avers. Perico intercepts a letter meant for Martino, asking for money so that Clara can enter the convent. Pretending to be the brother of Lorenzo, commissioner of the convent, Perico pockets up the full amount and, after speaking to Clara, reveals to his master that "the charming novice burns and dies for Claudio". Claudio and Clara are surprised during a secret meeting by Martino and Ines. Clara pretends she was "occupied in reading Kempis". Ines accuses her of illicitly meeting Claudio, which Clara denies, though admitting she is "a vessel of iniquity". Martino calls Ines a "vile liar, an odious viper". But Luis believes his daughter, not his brother. Claudio's father, Pedro, is set to arrive. Luis insists that Claudio in filial duty meet him in advance. Clara knows that this is done to separate the loving couple. She meets Perico and plans to marry Claudio in secret and be "freed of the execrable crew around me," she says. One day, she sees her father lurking behind her, but while speaking to Perico pretends not to, saying for his benefit: "My heart's desire is to become a shoeless nun, for when austerity is greater, the palm is more magnificent." Martino advises her how to conduct herself inside the convent. At the mere mention of the tempter, Clara, always the false prude, holds his hands and trembles. Luis, wishing to help his niece to a favorable marriage, asks her to be more honest with him, "to throw out the mask of devotion", so that he may defend her against the "strange obstinacy" of her father, but she persists in pretending, so that he wishes not to have anything more to do with her. Meanwhile, fearing Luis has discovered their plot, Claudio contemplates leaving immediately, but Lucia, the servant, assures him that Luis is willing to help him in this marriage despite Clara's distrust of him. Luis receives a letter from the cousin in Seville, saying that since learning of Clara's vocation, he has revoked his intentions and will give all his money to Ines instead. On learning this, Martino is in despair. Moreover, he discovers that his money was never received by the abbess. Perico's treachery is discovered and Claudio summoned, who reveals that he signed a marriage contract between himself and his daughter. Considering herself certain to receive the inheritance, Clara wishes to leave with Claudio, but Luis shows her the letter from Seville, revealing that Ines, not her, is heir to a fortune. But Ines reconciles father and daughter by sharing her inheritance with Clara.
"The maidens' consent"
"The maidens' consent". Time: 1800s. Place: Alcala de Henarès, Spain.
"The maidens' consent" text at ?
Diego and Irene rejoice at his upcoming marriage with her daughter, Francisca, fresh out of a convent. Irene is proud of her, she being "raised without artifice and far from the world's pitfalls". But Irene's servant, Rita, reveals to Calamocha, servant to a man named Felix, that Francisca, despite Diego's wealth, is in tears at the thought of marrying a man of fifty. To Francisca she reveals that Carlos, her lover, has arrived. "Forever gratitude and love!" exclaims Francisca. Irene's opinion is that Francisca should be thankful for her happiness, attributed to her aunts' prayers rather than her "your feeble advantages and my poor efforts," as she says. When Carlos arrives, he intends to prevent the marriage, mentioning a rich uncle from whom he is likely to inherit. "To love and to be loved, that's my ambition, my supreme felicity," Francisca responds. When Diego enters, Carlos discovers that his rival is the same rich uncle. Diego scolds his nephew for leaving his garrison and orders him to leave at once. Unwilling to defy his uncle openly, Carlos pretends to obey. Francisca discovers her lieutenant is gone. "My Lord God," she moans, "what is my crime? What is it?" Rita must hold up her distressed mistress as she walks back to her room. At three o'clock in the morning, Diego spies Francisca out of her room, apparently reacting to the sound of a guitar. Carlos is playing and he tosses a letter up to her, but in the darkness she is unable to find it. She hears a suspicious sound in the room and escapes back to hers. Diego finds the letter and orders the innkeeper to bring back Carlos. Francisca thinks the letter contains merely excuses for his abrupt departure. Discouraged, she hears Diego asking her to open her heart and promising to help her. She thanks him and leaves. Diego shows Carlos his own letter, explaining how he first met Francisca and promising to return to the garrison. He announces to Irene that her daughter loves someone, but not him. "Is it possible you are prepared for such a sacrifice?" asks Irena in wonder, to which he answers: "That is the faith we must yield to the maidens' consent."
"The force of fate"
"The force of fate". Time: 18th century. Place: Spain and Naples.
"The force of fate" text at ?
Rejected as a son-in-law by the marquis of Calatrava, Don Alvaro seeks to elope with Leonora, but is prevented by him. As he drops his pistol in submission, it goes off by accident and kills the marquis. Alvaro and Leonora flee but are separated after a battle ensues between his men and the marquis'. Leonora reaches the convent of the Holy Angels, where she requests the father superior's permission to live inside a hermitage in penance of her father's death. He accepts. The new marquis of Calatrava, Carlos, seeks to avenge his father's death and his sister's dishonor but is unable to find Alvaro. By chance, without knowing who he is, Alvaro saves his life in a tavern brawl. Both use assumed names while fighting in Naples against the Germans, when Carlos returns the favor by saving Alvaro's life. As Alvaro lies in surgery from a bullet wound in the chest, Carlos discovers who he is and, once recuperated, challenges him to a duel, although against the law as recently promulgated by Charles III of Spain. Alvaro hesitates before accepting this challenge, until Carlos mentions he knows his sister to be alive but intends to kill her, too. Alvaro kills him and is imprisoned for it. When the Germans attack the Spaniards, Alvaro is set free, vowing to enter a life of religion should he survive. He does so, entering the convent of the Holy Angels, where he is discovered by Carlos' younger brother, Alfonso, who also challenges him to a duel. Alvaro succeeds in stabbing him. Fearing his end near, Alfonso asks for spiritual comfort. To accede to his desire, Alvaro knocks at the hermitage door for the saintly hermit reported to be living there. Recognizing Leonora, Alfonso stabs her to death and dies by turning the weapon on himself. In despair at losing her, Alvaro plunges to his death down a deep ravine.
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 1"
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 1". Time: 1540s. Place: Seville, Spain.
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 1" text at http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Spanish/Zorilla.htm
Don Juan Tenorio and Don Luis Mejia have wagered on who should prove the most accomplished man within a year. Each boast of women cheated and men dead in duels, Juan being the winner in total numbers of both. Juan is ready to do more: steal away Donna Anna, Luis' betrothed. Their talk is interrupted by Don Gonzalo, commander of Calatrava, who was asked by Don Diego, Juan's father, to yield the hand of his daughter, Ines, in marriage to him, but overhearing this scandalous conversation, declares he will never have her. Affronted, Juan replies that either he gives her to him or he will take her away by force. Overhearing this, a masked man comes forth to say he will never know him more, at which Juan tears off the mask, revealing his father. These interruptions do not prevent Juan and Luis on betting who will obtain each other's intended. Both are arrested, as each denounced the other to the law, and both easily released. A worried Luis heads straight for the house where Anna stays the night before the promised wedding day, but so does Juan, whose servant, Cuitti, sneaks up behind Luis and ties him up while his master steals her away, as well as Ines from the convent. He removes Ines to his country house, where the liberated Luis arrives to challenge him, but they are interrupted by the arrival of Gonzalo, incensed at having lost his daughter. Juan tries to convince him of his conversion: "Commander, I adore Donna Ines, persuaded that heaven sends her to guide my steps in the path of goodness," he pleads. But the commander does not believe him. Angry at this refusal, Juan shoots Gonzalo to death and then stabs Luis to death before jumping in the river and entering a tug-boat as officers of the law contemplate the murder scene.
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 2"
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 2". Time: 1540s. Place: Seville, Spain.
"Don Juan Tenorio, part 2" text at http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Spanish/Zorilla.htm
Don Juan contemplates the pantheon paid for by his father before his death: statues of his son's victims: himself, Gonzalo, Luis, and Ines, dead after Juan abandoned her. A repenting Juan is astonished at seeing Ines' statue disappear over the pedestal and her shade appear before him, who reveals she will either save or lose her soul with his. Juan believes he is delirious. To shake it off, he invites two friends over to his house, where he says they will be alone unless the statues care to join them. As Juan sups with his friends, a knock is heard at the door, yet his servant, Ciutti, looking out from a window, can find no one. A second knock is heard with the same result, then five more times nearer and nearer inside the house until Juan asks the presence to enter through the chamber door, which the commander's statue does. The two friends faint at the sight of this vision, who reveals that Juan will die the next day, having one last chance to be converted, daring him to meet him, then disappearing through the wall. Juan next receives the visit of Ines' statue, who before disappearing the same way, discloses that tomorrow they will sleep in the same tomb. Seeing his friends awake, he accuses them of infusing a drug in the wine, as do they, so that a duel becomes as inevitable as the two friends' deaths. Juan goes back to the pantheon and finds a supper-table laid with snakes, garter-snakes, bones, fire, and ashes, followed by the commander's statue, who declares: "All that you see before you is where valor, youth, and power end" after which the death-knell sounds. The commander's statue takes hold of one hand to bring him down to hell, but the other hand is raised towards heaven and taken by Ines' statue. Don Juan is saved. "Let it be known to all," says he, "that the God of clemency is also that of Don Juan Tenorio."

In photographical terms, EV is probably the single most important number you will have to understand, to understand the theory behind the art of photography. This goes from your tiniest, least significant compact camera, to your cock-on-the-table style medium format camera wit a digital back.
Let us imagine a value called TCE. This TCE (The Correct Exposure) does not exist, because you might for a variety of reasons want a different exposure than the TCE. But for the sake of argument, let's assume TCE exists, and this is what you will want when you take a certain picture.
To get a correct exposure, you will want to have EXACTLY the right amount of light to capture your image. Not too much, and not too little.
So, what is it that might affect how much light comes to the film or imaging chip?
- Shutter speed - Imagine a mug with a lid containing a mysterious source of light, and the room you stand in is covered in darkness. Shutter speed would be how long you open the lid.
- Aperture - Same cup, same concept, but this time, how far you open the lid (if you open it a little - small aperture, i.e high aperture numbers (for example f/22). If you open it all the way - large aperture - i.e low aperture numbers (for example f/2.8)
- These are the two basic ones. The last factor that comes into play is your film speed, or the light sensitivity of your surroundings while holding the cup if you will.
That's all there is to it - these three factors combined allow you to manipulate the light in all kinds of ways (big depth of field through small apertures, freezing motion through fast shutter times, etc).
So, to get TCE, you will want to combine these three factors into JUST the correct way. Now, if you replace TCE with TCEV (The Correct Exposure Value), you understand what I have been on about.
EV is a number describing an exposure - any exposure - regardless of its "correctness".
The definition of EV=0 is an exposure of 1 second at f/1 using ISO 100 film, or any equivalent thereof (2 seconds f/1.4, 4 seconds f/2.0 etc)
The technical definition of EV is 2EV = LS/C.
- EV = the exposure value - explained above
- L = field (or zone) luminance -
- C = Exposure Constant - This is a constant that depends on what unit you are using to express the luminance (L)If you use candelas/ft2, it is 1.3. If you are using candelas/m2*, it is 12.5*. If you use apostilb, it is 3,98.
- S = film speed following the ISO standard
*) some of you might know cd/m2 as lux or lumens/m2,
This also means that 2ev = A2/T
- A = the f-stop number of the aperture
- T = shutter time in seconds
Combining these two; EV = log2(A2/T) = log2(LS/C) - which is the only formula you are likely to need, if you want to understand the basics of mathematics behind photography.
So what is the EV number used for?
Ah.. Well, the EV number is used internally in cameras - an EV number of 10, for example, would refer to all the combinations of shutter times and apertures that would give a given exposure using ISO 100 film. This is useful, because a camera only has to add one thing to this equation; A light measurement. A camera with a lookup table or an algorithm to calculate the correct EV is all set for using all the different combinations that are able to give you the exposure you want.
But why would I care, if the camera handles everything?
Because the camera doesn't always get things right. You may also want to use alternative exposures for artistic reasons.
Most cameras have an EV compensation wheel/dial, allowing you to choose how much you want to over/underexpose an image. This is usually measured in +/- 2EV, 1/3 steps. This means that you can over- or underexpose an image by two whole EV steps (which, incidentally, would mean the same as two full f-stops either way), in steps of 1/3 EV.
I hope that made things a little clearer. Any corrections or questions are welcome!
also see: Auto exposure bracketing
, photography metanode

Bruised Heel (Fat Pad Contusion)
What Are Bruised Heels
The largest bone in the foot is the heel bone. Physicians refer to this bone by its Latin name, the calcaneus. Of all the bones in the foot, it is the calcaneus that bears the most of our weight when we are standing, walking, jumping, and running. For this reason, it is more prone to injuries than other bones in the foot. The word contusion simply means a bruise. However, in the case of heel bruises, the underlying injury may be a flesh bruise, a bone bruise, or either one of these accompanied by a fracture of the calcaneus itself.
The absolute most common type of foot injury due to athletics is a sprain of the ankle, but heel bruises are also common and can be very painful. They can also lead to difficulties engaging in physical activities as well as the normal tasks required in daily life.
Symptoms of a Bruised Heel or Foot Pad Contusion
There is a wide range of injuries associated with the heel. Damage to the heel bone or the fat pad covering it can vary from a mild bruise of the fat pad only, which will cause no lasting damage, to a severe fracture of the bone itself. In between these extremes it is possible to have a bone bruise or stress fracture of the calcaneus, both of which are regarded as moderately serious conditions .
Common symptoms of heel bruises include all of the following:
- Swelling in the heel area
- Swelling around the heel area
- Pain while walking, running, or jumping
- Pain while standing still
- A sensation of tenderness in the heel area, especially when it is subjected to pressure. This may be true even when the pressure is mild -- for example, when a patient presses against the heel area using his or her fingers.
A more serious symptom is possible displacement of the fat pad covering the heel bone, meaning that the pad itself can shift to one side or the other, leaving part of the heel bone without its usual cushioning protection. If this has happened, there will be a flattened spot on the heel. Comparing the injured foot to the uninjured one will make this flat spot an obvious anomaly.
Men or women who continue to engage in vigorous exercise despite the warning signs listed above might develop another symptom, one which is much more serious. Inflammation may set into the outside perimeter of the calcaneus. This area is referred to as the periosteum. Once inflammation has set in, it may become a chronic condition. At this point, the athlete has developed a debilitating injury.
What Causes a Bruised Heel or Foot Pad Contusion?
Heel bruises may result from either a series of repetitive small injuries or one single severe event. In moderate cases the injury will be restricted to the fat pad alone or to a bruise on the surface of the heel bone, but serious cases can involve a true fracture of the bone itself or even several fractures at once.
There are two main causes of heel bruises:
- Repetitive motions.
These layer strain onto the heel and over time can cause injury. The phrase "repetitive stress injury" is apt in the case of foot pad contusions. Repetitive motions that can cause heel bruises include running or walking long distances at a single stretch. Marathon runners frequently develop one variety or another of the condition.
- Sudden strong impacts.
In many cases, the sudden impact is associated with landing too hard on one's feet, especially onto a hard surface. Athletes engaged in jumping events are at risk for developing heel bruises. Anyone who lands on their heels from a significant height, such as from up on a ladder, is also at risk.
A more extreme example of this type of causation is associated with sky diving, a thrill sport that entails many serious risks of injury to a variety of bodily systems. In the case of the calcaneus or heel bone, a difficult landing during sky diving can cause it to shatter in several places at once. This would produce immediate severe pain as well as swelling and would require an extended convalescence during which walking would be ill advised if not impossible. However, a permanent deformation of the bone is not likely to result.
Within the two main causes listed above, there are some associated and related causes:
- Lack of adequate footwear for the physical activity undertaken.
The classic example of this when it comes to heel bruises is participation in the military. Hours spent marching can lead to repetitive stress injuries, particularly when the shoes or boots worn do not have sufficient padding or other shock absorbing features. A general rule of thumb is that the harder the surface upon which an athlete or soldier will be running or marching, the more important it is to have shoes that provide shock absorption in order to shield the heel from excessive stress and strain.
- Being overweight
Excessive weight strains all body systems and places additional stress on weight bearing bones such as the calcaneus, making them more vulnerable to injury.
As we get older, our bones become more brittle, particularly if we are not getting enough calcium or the calcium is not adequately absorbed.
- Going barefoot
This is particularly ill advised during athletic activities. Wear shoes that are well cushioned and when they begin to wear out, replace them. You can tell that shoes are beginning to wear out not only from their visual appearance but also from the feel of your foot inside them when you exercise. If you begin to suspect there is less cushioning now than previously, you are probably right.
- Training surfaces that are uneven
These can produce sudden shocks of stress to the foot, which is adapted to generally expect a level surface to walk or run upon. Think of how difficult it is to walk in sand, which constantly shifts its surface characteristics, and you will have a sense of how uneven surfaces can lead to foot strain. Hard surfaces are also a problem, although in some sporting activities such as standard tennis, they cannot be avoided.
- Sudden changes of direction
These can subject the foot to unexpected stresses for which the muscles and fat pad aren't prepared to compensate.
Diagnosis of Heel Bruises or Fat Pad Contusions
Most doctors can diagnose a heel bruise, but you may be referred to a sports medicine specialist for treatment. Visual inspection along with a thorough medical questionnaire and interview to ascertain your health history is usually sufficient to diagnose a simple bruise.
In cases where the sports medicine specialist has cause to suspect that a fracture may be involved, a bone scan or x-ray may be ordered. X-rays are considered a definitive test when it comes to diagnosing a heel bruise that also encompasses a fracture. More advanced diagnostic tests such as magnetic resonance imaging are usually not required.
Common Treatment Options for Heel Bruises or Fat Pad Contusions
Initial treatment will consist of measures designed to decrease swelling and alleviate pain. These measures will sound familiar to anyone who has had a sprained ankle or indeed, any kind of bone injury to areas of the foot. They include common procedures outlines in any first aid manual:
- Ice (and later on, heat)
Experts recommend that icing take place for no longer than twenty minutes at a time in order to avoid causing cold injuries to the flesh surrounding the heel bruise. Applying ice for this span of time every two or three hours is usually sufficient to reduce swelling and assist with the patient's pain level. It is common to continue ice treatment for two or three days.
Ice treatment may involve the direct application of an ice bag or ice gel pack (stored in the freezer to cause it to chill). Another method is to immerse the foot in water into which several ice cubes have been placed.
Rest involves encouraging the injured party to avoid all use of the heel. This includes walking as well as athletic activities. If walking absolutely cannot be avoided, then it is acceptable to utilize crutches; the goal is to keep all weight off the injured heel. This phase of treatment should continue until the patient can place weight on the heel without experiencing pain. In this case, pain is the body's warning system, letting the patient know that more healing needs to occur and that rest, therefore, should be continued.
When the patient or athlete first begins to put weight on the heel, even if the process is pain free, he or she should adopt a gradual approach. Do not jump right back into all your previous activities, but go slowly so that your heel bones can adjust back to full usage over time.
An interesting twist to the treatment regimen is that after two or three days of ice treatment, the patient should be switched to a heat treatment. This should continue for another two or three days. Heat may be applied directly using an electrical heating pad or even an electric blanket for those who do not have a pad and may not wish to invest in one. An even more inexpensive alternative is to plunge the foot into heated water. Be sure that the heel area is completely immersed and that the water is not hot enough to burn.
A Word About Pain
Unfortunately, athletes in particular are sometimes encouraged to ignore pain and keep working out despite it. This is extremely ill advised in many types of injuries, including heel bruises. Exercising or engaging in sporting activities when the heel is in a painful state can lead to a host of other injuries, some of which are quite serious, so do let yourself heal. If not, you may find yourself in a position where you have developed a severe condition and have no alternative but to face a much longer convalescence than you would have had initially.
A full return to sports activities should not take place until a physician has authorized it.
Ongoing Treatment Options
When the patient is ready to resume normal activities, it may be advisable to use some protective devices that are designed to shift weight away from the center of the heel. This will allow for standing, walking, and running with less stress being placed on the heel bone itself, as well as the fat pad covering and cushioning it. The two most common such devices are:
- The protective donut
- The heel cup
The patient should also make sure that footwear is well cushioned and appropriate to the activity being undertaken. All of the other caveats discussed above also apply. Patients should avoid hard or uneven surfaces when possible and make efforts to lose weight.
Prevention of Heel Bruises
The single most important step you can take to prevent heel bruises is to wear proper shoes. They should be sized correctly for your feet and include enough cushioning and padding so that you can comfortably complete your tasks and / or sporting activities. For some sports, special shoes are available; these are designed specifically with that sport in mind. Avid athletes would be wise to invest in such shoes; even dabblers will often find them of great benefit. In the absence of sport specific shoes, a general purpose running shoe is appropriate for most sporting activities.
Another important consideration in prevention is the fact that shoes should be replaced frequently to avoid repetitive stress injuries. Runners in particular should be vigilant to be sure that their current shoes still have all the shock absorption qualities now that they had when new. If not, purchase new.
Other basic prevention measures include taking part in only those sporting activities that are appropriate for your age and physical condition, and losing weight.
Recommended Products for Heel Bruises and Fat Pad Contusionsa
Some of the home treatment options include heel cups and protective donuts. Indeed, physicians may advise the use of these products as well; they are not merely for home care. Such products are widely available at pharmacies and discount stores, as well as online. Some of the products below are rated at www.amazon.com with their highest rating: 5 of 5 stars. These ratings are generated by actual users of the product.
Produced by Everything Track & Field, these heel cups received a 5 out of 5 rating from every person who evaluated them. They range in price from $5.00 to $23.00 depending on how many heel cups you purchase in a single pack and come in both regular size for adults and "junior" size for younger athletes.
These heel cups are made of hard plastic and accomplish the job of nudging the fat pad on your heel back over the heel bone itself so that the heel is cushioned and physical activity becomes more comfortable. They do this by providing a rigid surface to either side of the heel, which keeps the fat pad from slipping sideways or spreading out too thin under pressure. The M-F Heel Cup Protector is recommended for slowing the advance of many problems associated with heel damage, which if not halted can change your way of standing and lead to problems far from the heel, such as in the lower back. They fit inside tennis shoes or any other type of shoe with a closed back.
Foot health expert Dr. Scholl's produces these orthotics (shoe inserts). Rather than using the heel cup solution outlined above, these inserts are protective donuts that are affixed to the heel and provide cushioning. They retail for about $8.40 each, making them very economical. Also appropriate for the care of plantar fasciitis and heel spurs, Dr. Scholl's heel pain relief orthotics provide immediate relief from pain – and relief that last all day. Since these are a physical rather than a chemical solution to pain, there's no danger of liver damage or other health problems that can result from taking too much pain medication. The standard size of these orthotics fits women who wear shoe sizes ranging from 5 to 12, making them very versatile.
Tuli's Heavy Duty Heel Gel Cups
These heel cups were rated with 4 out of 5 stars. You might think that means you should choose the M-F cup listed above instead, but what the Tuli's cups have as an advantage is that they are specifically designed for people who weigh more than 175 pounds. They provide for absorption of shocks and bumps even for a person of large size who may be experiencing significant issues with the weight bearing bones in the foot – primarily the heel. These cups are also recommended for the treatment of plantar fasciitis and will reduce heel pain in a variety of injury situations.
Check Out Some Possible Related Conditions:

The Spiritualist movement sprung from humble origins. In 1848, twelve and thirteen year-old Katherine and Margaret Fox heard unexplainable knockings and rappings in their reportedly haunted family home in upstate New York. The girls, rather than being afraid, were thrilled, and established a simple code to communicate with the spirits.
One early message read: “Dear friends, you must proclaim the truth to the world. This is the dawning of a new era; you must not conceal it any longer. When you do your duty God will protect you and good spirits will watch over you.”
Spiritualism spread across America. Four years later, the accomplished American Mrs. Hayden traveled to England and introduced it to the fashionable world.
During the height of the movement, while public spiritualists displayed thrilling shows- private home circles were venerated for instilling proper spiritual values and harmony within families.
Spiritualism was a blessed relief to the countless Victorian families who’d lost children. Now, they were not only certain the soul survived, but they could also communicate with loved ones on the other side. Death was simply a transition to another realm which could be reached any time. It also appealed to those who were tired of dogmatism and wished to experience God in a personal way.
The middle-class Theobald family of London became involved in Spiritualism in the 1860s. Morell Theobald lived with his wife and four children. His spinster sister, Florence, often stayed with them. Florence always stated she’d been born “sensitive” and immediately was drawn to this new religion.
Florence began practicing automatic writing in 1863. After she received many loving messages from deceased relatives, the rest of the Theobald family became involved. Soon they were having regular family sittings in which Morell Theobald’s other children who’d died in early youth communicated with them. They spoke of their daily activities in heaven and answered some questions related to theology.
As time passed, the spirits became more active. Throughout the house, raps broke out at will. The spirit children spelled out their love to “mama” through the furniture on her birthday. The spirits encouraged them to live life fully as well as care for their spiritual needs.
The Theobalds became one of the most respected families in the spiritualist community.
In the early 1880s, a new cook named Mary, entered their household. She claimed to have had psychic experiences as a child which resulted in being “whipped as a witch” by her parents.
Mary related to the Theobalds that while working in Brighton she’d been “told” one day she would live with a kind, sympathetic family at Granville Park. (The Theobalds had moved there in 1873 after spirits warned Morell about the ill health effects of the clay soil in Highgate)
The family sittings were their spiritual sphere and always began with prayer. The servants attended but stood to the side.
In 1882, Mary announced she saw spirits. The Theobalds were impressed with her powers, yet she was a servant. Her place was downstairs. However, as time passed, and her powers became more and more evident, they welcomed her as a family member. After the rest of the servants gave notice, it was decided Mary would share the household duties with daughter, Nellie Theobald. They did not want any negative outside forces to interfere with their harmonious circle.
In the class-obsessed Victorian era, associates were horrified. While the Theobalds were obviously legitimate and astute spiritualists, Mary must be a fake, an unscrupulous villain. Many friends severed ties with them.
Morell Theobald refused to bow down to this prejudice. He defended their decision by publicly announcing in a journal: “Spiritualism comes somewhat as a leveler of social distinctions……”
Mary became best friends with Nellie. They ran the house together and Nellie also began developing mediumistic abilities through writing.
Soon, many bizarre ghostly happening occurred. The girls reported finding fires already lit in the morning. The dining table already set for breakfast. Mysterious letters were discovered in locked boxes. Spontaneous writings appeared on the ceiling. Mr. Theobald rose early and waited in the kitchen in order to see the spirits start the fires or set the table. They never came. During family sittings, the spirits informed him they could not perform fragile operations while being watched.
In 1884, the family acquired a cabinet and were thrilled when Mary produced materializations of spirit hands and feet. After Mr. Theobald detailed some of their experiences in the spiritualist journal, Light, he was met with more scorn.
The Society of Psychic Research insisted on drilling Mary through a set of tests. The Theobalds refused to force her through these brutal experiments. During this tension-filled time, Mary grew quite ill and took to bed. Morell claimed the Society was trying to disprove spiritualist ideas rather than observe and record its merits and distanced himself from them.
Through the years, the Theobald family and Mary remained closely knit.
Was Mary a fraud?
On one hand, it was convenient that no one else saw the fires being lit or tables being set. Some claim Nellie was in cahoots, seeking special attention.
On the other hand, the class prejudice can not be ignored. It had been perfectly fine when Mary participated in the sittings as a servant. It was only when the Theobalds regarded her as part of their family, that accusations of fraud circulated.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). HPV is the virus that causes genital warts.
In addition to causing genital warts, an HPV infection can mean trouble for both girls and guys:
In females, HPV infection can cause problems with the that may lead to cervical cancer. HPV infection also can cause problems that may lead to cancer in the vagina, vulva, anus, mouth, and throat.
In males, HPV infection may lead to cancer in the penis, anus, mouth, and throat.
New research suggests that HPV maybe linked to heart disease in women.
Both girls and guys can get HPV from sexual contact, including vaginal, oral, and anal sex. Most people infected with HPV don't know they have it because they don't notice any signs or problems. People do not always develop genital warts, but the virus is still in their system and it could be causing damage. This means that people with HPV can pass the infection to others without knowing it.
Because HPV can cause serious problems such as genital warts and some kinds of cancer, a vaccine is an important step in preventing infection and protecting against the spread of HPV.
That's why doctors recommend that all girls and guys get the vaccine at these ages:
For girls: from age 11 or 12 through age 26
For guys: from age 11 or 12 through age 21
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the HPV vaccine as safe for both guys and girls ages 9 to 26 years old.
The HPV vaccine is given as three injections over a 6-month period. The vaccine does not protect people who have been infected with HPV before they've been vaccinated. That's why getting the vaccine before having sex for the first time is the most effective way for it to help prevent the infection.
The vaccine doesn't protect against all types of HPV. Anyone having sex should get routine checkups and girls should get Pap smears when a doctor recommends it.
The HPV vaccine is not a replacement for using condoms to protect against other STDs when having sex.
Most of the side effects that people get from the HPV vaccine are minor. They may include swelling or pain at the site of the shot, or feeling faint after getting the vaccine. As with other vaccines, there is a small chance of an allergic reaction.
A few people have reported health problems after getting the shot. The FDA is monitoring the vaccine closely to make sure these are not caused by the vaccine itself.
Most people have no trouble with the vaccine. You can lessen your risk of side effects like fainting by sitting down for 15 minutes after each shot.
Protecting Yourself Against HPV
For people who are having sex, condoms offer some protection against HPV. Condoms can't completely prevent infections because hard-to-see warts can be outside the area covered by the condom. Also, condoms can break.
The only way to be completely sure about preventing HPV infections and other STDs is not to have sex (called abstinence).
Spermicidal foams, creams, and jellies have not been proven to protect against HPV or genital warts. If you have questions about the vaccine or are concerned about STDs, talk to your doctor.

IN a very elaborate and interesting book, published in the year 1867, the title of which, at length, is the following: Life and Work at the Great Pyramid, by C. Piazzi Smyth, Professor of Practical Astronomy in the University of Edinburgh, and Astronomer Royal for Scotland. Edinburgh, 1867: the conclusions (though a mistake) which we now supply from the author are offered as definitions, after infinite care, of this important name or word, 'PYRAMID'. 'Pyramid' is derived in this book from two Greek terms. πυρός, 'wheat'; μετρον, 'measure'; or from Coptic roots, signifying pyr, 'division'; met, 'ten'. However, we offer to deduce this term 'Pyramid' from quite another source. The present writer originally sought to do. this in the year 1860, in a dissertation on the origin and purpose of the 'Pyramids of Egypt'. It is well known that the letters P and F are radically the same letter (as is evidenced by their peculiar pronunciation in certain countries), and that they are interchangeable. In Professor Smyth's book, Πυρός is wrongly translated 'wheat'. It signifies 'product', or 'growth', or 'elimination'; in other words, and in the symbolical sense, it means 'sun-begotten', or 'fire-begotten'. The Coptic derivation (re-read by a new light) is the true one. Thus we obtain another reason upon which we rely as the real interpretation of the name of the pyramid, or obelisk, or great original altar or upright, raised in the
divinity working secondarily in nature. Πυρ is fire (or Division produced by fire); Μετρον is Ten (or measures or spaces numbered as ten). The whole word means, and the entire object bearing this name means, the original Ten Measures or Parts of the Fiery Ecliptic or Solar Wheel, or the Ten Original Signs of the Zodiac. Therefore the Pyramids are commemorative altars raised to the divinity Fire.
The Ophites are said to have maintained that the serpent of Genesis was the Λογος, and the 'Saviour'. The Logos was Divine Wisdom, and was the Bhudda, or Buddha, of India. The Brazen Serpent was called Λογος, or the 'Word', by the Chaldee Paraphrast (Basnage, lib. iv. ch. xxv). It is very certain that, in ancient times, the serpent was an object of adoration in almost all nations. The serpent-worshippers seem to have placed at the head, or nearly at the head, of all things (Maia), and most intimately connected with the serpent, a certain principle which they called 'Sophia'. This is clearly a translation of the word 'Bhudda' into Greek. It also reminds us that the old Bhuddas are always under the care of the Cobra-Capella. This is evidenced in all the Memnonian or Egyptian heads; and in the asp (or fleur-de-lis), more or less veiled or altered, displayed as the chief symbol upon the universal Sphynxes. The serpent, in one view, was the emblem of the evil principle, or destroyer. But, as we have seen before, the 'destroyer' was the 'creator'. Hence he had the name, among his numerous appellations, of ΟΦΙΣ; in Hebrew, אוב, Ob; and as he was the 'logus', or 'linga', he was also ΟΨ, and in Hebrew מרא∙מ. Query, hence, Συφαρ, a seraph or serpent?--see Jones's Lexicon (in voce), and Σοφος, wise. The Συφ and Σοφ are both the same root. The famous 'Brazen Serpent', called Nehustan, set up by Moses in the Wilderness, is termed in the Targum
a 'Saviour'. It was probably a 'serpentine crucifix', as it is called a cross by Justin Martyr. All the foregoing is allegorical, and hides deep Gnostic myths, which explain serpent-worship, united with the adoration paid to a perpendicular.
The three most celebrated emblems carried in the Greek mysteries were the Phallus, Ι; the Egg, Ο and the Serpent, Φ; or otherwise the Phallus, the Ioni or Umbilicus, and the Serpent. The first, in each case. is the emblem of the sun, or of fire, as the male, or active, generative power. The second denotes the passive nature, or feminine principle, or the element of water. The third symbol indicates the destroyer, the reformer, or the renewer (the uniter of the two), add thus the preserver or perpetuator--eternally renewing itself. The universality of the serpentine worship (or phallic adoration) is attested by emblematic sculpture and architecture all over the world. This does not admit of denial. Its character and purpose are, however, wholly misunderstood. Not only is the worship of the serpent found everywhere, but it everywhere occupies an important station; and the farther back we go, the more universally it is found, and the more important it appears to have been considered. The Destroyer or Serpent of Genesis is correctly the Renovator or Preserver. In Genesis there is a 'Tree of Knowledge' and a 'Tree of Life'. Here we have the origin of the Ophites, Ophiones, or Oriental emblematical serpent-worshippers, to account for whom, and for whose apparently absurd object of adoration, our antiquaries have been so much perplexed. They worshipped the Saviour-Regenerator under the strangest (but the sublimest) aspect in the world; but not the devil, or malific principle, in our perverse, mistaken ideas, and with the vulgar, downward, literal meanings which we apply. The mythic and mimetic art of the
[paragraph continues] Gnostics is nowhere more admirably or more successfully displayed than in their hieroglyphs and pictured formulæ. Even in the blazonry and in the collars and badges of chivalry (which seems so remote from them), we find these Ophite hints. The heathen temples and the modern ritualistic churches alike abound in unconscious Gnostic emblems. State ceremony harbours them; they mix with the insignia of all the orders of knighthood; and they show in all the heraldic and masonic marks, figures, and patterns, both of ancient and of modern times. The religion of the Rosicrucians is also concealed, and unconsciously carried forward, perpetuated, and ignorantly fostered, by the very persons and classes who form, contrive, and wear decorations with special mysterious marks, all the world over. Every person, in unconsciously repeating certain figures, which form an unknown language, heired from the ancient times; carries into futurity, and into all parts of the world, the same carefully guarded traditions, for the knowing to recognize, to whose origin the sun, in his first revolution, may be figuratively said to be the only witness. Thus the great inexpressible 'Talisman' is said to be borne to the 'initiate' through the ages.
Proposals were published some years ago for a book entitled, 'The Enigma of Alchemy and of Œdipus resolved; designed to elucidate the fables, symbols, and other mythological disguises, in which the Hermetic Art has been enveloped and signalized in various ages, in ecclesiastical ceremonies, masonic formulæ, astronomical signs, and constellations--even in the emblazonments of chivalry, heraldic badges, and other emblems; which, without explanation, have been handed down, and which are shown to have originated in the same universal mystic school, through each particular tracing their allusion to the means and
mechanism.' This intended work was left in MS. by its anonymous author, now deceased, but was never published. The unknown author of it produced also in the year 1850, in one vol. 8vo, a book displaying extraordinary knowledge of the science of alchemy; which bore the name A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery; with a Dissertation on the more celebrated of the Alchemical Philosophers. This book was published in London; but it is now extinct, having been bought up--for suppression, as we believe--by the author's friends after his decease, who probably did not wish him to be supposed to be mixed up in such out-of-the-way inquiries.
The Vedas describe the Persian religion (Fire-Worship) as having come from Upper Egypt. 'The mysteries celebrated within the recesses of the "hypogea"' (caverns or labyrinths) 'were precisely of that character which is called Freemasonic, or Cabiric. The signification of this latter epithet is, as to written letters, a desideratum. Selden has missed it; so have Origen and Sophocles. Strabo, too, and Montfauçon, have been equally astray. Hyde was the only one who had any idea of its composition when he declared that "It was a Persian word, somewhat altered from Gabri of Guebri, and signifying FIRE-WORSHIPPERS".' See O’Brien’s Round Towers of Ireland, 1834, p. 354). Pococke, in his India in Greece, is very sagacious and true in his arguments; but he tells only half the story of the myths in his supposed successful divestment of them of all unexplainable character, and of exterior supernatural origin. He supposes that all the mystery must necessarily disappear when he has traced, and carefully pointed out, the identity and transference of these myths from India into Egypt and into Greece, and their gradual spread westward. But he is wholly mistaken; and most other modern explainers are equally
mistaken. Pococke contemplates all from the ethnic and realistic point of view. He is very learned in an accumulation of particulars, but his learning is 'of the earth, earthy'; by which we mean that, like the majority of modern practical philosophers, he argues from below to above, and not, in the higher way, from above to below, or (contrary to the inductive, or Aristotelian, or Baconian method) from generals to particulars, or from the light of inspiration into the sagacities of darkness, as we may call unassisted world’s knowledge--always vain.
The Feast of Lanterns, or Dragon-Feast, occurs in China at their New Year, which assimilates with that of the Jews, and occurs in October at the high tides. They salute the festival with drums and music, and with explosions of crackers. During the Feast, nothing is permitted to be thrown into water (for fear of profaning it). Here we have the rites of Aphrodite or Venus, or the Watery Deity, observed even in China, which worship, in Protean forms, being also the worship of the Dragon or Snake, prevails, in its innumerable contradictory and effective disguises, over the whole world. How like are the noises and explosions of crackers, etc., to the tumult of the festivals of Dionusus or Dionysius, to the riot or rout of the Corybantes amongst the Greeks, to the outcry and wild music of the priests of the Salii, and, in modern times, to the noises said to be made at initiation by the Freemasons, whose myths are claimed to be those (or imitative of those) of the whole world, whose Mysteries are said to come from that First Time, deep-buried in the blind, unconscious succession of the centuries! In the Royal-Arch order of the Masons, as some have said, at an initiation, the 'companions' fire pistols, clash swords, overturn chairs, and roll cannon-balls about. The long-descended forms trace from the oldest tradition;
the origin, indeed, of most things is only doubt or conjecture, hinted in symbols.
The Egyptian Deities may always be recognized by the following distinctive marks:
Phthas, Ptah, by the close-fitting Robe, Four Steps, Baboon, Cynocephalus.
Ammon, Amn, by a Ram's Head, Double Plume, Vase, Canopus.
The Sun-God (Phre or Ra) has a Hawk's Head, Disc, Serpent, Uræus.
Thoth, or Thoyt, is Ibis-headed (means a scribe or priest).
Sochos, or Suches, has a Hawk. Hermes Trismegistus (Tat) displays a Winged Disc.
The Egyptians, however, never committed their greater knowledge to marks or figures, or to writing of any kind.
Figure 313: the Gnostics have a peculiar talisman of Fate (Homer's Αισα). This is one of the rarest types to be met with in ancient art. In Stosch's vast collection, Winckelmann was unable to find a single indubitable example. It is of brown agate, with transverse shades, and is an Etruscan intaglio or Gnostic gem. The Gnostics, p. 238, makes a reference to this figure.
Later in our book (figs. 191, 300, 301) we give a figure of the 'Chnuphis Serpent' raising himself aloft. Over, and corresponding to the rays of his crown, are the seven vowels, the elements of his name. The usual triple 'S.S.S.' and bard, and the name 'ΧΝΟΥΒΙC', are the reverse of, this Gnostic gem. It is a beautiful intaglio on a pale plasma of the finest quality, extremely convex, as it has been found on examination.
In the Ophic planetary group (Origen in Celsum, vi. 25) Michael is figured as a lion, Suriel as a bull, Raphael as a serpent, Gabriel as an eagle, Thautabaoth
as a bear, Eratsaoth as a dog, Ouriel as an ass. Emanations are supposed to pass through the seven planetary regions, signified by these Chaldæan names, on their way to this world. It was through these seven planetary spiritual regions, or spheres, filled with their various orders of angels, that the Gnostics mythed the Saviour Jesus Christ to have passed secretly; disguising Himself and His Mission in order to win securely to His object. In evading recognition, in His acceptable disguises, through these already-created 'Princedoms of Angels', He veiled His purpose of His Voluntary Sacrifice for the Human Race till He was safe, in His investment in 'Humanity' for the accepted 'Propitiation'--through the 'Virgin' for production only; not for 'office'.
There was deep mystery in the Gnostic method of teaching that, although the 'Sacrifice' (the source of sacrifice in all faiths) was complete and real and perfect, the Saviour did not--nor could--suffer bodily or be nailed really, and die upon the Cross, but that He suffered in appearance only, and vicariously--the Scripture being misread. The Gnostics maintained that Simon the Cyrenean--who, the Evangelist states, bore His Cross--did really bear it as the culprit, and suffered upon it. As human and divine are totally different, this could not impair the efficacy of the 'Crucifixion', for the substitution of persons was miraculous and remote (of course) from human sense.

After the big blow up, which is still being discussed, between Tom Cruise and Brooke Shields in 2005, many people wondered whether postpartum depression is ‘real’ or not. A news release from the NIH claims that researchers Istvan Mody and Jamie Maguire may have found a mechanism behind this disease (published in Neuron).
Researchers have pinpointed a mechanism in the brains of mice that could explain why some human mothers become depressed following childbirth. The discovery could lead to improved treatment for postpartum depression. Supported in part by the National Institute of Mental Health, of the National Institutes of Health, the study used genetically engineered mice lacking a protein critical for adapting to the sex hormone fluctuations of pregnancy and the postpartum period. – NIH News Release
Although it was first thought that this depression related to fluctuations in hormone levels, this theory was mostly disproved. Now, it seems that the hormones actually change the levels of a receptor in the brain. A mutation in this receptor in women suffering from postpartum depression may be the cause of this disorder (if women are anything like the mice used here).
The question now is, will this research have Tom eating his words? Probably not, but we have to keep trying…

is a Reform
Reform Judaism is the largest denomination of American Jews today. With an estimated 1.5 million members, it also accounts for the largest number of Jews affiliated with Progressive Judaism worldwide.- Reform Jewish theology :Rabbi W...
A synagogue is a Jewish house of prayer. This use of the Greek term synagogue originates in the Septuagint where it sometimes translates the Hebrew word for assembly, kahal...
in Richmond, Virginia
Richmond is the capital of the Commonwealth of Virginia, in the United States. It is an independent city and not part of any county. Richmond is the center of the Richmond Metropolitan Statistical Area and the Greater Richmond area...
. Founded in 1789 by Spanish and Portuguese Jews
Spanish and Portuguese Jews are a distinctive sub-group of Sephardim who have their main ethnic origins within the Jewish communities of the Iberian peninsula and who shaped communities mainly in Western Europe and the Americas from the late 16th century on...
as Kahal Kadosh Beth Shalome
(Hebrew: Holy Congregation, House of Peace,) it is one of the oldest synagogues in the United States
The designation of the oldest synagogue in the United States requires careful use of definitions, and must be divided into two parts, the oldest in the sense of oldest surviving building, and the oldest in the sense of oldest congregation...
When the congregation was founded, there were 100 Jews in Richmond's population of 3,900. After meeting for some years in leased space, the congregation built its first synagogue in 1822. It was a handsome if modest, one-story, brick building in Georgian style.
The community grew and in 1841 the Ashkenazi members founded a new congregation called Beth Ahabah. In 1846 Beth Ahabah established the first Jewish school in Richmond, and 1846 built a synagogue at Eleventh and Marshall Streets. The Congregation moved toward Reform in 1867 with discussion of acquiring an organ , the decision to switch to family pews (mixing men and women,) and allowing women to join the choir. Beth Ahabah joined the Reform Movement Union of American Hebrew Congregations in 1875. A new building was erected, also at Eleventh and Marshall, in 1880. In 1898 K.K. Beth Shalome formally merged with Congregation Beth Ahabah.http://www.bethahabah.org/our-history.htm
On March 4, 1904 the congregation laid the cornerstone for its present building, known as the Franklin Street Synagogue The building was dedicated on December 9, 1904. The domed, Neoclassical synagogue was designed by the Richmond-based firm of Noland and Baskervill, who also designed nearby St. James' Church and the wings of the Virginia State Capitol. The synagogue has 29 stained glass windows. Most notable is a window on the building's eastern wall created and signed by the Louis Comfort Tiffany
Louis Comfort Tiffany was an American artist and designer who worked in the decorative arts and is best known for his work in stained glass. He is the American artist most associated with the Art Nouveau and Aesthetic movements...
Studios in 1923. It depicts Mt. Sinai.
The congregation maintains the Hebrew Cemetery of Richmond
The Hebrew Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia, also known as Hebrew Burying Ground, dates from 1816. This Jewish cemetery, one of the oldest in the United States, was founded in 1816 as successor to the 1789 Franklin Street Burial Grounds of 1789. Among those interred here are Josephine Cohen Joel,...
and the Cemetery for Hebrew Confederate Soldiers
The Cemetery for Hebrew Confederate Soldiers a Jewish cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. It is the only Jewish military cemetery not located in Israel. The cemetery within the Hebrew Cemetery of Richmond, on historic Shockoe Hill, and is maintained by Congregation Beth Ahabah.-External links:*...
, as well as the original site of the 1789 Franklin Street Burial Grounds, which was the first Jewish cemetery in Virginia.
Beth Ahabah Museum
Congregation Beth Ahabah is the home of the Beth Ahabah Museum & Archives
, located at 1109 West Franklin Street. Established in 1977, the museum's focus is the history and culture of Richmond's Jewish community and the Southern Jewish experience. Three galleries feature changing exhibits. The museum is open from Sunday through Thursday.

HEIDELBERG, Germany, Oct. 27 (UPI) -- German scientists say they've developed technology that allows paraplegics paralyzed from the hips down to wirelessly operate the right pedal of a piano.
Researchers at the Orthopedic Clinic of Heidelberg University Hospital led by Rudiger Rupp said their technology overcomes disadvantages of other methods that do not allow half pedal or flutter.
Rupp and his team developed a bite splint with a pressure-sensitive sensor a pianist can hold in his or her mouth to control the pedal according to the markings on the music.
A wireless transmitter is connected to an electric motor attached to the pedals of the concert grand. A remote module -- a kind of miniature transmitter -- is placed in the pianist's right cheek. In the left cheek, the paraplegic pianist has a button cell that provides energy for 12 hours.
When pedal markings appear in the notes, the paraplegic pianist literally grits his teeth, to a greater or lesser extent, to achieve the same differentiated sounds as a non-disabled pianist.
Rupp, director of the research department at the hospital's spinal cord injury unit was honored for the invention with the award of 15,000 Euros by the German Paraplegic Foundation.
|Additional Science News Stories|
LAUSANNE, Switzerland, June 18 (UPI) --A new computer algorithm that can give humans the ability to map their environments with sound could lead to an app to aid blind people, Swiss researchers say.

|Uploaded:||September 28, 2009|
|Updated:||September 29, 2009|
This is a cool animal drawing that I did a few days ago. It is an animal character from a very funny animated movie called “Madagascar 2”, and I think you guys will find this lesson very fun, easy, and colorful. You will be getting a lesson on “how to draw a lemur step by step”. The three lemurs in Madagascar are King Julian, Maurice who is an aye-aye lemur, and then there is Mort who is the small one ounce mouse lemur. Of course as you can see this lemur is in cartoon form. That is because I wanted this online drawing lesson to be as easy as possible for you all to learn from. The lemur are small monkey like primates that live in their native land of Madagascar. I say that they are “monkey like” because that is exactly what these animals are. Lemurs are also known as being the primate before the primate or pre-primates. They have slender hands and feet that move just like a monkey, and they also have long snouts. Just like other monkey species, these animals come in a variety of colors ranging from grey, brown, a reddish color and even mixed shades. A lemur can weigh as little as one ounce, to fifteen pounds. The ones that weight around an ounce are called “pygmy mouse lemurs” and the largest of the species are called “indri lemurs”. These beautiful animals also have long tails that are either solid in color or striped. Like other primates these creatures are very social animals, which means they live in groups. They love spending most of their day in the trees and other bushes. The only species of lemur that splits up their days to the ground and trees, is the ringed tailed lemur. An interesting thing about these social animals is that they bath in the sun just like us, but they also do this to heat up their bodies. The diet of the lemur consist of leaves, different fruits, insects, and animals that are much smaller then themselves. All in all this is a cool lesson and I think you guys will like drawing one of the more popular character of the Dream Works movie Madagascar 2. Have fun teaching yourself “how to draw a lemur step by step” with this free online drawing lesson. I will be back once again with more fun things to draw. Peace out peeps and happy drawing!

Act II, scene i
The scene is the public square outside Corvino's home, slightly later in the day. Sir Politic Would-be, the English knight residing in Venice, and Peregrine, an English traveler who has just arrived in Venice, are strolling together. Sir Politic explains that is was his wife's wish that the two should go to Venice, for she desired to pick up some of the local culture. He asks Peregrine (whose name derives from the word peregrination, or wandering travel) for news from the home country, and says that he has heard many strange things from England; for example, a raven has been building a nest in one of the king' ships. Having decided that Sir Politic will believe anything anyone tells him, as his name indicates, Peregrine proceeds to let him tell some more improbable stories for his and the audience's amusement, including the one about Mas' Stone, the supposed drunken illiterate who Politic is convinced was a dangerous spy. According to Politic, Stone had secret messages smuggled out of the Netherlands in cabbages. To see just how much Politic will pretend to know, Peregrine mentions a race of spy baboons living near to China. Politic, of course, says he has heard of them, and calls them "the Mameluchi", another name for the Mamelukes (who were actually an Egyptian dynasty that had nothing to do with either China or baboons). Peregrine says, sarcastically, that he is fortunate to have run into Sir Politic, because he has only read books about Italy, and needs some advice on how to negotiate his way through Venetian life. Sir Politic seems to be agreeing when Peregrine interrupts him, asking him to identify the people entering the square.
This scene introduces us to the Sir Politic Would-be subplot of Volpone. The subplot is a key component of Elizabethan drama; it is a secondary storyline which, like a variation on a theme, should take up the themes of the main story, or related themes, and treats them in a slightly different way, either with a different tone or with a different emphasis. The subplot usually often revolves around a central character that plays a less central role in the main plot. Volpone has been criticized for the fact that the central characters in its subplot-Sir Politic, Lady Politic and Peregrine-play almost no role in the central plot. But the satirical intent of the two plots and their light-hearted tone are similar, as are their focus on gullibility. In the main plot, the gullibility of the main characters is inspired by their greed. In the subplot instead of satirizing greed, Jonson attacks another selfish virtue, that of vanity. Sir Politic considers himself wise and learned, and wants everyone to see him that way; he speaks confidently of knowing the ways of Venetians, even though he has only lived in Venice a short while. His name gives us the central indication of his vice, that he "would be politic," or knowledgeable, if he could; his desire to appear so at all costs makes him agree to anything anyone says as if he knew it already, before trying to add his own bit of (usually incorrect) insight to the statement. His situation is ironic (situationally) because in trying so hard to appear knowledgeable, he in fact appears gullible and stupid to anyone who meets him for even the briefest period of time—such as Peregrine.
The Sir Politic subplot is also directed to a specific segment of Jonson's audience, namely Italo-phile Englishmen like himself, for whom a very serious issue at the time was whether or not Englishmen in love with the grandeur of Italian civilization should take the risk of traveling to Italy. The "risk" involved was not that of disease or death, but of "moral degeneration"; Italy was seen as a corrupt and decadent place, full of liars, swindlers, and immoral hedonists, and Englishmen who traveled there risked bringing the moral contagion of vanity and deceit back to the mother country, as if introducing a previously unknown disease to their homeland. Indeed, Venice was the corrupt, decadent city; as we can see from the main plot, where every single character is engaged in some form of deceit, Jonson's portrayal of Venetian life fully buys into the stereotype, and the play's setting probably lent it a great deal of believability in the eyes of its English audiences. Sir Politic functions serves, then, as an example of all Englishmen who go to Italy and are corrupted by its decadent ways. The satire leveled against his vanity is also leveled against his desire to talk and act like Italians (in the eyes of Jonson's compatriots, they were just about the same thing). Peregrine, on the other hand, is a model of how one should behave in Italy; his named, which comes from the Latin for "wanderer", indicates that he is just passing through this foreign land. Furthermore, he has been instructed well by "he that cried Italian" to him, in other words his tutor, who instructed him using a "common grammar." This was probably one of the travel books then widely available, published by educated Italo-philes, giving instructions on how to go to Italy without being corrupt; they were full of various bits of helpful advice such as "never let a Venetian know where you live, or any other important facts about you"; and they were seen as a kind of inoculation, if you will, against whatever "virus" the Italians had that made them so mean.
Readers' Notes allow users to add their own analysis and insights to our SparkNotes—and to discuss those ideas with one another. Have a novel take or think we left something out? Add a Readers' Note!

Ethiopia has the largest livestock population in Africa, with approximately 27 million head of cattle, including around 6 million draught oxen, 24 million sheep, 18 million goats, 7 million equines, 1 million camels and 52 million poultry. The greatest concentration occurs in the highlands where 70 percent of the human population live. Livestock and livestock products contribute 35 percent of the agricultural output and additionally supply the power to cultivate virtually all of Ethiopia's 6 million ha of land cropped annually. Livestock (mainly donkeys) also contribute substantially to rural transport needs. Exports of livestock products are presently limited to hides and skins, but a great potential exists and maximum effort is being exerted for exports of beef, mutton and live animals, especially to the Middle East. Livestock is the second largest earner of foreign exchange after coffee.
Since the mid-1970s, rural development has been organized within a socialist framework. However, collective farming through cooperatives and state farms accounts for less than 10 percent of the total cultivated area. Over 85 percent of agricultural output is still produced by individual subsistence smallholders who have farming rights over the land they till. Out of the total land area 55 percent are grasslands or permanent pastures. In the highland area animals are part of a mixed subsistence farming complex, while in the lowland area animals are kept by pastoralists. Only a very small proportion is commercially owned by state farms, cooperatives or private individuals.
Livestock productivity, in general, is low throughout the country. Cows calve about every second year and cattle take four to five years to reach maturity. All types of animals suffer nutritional stress for much of the year because of the high cropping and grazing intensity. There are few opportunities for increased offtake under the present production systems and nutritional interventions, such as forage development or supplementation (or a combination of the two) which would be necessary to increase per head and animal production. Cattle, sheep and goats frequently walk long distances to water/graze and are housed or gathered at night, either with their owners or in simple shelters and barns made out of thorn bushes.
Substantial areas are used for communal grazing. These commons are typically dominated by unpalatable and low productivity grass types. Severe overgrazing and erosion are evident in almost every part of the country.
2. FEED SUPPLIES
2.1 Crop residues: cereals, pulses and other crops
These are the main sources of roughage for small-scale and commercial fatteners operating around crop farming areas. Cereal straws from teff, barley and wheat are the largest component of the livestock diets. The residues are stacked after threshing and fed during the dry season, as are pulse crop residues. Maize, sorghum and millet stovers are important residues in the lower altitude zones. Teff is widely grown in the highlands and barley replaces wheat at higher altitudes, where pulses increase in importance.
Ethiopia's annual crop of about 4.6 million ha of cereals produces 6.5 million tonnes residue, and 0.8 million ha of pulses provide 0.4 million tonnes of haulms. Nutritive values of teff straw are equivalent to medium quality hay, whereas other cereal residues are only of poor to fair quality. However, pulse haulms are high quality roughage (5–8 percent crude protein).
2.2 Byproducts from the Ethiopian sugar industry
On the average about 15 000 ha of cane are harvested each year with a yield of 110 tonnes cane/ha (FAO Production Yearbook 1985). Sugar mills are found at Wonji/Shewa and Metahara and are organized and run by the Ethiopian Sugar Corporation (ESC).
Present molasses production is more than 70 000 tonnes per annum (Table 1) and molasses production is expected to reach 92 000 tonnes by 1991–92. The expansion will take place in 1988–89 (Wonji/Shewa) and 1989–90 (Metahara).
The major part of molasses produced by the Sugar Estate is presently exported to Europe and USA through Djibouti and all the molasses from Metahara are exported (Table 2). Railway wagons are used as transport for exports.
A part of the molasses produced in sold on the local market to distilleries and for cattle fattening (Table 3)
Comparison, for each year, of the figures of production and export + local sales shows immediately that there is an important quantity of molasses which is neither used locally nor exported. Residual molasses could be available for additional livestock feed. The average excess for 1980, 81 and 82, is around 15 000 tonnes/year. This excess molasses is in fact dumped in ground pits existing in the Sugar Estates and used for road maintenance and the rest dumped down the river (Awash).
Explanation of this situation is not the lack of export possibilities. ESC always finds international buyers but the Ethiopian railways cannot for the moment insure the transport of molasses. The surplus molasses will increase with the expansion programme and will reach 65 000 tonnes in 1991–92. However, the Government has started plans to convert all surplus molasses into ethanol including, presumably, the 50 000 tonnes which were to be exported.
The most recent group to examine alternative use for molasses was an FAO team that visited Ethiopia in late 1984 to plan an emergency programme for livestock survival during the current drought. The team adovocated (and we all do) that all molasses should be used as livestock feed, both in times of drought and during normal seasons. Five thousand tonnes of molasses would fatten less than 10 000 head per annum. This is less than the number currently fattened by the Ministry of State Farms Development for export. Ethanol production conflicts with existing operations and future plans for cattle fattening in Ethiopia particularly if rations are to rely on molasses for the energy available for weight gain.
There are substantial economic data and research results to support the argument that molasses should be used as a livestock feed, irrespective of the season. The FAO team that visited Ethiopia in late 1984 concluded that in times of severe drought, priority should be given to the use of molasses to assist with the survival of breeding cattle and that in normal years, fattening and feedlot finishing would be the most profitable alternative.
2.2.2 Cane tops, trash and bagasse
Ethiopia's cane field produces 540 000 tonnes of cane tops and 270 000 tonnes of trash each year (380 000 tonnes of dry matter) and the factories produce about 476 000 tonnes (235 000 tonnes of dry matter) of bagasse. Some of the cane tops are collected by local peasants and fed to livestock without any charge. Usually most of the cane tops and trash are burnt to facilitate subsequent irrigation and cultivation of the ratoon crop. The three existing factories use most of the bagasse as boiler fuel. In any given year a minimum of 300 000 tonnes of dry matter in the form of cane tops and trash has been produced within the three sugar estates. This means that at the rate of 3 to 4 kg average dry matter intake per head per day for 90 days it will be sufficient to feed more than one million cattle. This is assuming efficient recovery of tops and trash but shows the enormous potential for productive utilization of available resources that are presently wasted.
3. Molasses as cattle feed
Feeding practices in almost all fattening programmes in our country depend on liberal feeding of wheat bran, and middlings and noug cake supplemented with straw (and more recently sugarcane tops). Molasses is fed in limited quantities (less than 3 kg/day). Urea in most cases is not used. Average performance rate is between 500 and 600 per day. These feeding practices must change and are being changed because of the following major reasons:
There is a shortage of wheat bran and middlings due to competition for existing supplies to livestock which make more efficient use of the resource (poultry, pigs and milking cows).
Total production of wheat bran and wheat middlings that is physically available within the country does not increase by more than 30 000 tonnes annually.
The only other concentrated energy resource available locally which can serve as the basis of a cattle fattening diet is molasses. The average production of molasses is some 70 000 tonnes.
Drought has put further pressure on feed supplies.
The pressing need to earn foreign currency and the rising price of good quality beef makes it imperative to expand the fattening programme using more and more molasses.
To reduce the cost of fattening by making greater use of presently under-utilized feed resources (molasses).
The use of molasses for cattle fattening has been developed in many countries under conditions resembling in some respects those presently prevailing in Ethiopia. Namely, shortage of foreign exchange, lack of conventional concentrate feeds, and the need to expand meat production to provide protein for the population. A high molasses feeding system proved economically successful since rates of animal performance and efficiency of feed utilization were almost doubled compared with the traditional method. In view of the export potential of molasses and foreign exchange cost associated with urea, the use of molasses/urea (blocks or liquid) must be associated with livestock production systems which either provide export earnings (finished beef animals) or provide substitutes for imports (dairy production).
3.2 Feeding and management systems on state farms
3.2.1 Beef cattle feedlots (at Wonji and Kuriftu) have started to feed ad libitum molasses with 500g/day of poultry litter, one kg/day of protein-rich oil cake (noug, cotton) and sugarcane tops or straw at the rate of approximately 1 kg dry matter per 100 kg liveweight per day. A mixed supplement of wheat bran and wheat middlings with oil seed cake is being replaced by oil cake and poultry litter. The supply of poultry litter is from the State Poultry Farm not too far from the feedlots (Debre Zeit). The ad libitum feeding of molasses is reached by providing steadily increasing quantities of molasses; it usually takes three weeks to reach ad libitum feeding.
3.2.2 Beef holding areas (Netle, Alemtena): These areas have water points and advantage was taken to situate cattle around the water troughs and to feed them molasses ad libitum. Oil barrels cut down the middle and concrete troughs made from drain pipes (60 cm diameter) are used to mix the molasses, 1 kg oil cake, and 500 g of poultry litter per head per day. Straw is fed on the ground (or on a rack) at daily quantities between 1 and 4 kg/head depending on the holding area grazing capacity (native pasture). Grazing time is between 3 and 7 hours per day and confined throughout the rest of the day and night (with adequate space) with easy access to the troughs. This system of feeding is also adapted to fattening of goats and sheep. The amount of oil seed cake and poultry litter is 150 kg and 50 g per head per day respectively. Molasses is sometimes sprinkled over the daily hay allowance at the rate of about 0.5 kg/head/day.
3.3 Storage and transport of molasses
A system of mixing aqueous urea and molasses in standard oil tankers has been developed and is giving satisfactory results. The important points to note are that water should be added first to the tanker in amounts equivalent to 5 percent based on the weight of the final mixture. The system of introducing the water is to use a hose pipe and to measure the rate of flow with a watch. The approximate amount of water is then added to the tanker on a time basis. This is quicker and perfectly reliable for the purposes required. The urea (in amounts equal to 2.5 percent of the total weight of the mixture) can be added at the same time as the water. Care must be taken to ensure that there are no lumps in the urea. Lumps of urea can be easily broken with a spade or similar instrument. The urea and water must be put in the tanker at least some 10 km away from the sugar factory so that the urea will go into solution as the tanker is driven to the factory. At the factory the required amount of molasses (92.5 percent of the total weight of the mixture) is added. As molasses has a higher density (1.45) than fuel oil the loaded weight of the tanker is achieved when it is approximately two thirds full. The space that is left above the above the molasses together with the baffler inside the tanker ensure that the molasses and aqueous urea are completely mixed before the tanker arrives at its destination. The above system of transporting and mixing of urea was used during the drought feeding programme and to feedlots and holding areas of the State Farms.
Storage of molasses on farm sites is a simple earth pit on a hill side. Tankers can unload and the molasses could flow out by gravity on tankers pulled by horses or tractors.
4. RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSION
Changes in feed availability and in the nature of the ingredients fed can be causal factors of the metabolic disturbances associated with high level feeding of molasses. Inevitably when a change is made from restricted feeding of molasses to ad libitum feeding, there will be a relatively high incidence of metabolic disturbances. The three metabolic disturbances that can occur are molasses toxicity (drunkenness), urea toxicity and bloat. The important step is to establish the feedlot on the ad libitum molasses system; then provide on a continuous basis both the molasses and the other supplements (e.g. oil seed cake and poultry litter) and measure the results in terms of animal performance, economics and disease incidence.
The economic advantages of using high levels of molasses/urea are considerable apart from the fact that the use of high levels will enable the wheat bran/middlings presently used in the fattening ration to be allocated for other more appropriate purposes such as feeding of dairy cows, poultry and pigs. There is, therefore, a very strong incentive for a programme of research which will increase the understanding of the factor causing molasses toxicity; and to development of feeding and management systems in which the economic losses due to this disease are minimized to the point that they are more compensated by the greater rate and economy of fattening.
Therefore, the following feeding trials should be the developmental research areas to be studied: the base of research areas will be on indigenous cattle, crop residues and agroindustrial byproducts available in Ethiopia.
Evaluation of roughage sources and the interactions between these and supplementation with poultry litter and with the level of feeding of the molasses (e.g. restricted versus ad libitum feeding).
Investigation concerning the use of cane tops as roughage source. This will include studies on the method of harvesting and processing (e.g. use of fresh green or burnt tops).
Studies on the use of poultry litter and poultry excreta partly as additives for improving the rumen ecosystem and as a partial replacement for urea.
Determination of response course to different protein supplements including levels with the use of molasses/urea blocks.
The list of research areas is not comprehensive nor does it indicate the exact orders of priority. It is certain that considerable research will be needed both at the operational level and laboratory in order to optimize the use of molasses in livestock feeding systems in Ethiopia.
In order to understand and implement strategic feeding systems the Ministry of State Farms Development and the International Livestock Centre for Africa (ILCA) have commenced collaborative programmes on development research and training since the beginning of this year (1986). This point of collaborative effort should be stressed because the result will not have application only to Ethiopia but to other African countries already contemplating a greater utilization of their own national feed resources.
|Year||1984 – 85||1983 – 84||1982 – 83|
|Wonji||11 917||14 358||11 547|
|Shewa||13 988||15 158||12 565|
|Metahara||44 856||43 727||40 629|
|70 761||73 243||64 741|
|Year||1984 – 851||1983 – 841||1982 – 83||1981 – 82|
|From ESC tonnes||35 000||28 000||41 000||29 000|
|Sale prices US$/tonne||50.0||47.8||61.9|
|Year||1984 – 851||1983 – 841||1982 – 83||1981 – 82|
|16 000||15 000||18 303||14 771|
|15 000||9 800||821||724|
1 On estimate available from Ethiopian Sugar Corporation(ESC), 1984.
|Total molasses production 1991–2||91 000|
|Tonnage to be used for alcohol production and baker's yeast||66 000|
|Tonnage required by the beverage industry||21 000|
|Tonnage available for livestock||5 000|
El ganado y los productos ganaderos representan el 35 por ciento de la producción agrícola de Etiopía, además de proporcionar energía de tiro para la producción agrícola y el transporte. Aunque las exportaciones de productos pecuarios se limita actualmente a cueros y pieles, se reconoce el beneficio potencial de la exportación de animales vivos y carne de vacuno y de carnero, y se están haciendo grandes esfuerzos en este sector.
Los residuos de cosecha constituyen la principal fuente de forraje para los animales, y también se dispone localmente de subproductos de la industria azucarera, por ejemplo melaza, cogollos de caña, bagazo y paja. Una pequeña parte de la melaza producida por el Ethiopian Sugar Estate (Ingenio azucarero etíope) se vende localmente a destilerías y para el engorde de ganado, mientras que la mayor parte se exporta. En general, todo parece indicar que el sector ganadero no utiliza plenamente los recursos de piensos disponibles.
Por consiguiente, es necesario realizar investigaciones sobre la utilización óptima de los recursos de piensos. La atención deberá concentrarse en la utilización de esos subproductos industriales por el ganado autóctono. Ello supondrá una evaluación de las fuentes de forrajes bastos y sus interacciones y suplementación con melaza/urea; investigaciones sobre la utilización de los cogollos de caña como forraje y de la gallinaza como aditivos y sustitutivos parciales de la urea; y la determinación de la respuesta de los animales a los diversos suplementos proteínicos.
A este respecto, el Ministerio de Desarrollo de Granjas Estatales de Etiopía y el Centro Internacional para la Ganadería en Africa (ILCA) han iniciado un programa cooperativo de investigaciones y capacitación en desarrollo a comienzos de 1986.

Nearly 8 million Americans go to work every day yet still live below the poverty line. That is in part because the federal minimum wage is too low.
Currently, an individual with a full-time job at the minimum wage and a family of three to support will fall below the federal poverty line. These workers, despite putting in regular hours, are struggling to provide basic necessities for themselves and their families. By allowing the minimum wage to remain at a nearly unlivable level, we have deemed certain jobs not worthy enough to meet even our country's minimum standard of living.
How have we been able to keep wages so low without significant social discord? By using tax revenue and a complicated government bureaucracy to subsidize low-wage employers and supplement minimum-wage salaries. Rather than firms paying a worker's true cost and customers paying an appropriate price for the services provided by those firms, the government provides workers with "income transfers" to help them meet basic needs. These include such programs as the earned income tax credit, food stamps and Medicaid.
These government supports mask a job's true value and set an artificially low wage. They also represent the height of inefficiency. Raising the minimum wage means that the income required for basic needs is delivered in a one-step approach, via the paycheck directly from firm to worker, rather than requiring additional government expenditures.
Beyond efficiency, there is also the matter of human dignity. Think about it: After a long day on the clock, you come home knowing that despite your hard work, you can't feed your family, cover their medical insurance or pay your rent without government support. What message does that send about the dignity of your work and the pride of taking personal responsibility for your family? Low wages push workers into shadow labor markets where they get paid under the table, avoid reporting income and evade tax responsibilities. Artificially low wages teach workers that their work is not valuable — a disastrous policy outcome.
In his State of the Union speech, President Obama called for raising the minimum wage to $9 an hour. That would be a start toward restoring dignity and value to low-wage work. But it isn't enough. We propose raising the minimum wage, in stages, to $12.50 an hour, an amount that would allow an individual supporting a family of three to live modestly, at about 138% of the federal poverty line. That level offers workers a way to escape poverty, a chance to feed their families, buy basic medical insurance and live in secure housing without significant government support.
The most common objection to raising the minimum wage is that it destroys jobs. But a slew of recent studies have pointed out that although raising the minimum wage does increase earnings and reduce poverty, it has a limited, almost negligible, effect on employment. Studies have also illustrated that restoring the dignity of work through higher wages reduces worker turnover and increases productivity.
Some make the overstated claim that increasing the minimum wage would accelerate companies' off-shoring of jobs. But most low-wage jobs today are geographically fixed, or as economists call them, "non-tradable." A janitor or home-care worker's job, for example, can't be outsourced to China.
What is sometimes understated is the likelihood of low-wage jobs being automated, a real and growing threat. But if a small growth in the minimum wage is enough to move an industry to automation, it is likely that automation was coming in short order anyway. Technological progress is inevitable and further automation unavoidable. If raising the minimum wage leads to productivity gains through investment in automation, so be it. In the meantime, we need to reward American workers for their efforts.
Some argue that raising the minimum wage offers benefits to those who may not need them. This argument is also flawed. The Economic Policy Institute's latest analysis shows that most low-wage workers live in low-wage households, and 84% of the workers in low-wage jobs are at least 20 years old. But, regardless of age or need, anyone who shows up to work and puts in hard hours deserves a wage that keeps him or her out of poverty.
Finally, critics of raising the minimum wage often suggest raising the earned income tax credit instead. But that would simply perpetuate the cycle of devaluing work. It also takes money out of the pockets of taxpayers rather than from the businesses that benefit from the credit, creating, in effect, a federal subsidy for low-wage employers. A higher minimum wage would help ensure that the earned income tax credit works more effectively and efficiently.
Raising the minimum wage is about reducing inequality, but it is also about restoring the true value of work. Every American's hard work should be rewarded.
Andy Stern is a senior fellow at Columbia University's Richman Center and former president of the Service Employees International Union. Carl Camden is president and CEO of Kelly Services and co-chairman of the board of trustees of the Committee for Economic Development.

As Germany prepares to elect its next Chancellor, the two main candidates, Gerhard Schroeder and Edmund Stoiber, agree on one thing: unemployment must be reduced. Over the past two decades, high unemployment has transformed Europe in general and Germany in particular into a sociological time bomb. What will the unemployed - especially the long-term unemployed with only dim memories of integration into the world of work - do with themselves and their time? What will happen to confidence in governments that can not solve the problem?
It is easy to forget that little more than 50 years ago, Europe was the world's most violent continent. Europeans spent the previous forty years slaughtering each other on a scale unprecedented in human history. Against this backdrop, Western Europe after 1950 was remarkably peaceful and stable, even taking into account the fall of the French Fourth Republic and the transitions from dictatorship to democracy in Portugal, Spain, and Greece.
The most remarkable transformation of all was that of the Federal Republic of Germany. Anyone familiar with German history since 1800 is still astonished at the enthusiasm with which the nation that emerged from total defeat in 1945 embraced what many in previous generations would have called "unsuitable" Anglo-French political and economic models. Without the peace and stability that this assured in Germany - the largest linguistic nation west of Russia - it is difficult to imagine today's peace and stability in Europe as a whole.
Germany owes its transformation in part to a combination of three factors: a backlog of unexploited technological opportunities to fuel rapid income growth, nearly full employment, and a state that shared the benefits of growth widely through public programs (rather than serving one class or interest as a weapon to concentrate wealth and power). Other factors - the memory of the Nazi catastrophe, the example of life east of the Iron Curtain, the potential threat posed by Stalin and his heirs - also clearly played an important role. But the fact that the system worked for almost everyone was the final buttress holding up the cathedral.
To everyone's relief, political democracy and mixed market economies proved highly resilient against the oil price shocks of the 1970s. Incomes stagnated, but the institutional order endured. And it has also endured the subsequent emergence and persistence of high unemployment. Within the Federal Republic, where unemployment remains near its early-1980s peak, the failure to address the problem was offset by other successes. The early 1990s witnessed the reunification of Germany, and the elimination of even moderate inflation risks. The late 1990s delivered deeper European integration, culminating in European Monetary Union.
In short, lack of progress on reducing unemployment could be excused in the past: Europe faced more urgent problems and opportunities. But what more urgent problem or attractive opportunity exists today? Inflation no longer threatens anyone's savings. Germany is unified. Monetary union has been accomplished. Whoever leads the next German government must tackle unemployment, both for the sake of the economically most vulnerable and to ensure public confidence in the current system.
Unfortunately, whoever wins the election - Schroeder or Stoiber - will be helpless in the medium term to address the problem. Germany's Employment Commission has called for sweeping labor-market and social-welfare reforms, but it will be very difficult for any government to implement them. Without increased private-sector demand, the removal of supply-side restrictions that fuelled high "classical" unemployment will simply result in high "Keynesian" unemployment in the future.
European integration was supposed to take care of this by driving decades of rapid economic growth as companies realize continent-wide economies of scale. So where is this demand-driven growth? The European Central Bank (ECB) seems more interested in keeping interest rates high enough to force insolvent firms into bankruptcy than in promoting higher employment.
With private-sector demand stalling, the Employment Commission wants the government to serve as employer of last resort. But the Maastricht Treaty's Stability and Growth Pact limits fiscal deficits to 3% of GDP - a ceiling that Germany is already hitting. Unless a future government is bold enough to violate the pact with abandon, its only alternative will be to increase taxes, which would merely prolong the very downturn in private-sector demand that has kept unemployment high.
Were it not for the Stability and Growth Pact, a Keynesian spending-led program could provide the demand needed to reduce unemployment. The problem could be solved once and for all if the ECB were willing to risk the following bargain with governments: if you liberalize product markets and make labor markets flexible, we will reduce interest rates and permit higher spending to fulfill the promise of near-full employment. But the ECB and the Stability and Growth Pact being what they are, both German parties are what they are: a sculptor who has promised to carve a marble statue overnight but has lost his chisel.
There may be little cause for immediate worry. The sociological time bomb may simply continue ticking. As Adam Smith put it, "There is a lot of ruin in a nation." But while Western Europe's post-war institutional order has worked almost miraculously well in historical terms, voters have narrower views and focus on more private concerns. They are more likely to judge a party, a regime, or an institutional order by asking, "What have you done for me lately?" With the great tasks of reunification and European integration behind it, future German governments are increasingly likely to be forced to answer, "Not much."

The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in Fisher v. University of Texas, a case that could potentially change the way our country handles affirmative action.
Here’s the bare-bones facts of the case. Abigail Fisher, a student whose application to the University of Texas was rejected, sued the school for discrimination. She’s white, and arguing that if she had been a racial minority, she would’ve been accepted.
This isn’t the first time a case dealing with affirmative action has appeared in the court. 1978′s Regents of the University of California v. Bakke declared that a quota system, that is, saying that a certain number of spots are reserved for people of a certain race, is unconstitutional. 2003′s Grutter v. Bollinger, regarding the admissions policy at the University of Michigan, upheld affirmative action by arguing that a school has an interest in diversifying their student body, and should be permitted to consider race as a contributing factor in admissions.
Like most Supreme Court cases, Ms. Fisher’s experience will ultimately not have much to do with the debate. That’s doubly true in this case, since she’s already graduated from a different university. Her circumstances aren’t particularly complicated; she just attended Louisiana State University instead of Texas.
Instead, the case could become an argument over how we can decide when we’ve had “enough” affirmative action. At least, that seems to be the direction the justices were steering the conversation. In other words, at what point will the country decide that schools and other institutions are “diverse enough” and let the policy be race-blind?
That may be a loaded question, but it’s hard to talk about affirmative action without using loaded questions.

The Head-off Environmental Asthma in Louisiana (HEAL) Project is a collaborative research project conducted by the Tulane University Health Sciences Center and the New Orleans Department of Health. The purpose of the project is to learn about the effects of mold and other indoor allergens on children with asthma in post-Katrina New Orleans. Another goal of the HEAL Project is to look at inherited differences in childrens response to mold and indoor allergens. The project is funded by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), the National Center for Minority Health and Health Disparities (NCMHD), the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (FNIH), and the Merck Childhood Asthma Network, Inc. (MCAN). NIEHS and NCMHD are part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Childhood asthma is on the rise in the United States, especially among minority inner-city children. Up to 24 percent of minority children living in cities like New Orleans may have asthma. Asthma is the number one reason children miss school due to chronic illness, and the second leading cause of childrens emergency department visits. The rapidly increasing rates of asthma are thought to be related in part to increases in allergies and environmental exposures, such as mold, moisture and other allergens. Another factor that worsens asthma is the lack of access to health care. In New Orleans and in many other cities, both poor access to health care and environmental exposures to mold and allergens are likely to contribute to asthma at the same time. The post-Katrina New Orleans environment presents an opportunity to determine ways to promote better medical management and safer home environments in an effort to improve the health of local children with asthma.
HEAL has now gone to a phase II, and is being led by William Martin, M.D. , at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD).

This issue is currently out of stock and will not be reprinted.
Subscribe today and save! |
The world's best-selling astronomy magazine offers you the most exciting, visually stunning, and timely coverage of the heavens above. Each monthly issue includes expert science reporting, vivid color photography, complete sky coverage, spot-on observing tips, informative telescope reviews, and much more! All this in an easy-to-understand, user-friendly style that's perfect for astronomers at any level.
Looking inside the Sun
The Sun rings with sound waves that may give away secrets hidden deep in the solar interior.
A New Window on Star Birth
New submillimeter telescopes will open up unexplored territory.
The Curious Shapes of Cosmic Jets
Individual circumstances determine why jets come in so many different shapes.
The Many Faces of the Sun
During the International Solar Month astronomers observed the Sun across the wavelengths for the first time.
ASTRONOMY Sky Almanac
Eight Lunar Wonders
Odd lunar features have fascinated observers for centuries.
Your Own Piece of the Solar System
Create a three-dimensional model of your favorite planetary feature.
Galaxy Hunting around the Big Dipper
Springtime offers galaxies bright enough to be seen in binoculars and small telescopes.
How to Observe Planets during the Day
You don't have to wait until night to see planets and stars.
Behind the Scenes
Who Will Miss the Night Sky?
Saturn's Hexagon Jet
NASA's Mars Rover
Capturing Mars on Paper
Meetings and Events
Readings and Resources
Look for this icon. This denotes premium subscriber content.
Learn more »

Patti McGill Peterson Center for International and Intercultural Studies
Generational Clashes: Spanish Women after the Franco Era
I decided to focus my research on the relationships of mothers and their daughters in Spain and how Francisco Franco's dictatorship shaped that relationship. During Franco's regime, women were given a very strict Catholic upbringing, which instilled in them certain conservative beliefs. On the other hand, their daughters who have grown up in a mostly democratic government have had a much more liberal upbringing. This different kind of atmosphere shape the way in which both women think and view not only the world but most importantly their role as women in the world.
In interviewing these women I came across many different standpoints, which surprised me. As a scholar, I made the mistake of going into the field with a certain expectation; for example, I thought that all the mothers would have Catholicism very internalized to the point that it would cause conflict with their daughters that are not as religious. However, that was not always the case; one of the mothers in particular expressed how much she not only hated the regime, for her family always believed in democracy which was the system of government in Spain before Franco, but she hated religion studies as well. She, like I expected the daughters to be, hated the norms that women needed to follow to be "good citizens", which was being a good wife under any circumstance, being religious and being nationalistic. Those where the three characteristics Spanish women needed to conform to, wifehood/ motherhood, Catholicism and patriotism. So I learned that as a researcher, the most important aspect and perhaps the hardest thing to do, is to go into the field without any expectations, that is the smart way of conducting research.
Another aspect of the research that should be noted is that there is no doubt that Franco's regime and all it inscribed shaped the relationship of mothers and daughters, it helped define what these women believe to be womanhood. Whether the mothers and daughters agree that religion and what that signified during the Franco regime was just one more way for women to be controlled or if the mother believed that religion was an important aspect of her life and tried to force it on the daughter. The obvious point is that conflict resulted from both standpoints. The conflict go beyond what we believe to be normal due to the generational differences, these conflicts were deeply rooted in the Franco regime, because it doesn't matter how hard women tried not no internalize what the regime intended, it was impossible to avoid at least some of it. Franco's regime was totalizing and controlled perhaps every aspect of women's lives.

It’s so easy with our step-by-step guide - Click here to buy your FREE 'Guide to Plant Breeding' leaflet.
YES - you might just have something special, move straight to STEP C.
NO - go to STEPS A and B and try your hand at plant breeding to create your own new plant.
Plant breeding is not merely for boffins working in sterile laboratories or elaborate glasshouse breeding stations. Breeding can be fun and very rewarding and every plant you raise has the potential to be unique. The basic skills for plant breeding are patience and good observation. You do not need much room or space. Some gardeners have vied with each other to produce the ideal new plant in only the tiniest of back gardens. Plants like geraniums, dianthus, nasturtium, fuchsias, petunia and many others can be grown in pots and will take up little space.
Many new varieties have arisen in the past from the observation of an improved or different type growing in a larger batch of plants. The more plants of one type you grow, the more chance there is of finding something different or unusual.
Be observant as you go around the garden, looking out for anything unusual, e.g. more petals than normal, some variation in flower size or colour, or differences in plant height or habit. When you see it, label the plant, describing its important characteristics (e.g. double flowers, dwarf etc.) and try to isolate it from other similar plants so that no cross-pollination occurs (see step 2).
Isolation prevents your special plant from being pollinated by its neighbour. This can be done by enclosing a number of flowers (still attached to the plant) within a large insectproof bag, either netting of some sort, grease-proof paper, or a plastic bag with small slits for ventilation (fig.1). Ensure there is no gap at the base of the bag for insects to get in. Use a soft wire twist or string to secure the bag but be sure not to bruise or damage the stem of the flower. Another way of isolating a plant is to carefully dig it up with minimum root disturbance, pot it on, and move it a good distance away. Be sure the plant is sufficiently watered during this process. High obstacles like a tall thick hedge form a good isolation barrier, preventing bees or other insects from cross pollinating the plants.
Isolated plants or flowers will often still need to be pollinated to ensure that the seed will set. To do this, the flowers should be ‘self-pollinated’. This is when you use the same flower or a flower of the same plant to pollinate with. For instructions on pollinating, see the “how to pollinate” section. Although self-pollination naturally occurs in some plants, other types like Poppy (Papaver) or members of the Daisy (Compositae) family will not self-pollinate. This is due to self-incompatibility, an in-built mechanism in the plant that prevents self-pollination from occurring. If the plant is self-incompatible, you can select a second similar looking plant and cross the two together.
When the seedpod is ripe (fig.2), it is best placed with a label into a seed packet and stored in a cool, dry place. Later, the seed should be extracted, cleaned and placed in a packet labelled with the name, special characteristics of the plant and date of harvesting.
The following season you should sow the seed that you have harvested. Once they germinate, prick out as many seedlings as you can, thereby increasing your chance of good results. Try to plant the seedlings away from other plants of the same type. As the plants grow and develop, pull out any that do not resemble your original selection (referred to as ‘rogues’), do this immediately before they cross-pollinate. You may be left with only a few plants which fit your aim. You could then leave the bees to cross your selections. Harvest the seed of your plants separately, for best results. The selection process may take two or more seasons. It should continue until all or most of the seed sown produces plants resembling your new type very closely.
Find out as much as possible about the genus or species you are working on before you start. This is also a good way to check that there are no similar plants already in cultivation before you submit your entry.
Did you know?
Poppy ‘Angels Choir’ is a good example of the ‘eyes open’ method; the first variety of this type was actually seen growing in a field of red poppies. Wild flowers in the hedgerow or the plants in your garden may unexpectedly produce something different every so often, this is referred to as a ‘sport’.
When you deliberately set out to create a new plant variety, cross-pollination is an invaluable method in breeding. As an example, you could potentially create a dwarf yellow flowered plant by crossing two plants of the same genus, maybe a tall yellow flowered plant (x) with a dwarf red flowered one (y). Or you could try crossing an annual with a perennial.
In year one, you will need to cross plant x with y or vice versa, following the pollination method shown within this guide. At the end of the season, harvest the seed.
In year two, sow the results of the cross (referred to as the F1 generation) and grow in an isolated area and then harvest seed from these plants.
During the third year, you should sow out the harvested seed. This next generation (referred to as the F2) is where you should see the results of your original cross. Select plants that have the desired trait (using our above example, these would be plants that are dwarf and have yellow flowers). Once selected, the plants can be self-pollinated (pollinating the same flower with itself, or using a flower from the same plant). If they are self-incompatible, then they can be crossed with a plant with very similar characteristics.
In the subsequent years following your hybridisation, you should use the selection method to get your seed true to type. Remember to sow the seeds of individual selections separately to increase your chances of attaining seed true to type quicker.
Sometimes you may have a problem with your desired plant trait not coming through into the offspring. You may need to ‘back-cross’ some of the crossed plant selections with the original parent (either x or y, whichever has the characteristic that you are having problems with). The term back-cross simply refers to the method by which seedlings or offspring are cross pollinated back onto one of the parents involved in the original cross.
It is very important to label your plants accurately, and to also keep a small sample of seed from every stage of the breeding, in case you encounter a failure and need to retrace your breeding steps.
This 'fast-track' method can be used on occasions when you've already found a unique plant. It means you can replicate your plant without the need for any additional breeding work.
1. If you spot an unusual plant out of a bunch of seedlings, either as a selection or from the result of the 'cross-pollination' method, you can often reproduce the plant vegetatively (by cuttings).
2. Simply take cuttings from the plant, preferably using material from near to the base.
3. You should also try to avoid using the tips of any shoots that have buds or flowers, as they will produce poorer plants.
4. Package your cuttings as instructed on the entry form.
5. Send them in to Thompson & Morgan for assessment
Mid-morning is usually a good time to pollinate flowers. There is no dew on them and temperatures are adequate for the pollen to be effective. Avoid pollinating on a wet day, as any water on the pollen will kill it.
1. Grow a bed of each of the two plant types to be crossed. On the plant you intend to pollinate, use any buds or flowers that have colour in them, but have not yet opened.
2. Open the buds and remove the anthers containing pollen (fig.1 & 2). Dust pollen from the plant to be used as the pollinator (fig.3) onto the stigma of the one to be pollinated (fig.4). Members of the Compositae (Daisy) family, e.g. Rudbeckia, Chrysanthemum, Tagetes and Dahlia have flowers made up of many tiny florets that open from the outer edge in towards the centre. These small florets should be pollinated on consecutive days as they open inwards.
3. Plants can be pollinated either using a paintbrush or in some cases by rubbing the two flowers together. You can sometimes tell when the stigma is at its most receptive by the presence of a sticky or shiny solution appearing on the tip. In some plant types the stigma can also swell or change shape when receptive.
4. As you pollinate each flower, cover it with a bag or place an insect proof cage over the whole plant (see ‘Isolating your plant’ under The ‘Selection Method’ section).
5. Once successful fertilisation has occurred, plants have various trigger mechanisms which indicate success. Some will drop petals, on others the stigma will blacken and shrivel. After a period of time the ovule where the seed forms will begin to swell and ripen. Continue with more pollinations on other flowers as they open and label each cross with a lightweight label marked with pencil.
When using cross-pollination, avoid the use of F1 hybrid varieties as they often have very involved parentage, which can slow down breeding in the early stages. F1 hybrids can, however, be a good source of variation when using selection to find new material.
When you have problems ‘fixing’ a particular trait within a plant, you can cross it back with your original parent plant that had the desired trait.
Simply the process of transferring pollen from one plant to another, in order to create a hybrid. F1 Generation The result of the first cross-pollination between two plants.
The result of the seeds saved from the first cross.
This is the process of discarding any unwanted plants that do not show the characteristics you are looking for in your breeding work.
A breeding method that relies on close observation, you simply harvest seed from unusual or different plants that arise in the garden. You then select the best plants from the harvested seed, and so on.
When a plant is unable to set seed after it has been self-pollinated.
To ‘fix’ certain traits in a plant, you can pollinate it with itself. Self-pollination is the action of transferring pollen from a flower onto the stigma of a flower on the same plant.
After a trialling process with Thompson & Morgan (which can take anything from 6 months to 6 years), we will contact you to discuss your plant. We currently pay £500 for each successful entrant, rewarded as a lump sum when the product goes on sale. At Thompson & Morgan’s discretion, outstanding or rare new products could receive more.
We ask that the originator agrees to be involved in any subsequent publicity about the new plant.
1. Once you are happy that your plant is suitably different to any others available or that a high percentage of the seed comes true, you are ready to send in a sample.
2. If you wish to send cuttings (if you have chosen the vegetative route), send them in a zipped plastic bag with holes punched in the top for air movement. The area around the roots should also be wrapped in damp tissue, so that the plants do not dry out.
3. Then simply label your seeds/plants and package in either a small box or envelope and send by first class mail.
4. Always keep some seeds or plants in your possession, in case anything is lost in transit.
5. Your submission should be sent with the entry form below. Please try to post you entry early in the week, so that weekend postal delays are avoided.
Terms and conditions apply. Please click here for details.
A T&M customer sent us the first star-shaped petunia, a white-flowered petunia that was very different from the normal round-flowered ones. The new flower shape is now available in an array of colours, but it all started from the one plant discovery!
Another customer spotted a nasturtium that was different from any other, and T&M introduced this new flower shape into other nasturtiums by using the cross pollination method. In order to fast-track market release of this very new nasturtium, we then used vegetative breeding and took cuttings from the very best plants.
One of our customers in Scotland sent in some seed of a tall, border marigold with unusual, striped blooms that they had found growing in their garden. We then crossed the plant with a modern, dwarf variety in order to reduce the height, and achieve a more compact habit.
A keen customer tried his hand at vegetable breeding when he crossed small-fruited, extra-sweet tomato variety, Sungold, with a larger type. The result is lovely, large-fruited fruits without the bitter tang of some tomatoes.
A customer in Suffolk spotted an unusually short and compact foxglove, with primrose yellow blooms appearing in whorls all around the stem. Thinking this was very unusual for a foxglove, the customer sent the seeds to us and our breeders further selected the original plant for 2-3 years in order to stabilise the habit, form and colour
An amateur breeder raised this divine blue sweet pea and entered the variety into RHS trials in 2002 and 2003, winning awards each time. They came to Thompson & Morgan for help in launching the variety. From a handful of seeds to a major catalogue introduction took 7 years. It is now Thompson & Morgan's Flower of the Year in our seed catalogue range.

November 26, 1988 |
A strong earthquake rattled much of the northeastern United States and eastern Canada on Friday, shaking buildings in both nations, knocking out power and phone service in much of Quebec province and frightening thousands of people, authorities said. There were no immediate reports of serious damage or injury. The Canadian government said that the earthquake, which was measured at a preliminary magnitude of 6.0 on the Richter scale, was the most powerful temblor to strike the region since 1935.
November 15, 1987
An earthquake shook objects from shelves in southeastern Alaska and adjacent sections of Canada, geologists said. The quake, which measured 5.3 on the Richter scale, was centered just southeast of Haines, Alaska, Bob Horner, a seismologist with the Geological Survey of Canada, said in a telephone interview from the Pacific Geoscience Centre in Sidney, British Columbia.
July 24, 1987 |
A light earthquake rattled the Toronto area of Canada early Thursday, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The survey's earthquake monitors at Golden, Colo., said the tremor measured 3.2 on the Richter scale.

Wild Thing is an occasional series where JHU Press authors write about the flora and fauna of the natural world—from the rarest flower to the most magnificent beast.
Guest post by Uldis Roze
Having grown up in large cities where porcupines are absent, I was in my 30s before I saw my first porcupine in the wild. We met at night, in the light cone of my flashlight, as the porcupine was chewing our freshly-built cabin at a woods edge in the Catskills. The animal looked surreal and wild, but I had no doubt about its identification. It had quills, therefore it was a porcupine.
But the quills that give porcupines their easy identification and shape their natural histories are themselves the source of endless mystery and mystification.
Do porcupines throw their quills? All scientific accounts assure readers to the contrary, but it wasn’t always so. Writing in the April 16, 1956 issue of Sports Illustrated, Dr. William J. Lang describes a porcupine he had surprised in a woodshed: “With an upward flick of his tail, one quill grazed my cheek, another stuck in my hat brim . . . three more clung by their barbed tips to the cedar splits.” Dr. Lang notwithstanding, porcupines can no more throw their quills than dogs can throw their hair, and if they somehow evolved the capacity to do so, it would do the throwers no good. This is for reasons of fundamental physics: the energy residing in a moving body is given by its momentum, the product of its mass times velocity. Because a porcupine quill has negligible mass, it would carry negligible momentum, and serve very poorly in the animal’s defense.
A porcupine misunderstood. The royal crest of Louis XII of France featured a crested porcupine, shown throwing a shower of quills at distant enemies, while keeping other quills in reserve for an impregnable defense. Perhaps because Louis XII lost most of his military engagements, his successors abandoned the porcupine symbolism. Photo by Philippa Moore.
Perhaps the flying quill hypothesis is so persistent because when quills arrive in human skin, they materialize in a microsecond, faster than the eye can follow. But quills do not arrive in flight–they arrive on the surface of the tail. And because the mass of the incoming is not the mass of the quill alone but the mass of the quill plus tail, the momentum is high and the quill can penetrate deeply.
Another source of quill confusion is the one-way barbs. True or false: all porcupine quills have barbed tips. False!
No Old-World porcupine (11 spp.) carries barbed quills. With a single exception, all New-World porcupines (15 spp.) carry barbed quills. The presence or absence of barbs is possibly the most fundamental difference between quills of the 2 porcupine families.
Old-World porcupines are large animals, with some species reaching weights of 50 lbs in the wild. They are defended by large quills with sharp, knife-like tips that can kill lions and leopards. Large quills require large bodies for delivery. But large bodies are not an option for New-World porcupines, who live in trees. Their small bodies carry small quills. With the evolutionary invention of barbs, these small quills can travel deep inside a predator’s body, pulled by the predator’s own muscles until they either strike an organ or exit the body, far from the point of entry.
That said, there are limits to the defense offered by small quills. Unlike their Old-World cousins, who can stand up to the large cats of Africa and Asia, New-World porcupines have no effective defense against their North American predator, the mountain lion. Rick Sweitzer, who studied a porcupine population in the Great Basin desert of Nevada, reports what happened when a single mountain lion started preying on his porcupines. In a 3-year period, the population plummeted from 82 animals to just 5. Instead of avoiding the quills, mountain lions eat their porcupines whole, and accept the consequences. Mountain lions autopsied in Oregon routinely showed quill tips embedded in the gums, where they had come to rest against the jawbone.
How many quills does a North American porcupine carry? An answer given by one respondent is “roughly 658, but I lost count after they kept stabbing me.” A more common answer is “around 30,000.” The number, enshrined in the biological literature, seems to make sense because hundreds of quills may be lost with each predator attack, and lost quills require months to replace. Therefore carrying a hundred-fold excess represents an effective safety (pin)cushion.
But the source of the 30,000 quill figure cannot be found. The earliest mention of the number is by Donald Spencer in 1950, in a National Geographic article. Spencer gives no indication that he counted the quills himself, nor identifies the source who did.
Much else about porcupine quills remains unknown or misunderstood. Quills of North American porcupines carry surface antibiotics, and help disseminate a warning odor. Do other porcupine species show the same capabilities? We don’t know and can’t predict, because North American porcupines follow a unique life style, even within its New-World family. Shouldn’t we approach porcupines with the same openness we extend to our wives, husbands, lovers: work to know them as they are, not as we perceived them on first meeting?
Uldis Roze is professor emeritus at Queens College in New York City. He is a contributor to Natural History magazine and is the author of Porcupines: The Animal Answer Guide, published by JHU Press.

During its first cycle, from 2004 to 2008, VI-EPSCoR studied the bio-complexity of coral reefs in the territory, looking at various aspects of reefs such as structural function. During the second cycle, which began in 2008 and will end in 2013, researchers studied ridge-to-reef relationships, incorporating all elements to find out how they act and interact.
“We want the third phase to fold into the human dimension – how we impact and are impacted,” said Nick Drayton, assistant director of the project.
While a few suggestions about the human dimension arose, a majority of residents were concerned about the threat invasive lionfish pose to the territory. Drayton said lionfish have gained international attention for their invasive behavior, but researchers are still looking for solutions to the problem.
The local EPSCoR group originally wanted to promote lionfish as an edible species, but with the discovery of ciguatera in many of the fish, program researchers worry it’s a dead end.
According to Henry Smith, VI-EPSCoR director, lionfish could become part of EPSCoR’s research as a small piece of the puzzle that includes hundreds of invasive species affecting our ecosystem.
Attendees also discussed projects such as generating power by harnessing water energy, while others suggested moving away from marine research into other areas that heavily affect the territory, such as agriculture and health issues.
Smith said they will narrow down the list of suggestions based on NSF’s priorities. He said the foundation has certain areas they will support. For example, research should be relevant to the territory and the University of the Virgin Islands should have the capacity to do the research.
Smith said researchers will evaluate NSF criteria, come up with general areas that include as many suggestions as possible and use that as a jumping off point.
Those ideas that do not fit into the general theme but are worthy of more research can receive incubator grants that fund additional research to help flesh out ideas so they can be part of the bigger picture in upcoming cycles.
“We’re helping generate revenue that not only goes to researchers, but finds its way into the community,” Drayton said, adding that EPSCoR is more of a facilitator.
“We provide funds for people to do things.”
The proposal for the third cycle is not due until October, so residents still have time to submit ideas. Please visit http://epscor.uvi.edu/ to submit information.

Tuesday April 19 2011
It is particularly important to eat a healthy diet during pregnancy
“A mother’s diet during pregnancy can alter the DNA of her child and increase the risk of obesity,” reported BBC News.
The news story is based on a study that looked at maternal diet and how it might be associated with “epigenetic changes” in the offspring. Epigenetics is the study of how genes can be influenced by the environment, without their DNA sequence being directly changed.
Researchers asked women to fill out food questionnaires during pregnancy, and then measured the fat levels of their offspring when they were older. They then compared these findings with DNA samples taken from the children’s umbilical cords. This well conducted study found associations between maternal diet, the likelihood that the child would have more fat at the age of six or nine, and chemical changes to a region containing a specific gene.
However, the researchers highlight that their findings demonstrate associations only. They do not show that maternal diet during pregnancy caused these changes, or that the epigenetic changes caused the children to have more fat. Further research is needed into whether this is the case. No recommendations for diet during pregnancy can be made based on this research. A healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle at any time, but it is especially vital if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy. See our pregnancy care planner for more advice.
Where did the story come from?
The study was carried out by researchers from The University of Southampton, the University of Auckland and the Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences. Funding was provided by WellChild, the University of Southampton, The Medical Research Council and the National Institute for Health. It was published in the peer-reviewed medical journal Diabetes.
What kind of research was this?
This genetics study looked at “epigenetic” changes to the DNA taken from umbilical cords of newborns and related these to the mother’s diet. Epigenetics is the study of how the environment can affect the function of genes. Signals from the environment can cause chemicals to be attached to DNA. These epigenetic chemical changes do not change the basic structure of DNA, and a gene that has had epigenetic changes will still make the same protein, but these changes may affect when the gene is switched on and the amount of protein the gene makes.
The researchers were interested in factors that affect the risk of human obesity and metabolic disease. They say that genomic variations (differences in the gene DNA sequences between people) explain only a fraction of the risk of obesity. Besides the child’s diet after birth, they say there is increasing epidemiological evidence that the mother’s diet during pregnancy may affect the child’s development.
They also say that animal studies suggest that maternal diet during pregnancy may lead to epigenetic modifications that alter the body composition of the offspring in adulthood. However, as yet there is no direct evidence in humans that such epigenetic processes during pregnancy are involved in children's later likelihood of obesity and there has been considerable debate about whether these modifications are significant enough to affect the children's development.
The researchers measured one type of epigenetic change called DNA methylation. They wanted to see if these changes were associated with the foetal environment in the womb and, furthermore, whether they were associated with the child’s weight at the age of six or nine years.
What did the research involve?
The study involved women that had been recruited into two different study groups (or cohorts) in Southampton. One group, from the Princess Anne Hospital (PAH) study, was made up of Caucasian women aged over 16 and less than 17 weeks pregnant with a single baby. The other group, from the Southampton Women’s Survey (SWS) was made up of women between 20 and 34 years who were not pregnant when they were recruited, but were then followed if they did become pregnant. Women with diabetes or hormonally induced conceptions were excluded.
The women in the PAH group were given a food frequency questionnaire when they were 15 weeks pregnant. The researchers then contacted them when their offspring reached nine years of age, and asked them to attend a clinic for follow-up. Of these, 219 children attended a clinic to have their fat levels measured. A DNA sample from the umbilical cord was available for 78 of these children.
In the SWS group, 239 children had both umbilical cord DNA available and childhood fat measurements when they were six years old.
From the DNA samples, the researchers selected 78 candidate genes that could be subject to epigenetic changes. From a subsample of 15 children from the PAH cohort, they looked at which genes from the umbilical cord sample had methylation changes above a 5% level. They then looked at which of these methylated genes were associated with obesity at nine years of age, and focused on five of these genes that could plausibly be involved in fat regulation.
What were the basic results?
The researchers found that similar numbers of mothers smoked in the two cohorts (21-34%). The average age of the mothers in the PAH cohort was 28, and 31 in the SWS cohort. The average body mass index (BMI) of the mothers was 22.3 in the PAH cohort, and 24.3 in the SWS cohort (a BMI of above 25 is considered overweight).
In the PAH cohort, the methylation of two genes was associated with childhood fat mass at nine years of age. These were the retinoid X receptor–α (RXRA) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS). The researchers calculated that gender and these neonatal epigenetic changes were associated with more than 25% of the childhood variation in fat levels.
Higher levels of methylation of RXRA, but not eNOS, were associated with a lower maternal carbohydrate intake in early pregnancy. Fat and protein intake had no effect.
The amount of methylation at sites on two other genes (PIK3CD and SOD) was associated with the infant’s birth size.
For the SWS cohort, data were available for epigenetic methylation of genes from the umbilical cord and for fat levels at the age of six. In this group, eNOS methylation did not show an association with increased fat levels, but there was a similar association between RXRA methylation and fat levels as seen in the PAH cohort.
Sequencing of the RXRA gene showed that there were no particular sequence trends that could account for the differences in methylation seen between individuals. This means that it is unlikely that the differences seen stemmed from genetic variations between individuals.
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers say that “greater methylation on the RXRA gene was associated with greater fat levels in later childhood”. They say that epigenetic measures at birth may be used to identify children at risk of obesity. This, they say, could potentially lead to programmes to optimise the mother’s health and nutrition with the aim of long-term benefits for the offspring. However, further research looking at methylation measurements in early life and comparing them with those in later life would be needed to evaluate how feasible this would be.
This was well conducted preliminary research, showing an association between methylation of one gene and increased fat levels in children when they were six or nine years of age. However, it should be noted that this was a relatively small study and further follow-up is needed to see how strong the association is.
The researchers found an association between lower consumption of carbohydrates during early pregnancy and increased methylation of the RXRA gene. It is important to emphasise that these associations do not necessarily mean that the mother’s diet caused this effect, or that different methylation patterns on genes cause childhood fat retention.
The researchers also point out that, although the food questionnaire is a validated study tool, there can be inaccuracies in people’s dietary reporting.
The study did find an association between lower carbohydrate and the methylation of the gene. However, is it unknown whether the amount of carbohydrate the women ate was within a healthy range. The researchers also did not say which foods the women had consumed. As such, it is not possible to say from this study whether the mother’s diet was “poor”. Further research is needed to explore which food groups, if any, are associated with epigenetic changes if any dietary recommendations are to be made to pregnant women.
Lastly, this study did not assess whether it is possible to control weight gain in the child associated with epigenetic changes by changing the diet during pregnancy.
A healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle at any time, but it is especially vital if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy. See our pregnancy care planner for more advice.

Search engine optimization (SEO) is the process of improving the volume and quality of traffic to a web site from search engines via “natural” (“organic” or “algorithmic”) search results for targeted keywords. Usually, the earlier a site is presented in the Search Engine Results Pages (SERPS) or the higher it “ranks”, the more searchers will visit that site. SEO can also target different kinds of searches, including image search, local search, and industry-specific vertical search engines.
As an online marketing strategy for increasing a site’s relevance, SEO considers how search algorithms work and what people search for. SEO efforts may involve a site’s coding, architecture, and graphical layout, as well as fixing problems that could prevent search engine indexing programs from fully crawling a site. Another class of techniques, known as black hat SEO or spamdexing, use methods such as link farms and keyword stuffing that tend to harm search engine user experience. Search engines look for sites that employ these techniques and may remove them from their indexes.
The initialization “SEO” can also refer to “search engine optimizers”, terms adopted by an industry of consultants who carry out optimization projects on behalf of clients, and by employees who perform SEO services in-house. Search engine optimizers may offer SEO as a stand-alone service or as a part of a broader marketing campaign. Because effective SEO may require changes to the HTML source code of a site, SEO tactics may be incorporated into web site development and design. The term “search engine friendly” may be used to describe web site designs, menus, content management systems, URLs, and shopping carts that are easy to optimize.
Webmasters and content providers began optimizing sites for search engines in the mid-1990s, as the first search engines were cataloging the early Web. Initially, all a webmaster needed to do was submit a page, or URL, to the various engines which would send a spider to “crawl” that page, extract links to other pages from it, and return information found on the page to be indexed. The process involves a search engine spider downloading a page and storing it on the search engine’s own server, where a second program, known as an indexer, extracts various information about the page, such as the words it contains and where these are located, as well as any weight for specific words and all links the page contains, which are then placed into a scheduler for crawling at a later date.
Site owners started to recognize the value of having their sites highly ranked and visible in search engine results. They also recognized that the higher their site ranking the more people would click on the website. According to industry analyst Danny Sullivan, the earliest known use of the phrase search engine optimization was a spam message posted on Usenet on July 26, 1997.
Early versions of search algorithms relied on webmaster-provided information such as the keyword meta tag, or index files in engines like ALIWEB. Meta tags provided a guide to each page’s content. But using meta data to index pages was found to be less than reliable because the webmaster’s account of keywords in the meta tag were not truly relevant to the site’s actual keywords. Inaccurate, incomplete, and inconsistent data in meta tags caused pages to rank for irrelevant searches. Web content providers also manipulated a number of attributes within the HTML source of a page in an attempt to rank well in search engines.
By relying so much on factors exclusively within a webmaster’s control, early search engines suffered from abuse and ranking manipulation. To provide better results to their users, search engines had to adapt to ensure their results pages showed the most relevant search results, rather than unrelated pages stuffed with numerous keywords by unscrupulous webmasters. Since the success and popularity of a search engine is determined by its ability to produce the most relevant results to any given search allowing those results to be false would turn users to find other search sources. Search engines responded by developing more complex ranking algorithms, taking into account additional factors that were more difficult for webmasters to manipulate.
Graduate students at Stanford University, Larry Page and Sergey Brin developed “backrub”, a search engine that relied on a mathematical algorithm to rate the prominence of web pages. The number calculated by the algorithm, PageRank, is a function of the quantity and strength of inbound links. PageRank estimates the likelihood that a given page will be reached by a web user who randomly surfs the web, and follows links from one page to another. In effect, this means that some links are stronger than others, as a higher PageRank page is more likely to be reached by the random surfer.
Page and Brin founded Google in 1998. Google attracted a loyal following among the growing number of Internet users, who liked its simple design. Off-page factors such as PageRank and hyperlink analysis were considered, as well as on-page factors, to enable Google to avoid the kind of manipulation seen in search engines that only considered on-page factors for their rankings. Although PageRank was more difficult to game, webmasters had already developed link building tools and schemes to influence the Inktomi search engine, and these methods proved similarly applicable to gaining PageRank. Many sites focused on exchanging, buying, and selling links, often on a massive scale. Some of these schemes, or link farms, involved the creation of thousands of sites for the sole purpose of link spamming. In recent years major search engines have begun to rely more heavily on off-web factors such as the age, sex, location, and search history of people conducting searches in order to further refine results.
By 2007, search engines had incorporated a wide range of undisclosed factors in their ranking algorithms to reduce the impact of link manipulation. Google says it ranks sites using more than 200 different signals. The three leading search engines, Google, Yahoo and Microsoft’s Live Search, do not disclose the algorithms they use to rank pages. Notable SEOs, such as Rand Fishkin, Barry Schwartz, Aaron Wall and Jill Whalen, have studied different approaches to search engine optimization, and have published their opinions in online forums and blogs. SEO practitioners may also study patents held by various search engines to gain insight into the algorithms.
 Webmasters and search engines
By 1997 search engines recognized that webmasters were making efforts to rank well in their search engines, and that some webmasters were even manipulating their rankings in search results by stuffing pages with excessive or irrelevant keywords. Early search engines, such as Infoseek, adjusted their algorithms in an effort to prevent webmasters from manipulating rankings.
Due to the high marketing value of targeted search results, there is potential for an adversarial relationship between search engines and SEOs. In 2005, an annual conference, AIRWeb, Adversarial Information Retrieval on the Web, was created to discuss and minimize the damaging effects of aggressive web content providers.
SEO companies that employ overly aggressive techniques can get their client websites banned from the search results. In 2005, the Wall Street Journal reported on a company, Traffic Power, which allegedly used high-risk techniques and failed to disclose those risks to its clients. Wired magazine reported that the same company sued blogger Aaron Wall for writing about the ban. Google’s Matt Cutts later confirmed that Google did in fact ban Traffic Power and some of its clients.
Some search engines have also reached out to the SEO industry, and are frequent sponsors and guests at SEO conferences, chats, and seminars. In fact, with the advent of paid inclusion, some search engines now have a vested interest in the health of the optimization community. Major search engines provide information and guidelines to help with site optimization. Google has a Sitemaps program to help webmasters learn if Google is having any problems indexing their website and also provides data on Google traffic to the website. Yahoo! Site Explorer provides a way for webmasters to submit URLs, determine how many pages are in the Yahoo! index and view link information.
The leading search engines, Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft, use crawlers to find pages for their algorithmic search results. Pages that are linked from other search engine indexed pages do not need to be submitted because they are found automatically. Some search engines, notably Yahoo!, operate a paid submission service that guarantee crawling for either a set fee or cost per click. Such programs usually guarantee inclusion in the database, but do not guarantee specific ranking within the search results.Yahoo’s paid inclusion program has drawn criticism from advertisers and competitors. Two major directories, the Yahoo Directory and the Open Directory Project both require manual submission and human editorial review. Google offers Google Webmaster Tools, for which an XML Sitemap feed can be created and submitted for free to ensure that all pages are found, especially pages that aren’t discoverable by automatically following links.
Search engine crawlers may look at a number of different factors when crawling a site. Not every page is indexed by the search engines. Distance of pages from the root directory of a site may also be a factor in whether or not pages get crawled.
Main article: Robots Exclusion Standard
To avoid undesirable content in the search indexes, webmasters can instruct spiders not to crawl certain files or directories through the standard robots.txt file in the root directory of the domain. Additionally, a page can be explicitly excluded from a search engine’s database by using a meta tag specific to robots. When a search engine visits a site, the robots.txt located in the root directory is the first file crawled. The robots.txt file is then parsed, and will instruct the robot as to which pages are not to be crawled. As a search engine crawler may keep a cached copy of this file, it may on occasion crawl pages a webmaster does not wish crawled. Pages typically prevented from being crawled include login specific pages such as shopping carts and user-specific content such as search results from internal searches. In March 2007, Google warned webmasters that they should prevent indexing of internal search results because those pages are considered search spam.
White hat versus black hat
SEO techniques can be classified into two broad categories: techniques that search engines recommend as part of good design, and those techniques that search engines do not approve of. The search engines attempt to minimize the effect of the latter, among them spamdexing. Industry commentators have classified these methods, and the practitioners who employ them, as either white hat SEO, or black hat SEO. White hats tend to produce results that last a long time, whereas black hats anticipate that their sites may eventually be banned either temporarily or permanently once the search engines discover what they are doing.
An SEO technique is considered white hat if it conforms to the search engines’ guidelines and involves no deception. As the search engine guidelines are not written as a series of rules or commandments, this is an important distinction to note. White hat SEO is not just about following guidelines, but is about ensuring that the content a search engine indexes and subsequently ranks is the same content a user will see.
White hat advice is generally summed up as creating content for users, not for search engines, and then making that content easily accessible to the spiders, rather than attempting to trick the algorithm from its intended purpose. White hat SEO is in many ways similar to web development that promotes accessibility, although the two are not identical.
Black hat SEO attempts to improve rankings in ways that are disapproved of by the search engines, or involve deception. One black hat technique uses text that is hidden, either as text colored similar to the background, in an invisible div, or positioned off screen. Another method gives a different page depending on whether the page is being requested by a human visitor or a search engine, a technique known as cloaking.
Search engines may penalize sites they discover using black hat methods, either by reducing their rankings or eliminating their listings from their databases altogether. Such penalties can be applied either automatically by the search engines’ algorithms, or by a manual site review.
One infamous example was the February 2006 Google removal of both BMW Germany and Ricoh Germany for use of deceptive practices. Both companies, however, quickly apologized, fixed the offending pages, and were restored to Google’s list.
 As a marketing strategy
Eye tracking studies have shown that searchers scan a search results page from top to bottom and left to right (for left to right languages), looking for a relevant result. Placement at or near the top of the rankings therefore increases the number of searchers who will visit a site. However, more search engine referrals does not guarantee more sales. SEO is not necessarily an appropriate strategy for every website, and other Internet marketing strategies can be much more effective, depending on the site operator’s goals. A successful Internet marketing campaign may drive organic traffic to web pages, but it also may involve the use of paid advertising on search engines and other pages, building high quality web pages to engage and persuade, addressing technical issues that may keep search engines from crawling and indexing those sites, setting up analytics programs to enable site owners to measure their successes, and improving a site’s conversion rate.
SEO may generate a return on investment. However, search engines are not paid for organic search traffic, their algorithms change, and there are no guarantees of continued referrals. Due to this lack of guarantees and certainty, a business that relies heavily on search engine traffic can suffer major losses if the search engines stop sending visitors. It is considered wise business practice for website operators to liberate themselves from dependence on search engine traffic. A top-ranked SEO blog Seomoz.org has reported, “Search marketers, in a twist of irony, receive a very small share of their traffic from search engines.” Instead, their main sources of traffic are links from other websites.
At SDH Interactive our seo experts have over 12 years of experience optimizing complex dynamic websites obtaining top 10 search engine rankings in a timely manner. our Fortune 500 SEO strategist will attain a long term value to your web properties by positioning them on the top of search engine rankings for your relevant keywords and vertical. Contact us today at 786-709-8591
This information has been provided by Wikipedia.com

Distinguishing between Defining and Non-Defining Relative Clauses in This Question ??
Hi! I have an English exam very soon, so I need the answer of this fast.
THE QUESTION SAYS: Decide whether these sentences contain defining or non-defining relative clauses:
1- The person who is talking to Carrie is her uncle.
2- He comes from Seoul which is the capital of South Korea.
3- Carrie who has never been to Seoul would like to go there one day.
4- She would like to meet her cousins who have never been to America.
5- She goes to a school which is very popular in Santa Monica.
Re: Distinguishing between Defining and Non-Defining Relative Clauses in This Questio
I hope this helps you decide whether these sentences are defining or non-defining relative clauses.
Defining clauses give important information which tells us exactly what is being referred to.
That book which you lent me is really good.
Everyone who got to the sales early found excellent bargains.
The person who finishes first will be the winner, of course.
Non-defining clauses add extra information, separated by commas in writing, and intonation in speaking.
The book, which I hadnít read, was still on the shelf.
Davidís sister, who likes cats, offered to take one of the kittens.
Helen picked up the book, which had a green cover.
Search Engine Optimization by vBSEO

Geography of Massachusetts
Massachusetts, the 7th smallest state in the United States, resides in the New England region of the northeastern United States, and has an area of 10,555 square miles (27,340 km2). It is bordered on the north by New Hampshire and Vermont, on the west by New York, on the south by Connecticut and Rhode Island, and on the east by the Atlantic Ocean. It is the most populous New England state.
Massachusetts is called "the Bay State" because of several large bays, which distinctly shape its coast: Massachusetts Bay and Cape Cod Bay, to the east, and Buzzards Bay, to the south. A few cities and towns on the Massachusetts–Rhode Island border are adjacent to Narragansett Bay. At the southeastern corner of the state is a large, sandy, arm-shaped peninsula, Cape Cod. The islands Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket lie south of Cape Cod, across Nantucket Sound.
Boston is the largest city, at the inmost point of Massachusetts Bay, the mouth of the Charles River, the longest river entirely within Massachusetts. Most Bay Staters live in the Boston area, which cover most of eastern Massachusetts. Eastern Massachusetts is fairly densely populated and mostly suburban. Western Massachusetts is more rural and sparsely populated, especially in the Berkshires, the branch of the Appalachian Mountains that dominates the western quarter of the state. The most populous part of western Massachusetts is the Pioneer Valley, straddling the Connecticut River, which flows across Western Massachusetts from north to south.
Massachusetts has 351 cities and towns. Every part of the state is within an incorporated city or town, but many towns include large rural areas. The state's 14 counties have few government functions and serve as little more than judicial districts.
In Eastern Massachusetts, Boston is located at the innermost point of Massachusetts Bay, at the mouth of the Charles River. The Charles River is longest river located entirely within Massachusetts; however the Connecticut River in Western Massachusetts is the Commonwealth's longest river. Most of the population of the Boston metropolitan area (approximately 4.4 million) lives outside of the city proper. In general, Eastern Massachusetts, including and surrounding Boston, is densely populated. Boston's suburbs stretch as far west as the City of Worcester in Central Massachusetts.
Central Massachusetts encompasses Worcester County. It features the large city of Worcester, and the smaller cities of Fitchburg, Leominster, Gardner, and Southbridge. Central Massachusetts also includes many rural hill towns, forests, and small farms. The Quabbin Reservoir borders the western side of the county; it is the main water supply for Greater Boston.
West of the Central Massachusetts hill towns, the Pioneer Valley along the Connecticut River in Western Massachusetts features the Commonwealth's richest soil. The major city of Springfield sits beside the Connecticut River amidst a broad valley, a mere five miles (8 km) north of the Connecticut border and only 24 miles (39 km) from Connecticut's capital city, Hartford. The densely populated Springfield-Hartford region, called the Knowledge Corridor, is the second most populous region in New England (approximately 1.9 million.) As in Eastern Massachusetts, most residents live outside of the region's two principal cities, (i.e. Springfield and Hartford.) Other cities in the Massachusetts portion of the Knowledge Corridor include Chicopee, Agawam, West Springfield, Westfield, Holyoke, and the college towns of Northampton and Amherst.
West of the Knowledge Corridor is mountainous, including the hilltowns immediately to the west of the Valley. Further west rises a range of rolling, purple mountains known as the Berkshires. Near the New York border, the Taconic and Hoosac Ranges cross into Massachusetts; however, in general, the area is known as The Berkshires. The region was populated by aborigines until the 18th century when Scotch-Irish settlers arrived, after having found the fertile lowlands along the Connecticut River settled. On reaching the Berkshires, settlers found poor soil for farming, but discovered numerous fast-moving rivers for industry. Pittsfield and North Adams grew into small, prosperous cities. A number of smaller mill towns exist along the Westfield and Housatonic Rivers, interspersed among wealthy vacation resort towns.
The National Park Service administers a number of natural and historical sites in Massachusetts. Along with twelve national historic sites, areas, and corridors, the National Park Service also manages the Cape Cod National Seashore and the Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area.
In addition, the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation maintains a number of parks, trails, and beaches throughout the commonwealth.
Physical geography 
Massachusetts extends from the mountains of the Appalachian system in the west to the sandy beaches and rocky shorelines of the Atlantic coast. The entire state was covered in ice during the Wisconsin glaciation, which shaped today’s landscape. Much of the state remains covered in glacial till and dotted with typical glacial features, such as kettle ponds, drumlins, eskers, and moraines. Apart from a few alluvial floodplains, soils tend to be rocky, acidic, and not very fertile.
Part of the state is uplands of resistant metamorphic rock that were scraped by Pleistocene glaciers that deposited moraines and outwash on a large, sandy, arm-shaped peninsula called Cape Cod and the islands Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket to the south of Cape Cod. Upland elevations increase dramatically in Western Massachusetts. These uplands are interrupted by the downfaulted southern Pioneer Valley along the Connecticut River and further west by the Housatonic Valley separating the Berkshire Hills from the Taconic Range along the western border with New York. The highest peak in the state is Mount Greylock at 3,491 feet (1,064 m) near the northwest corner.
Elevation and relief are greatest in the western part of the state and increase somewhat from south to north. The Taconic Mountains, part of the Appalachian system, run along the western border with New York, reaching 2,624 feet (800 meters) at Mount Everett in the state's southwest corner, and including the state’s highest point, Mount Greylock, at 3,491 feet (1,064 meters) in the northwest corner. The Housatonic-Hoosic valley separates the Taconics from The Berkshires, a broad belt of steeply rolling hills that are a southern extension of the Green Mountains of Vermont. They extend south to the border of Connecticut. Mount Greylock lies on the western edge of the Taconic Range, across the Hoosic River from the Hoosac Range to the east. The Hoosac Range connects the Green Mountains with the Berkshires.
Between the Berkshires and the rest of the state lies the Connecticut River Valley, known within Massachusetts as the Pioneer Valley. This ancient rift valley appeared in the Mesozoic Era when North and South America broke away from Europe and Africa. Dinosaur footprints near Mount Tom bear witness to that era, and series of basalt and sedimentary rock ridges (collectively known as the Metacomet Ridge) including Mount Toby, Mount Holyoke, Mount Tom, and others extending south to Long Island Sound and the valley's abrupt thousand-foot (300 meter) western escarpment illustrate the tectonic forces. More than a hundred million years later, as the Pleistocene epoch ended, receding glaciers left moraines that dammed the Connecticut River, creating Lake Hitchcock. Lacustrine silt deposits replaced soil scraped away by the glaciers, leaving behind deep, productive soil after the river breached the obstructing moraine and the lake disappeared.
East of this valley is an area of rolling uplands dotted with lakes and dissected by streams flowing into the Connecticut River in the west and into the Merrimack, Quinebaug, Blackstone, or Charles rivers, or into other shorter, coastal rivers in the east. Just to the east of the Pioneer Valley, hills rise steeply toward the divide between the Connecticut River basin and the river basins to the east. This divide runs through central Massachusetts, though the summit of Mount Wachusett, the highest point in the state east of the Connecticut River, rising to 2,006 feet (611 meters).
To the east of this divide, the elevation of the hilltops gradually decreases, and the landscape is more gently rolling. Within 30 miles (50 kilometers) of the coast, few hills exceed 300 feet (100 meters) in elevation. Near the coast, swamps, marshes, and ponds alternate with low hills. However, the Blue Hills, just south of Boston, rise above the surrounding landscape. The state probably takes its name from the Massachusett name for their highest point, Great Blue Hill, with an elevation of 635 feet (194 meters).
The Massachusetts coastline is deeply indented with bays, coves, and estuaries, separated by narrow promontories. Some of these form natural harbors that gave rise to the state’s historic ports, including Newburyport, Gloucester, Salem, Boston, and New Bedford. The state has a few small barrier islands, the largest of which is Plum Island. The state’s largest promontory is the Cape Cod peninsula. Its backbone is formed by glacial moraines, but much of its coastline has been shaped by the longshore drift of coastal sand, which forms many of its famous sandy beaches. To the south of Cape Cod, glacial moraines rise above the ocean surface to form the state’s largest islands: Martha’s Vineyard, Nantucket, the Elizabeth Islands, and Monomoy Island.
Massachusetts has a humid continental climate. Winters are cold, with average January temperatures below freezing nearly throughout the state, and summers are warm.
The hilly western interior of Massachusetts has the coldest winters. Stockbridge, in the Berkshires, has a January average temperature of 21.6°F (-5.8°C). Winters are more moderate along the eastern coast. Boston has the state's highest maximum January temperature—35.6°F (2 C), but this temperature is elevated by an urban heat island. The average January temperature in Hingham, also on the coast but 13 miles (21 km) southeast of Boston, is 27.5°F (-2.5°C). Summer temperatures are highest in the state's urban centers, due to the heat island effect. Boston's July temperature averages 81.7°F (27.6°C), and the July temperature in the central Massachusetts city of Worcester averages 79.2°F (26.2°C), which is measured at the Worcester Airport, at an elevation of over 1,000 feet (300m). By contrast, the coolest average summer temperatures occur in the Berkshires and on the state's offshore islands. The average temperature in August, the warmest month on Nantucket Island, is 68.7°F (20.4°C). The average in July in Stockbridge is 68.9°F (20.5°C). Both daily and seasonal variation in temperature are greatest in the western interior and lowest along the coast.
Precipitation is fairly evenly spread throughout the year in Massachusetts. Boston averages 43 in (1091 mm) of precipitation annually, with a maximum monthly average of 4.3 in (109.2 mm) in November and a minimum monthly average of 2.9 in (73.7 mm) in July. Springfield, in the Pioneer Valley, averages 45.8 in (1163.9 mm) of annual precipitation, with a 4.6 in (116.8 mm) maximum monthly average in June and a 2.7 in (68.6 mm) minimum monthly average in February. Interior Massachusetts tends to have a summer precipitation maximum due to convection in air masses heated over the interior, which gives rise to frequent thunderstorms. These occur less frequently over the coast, due to the relative lack of convection over the cooler ocean waters. On the other hand, cold, dry air masses over the interior of the state tend to suppress winter precipitation.
All of Massachusetts experiences substantial snowfall in a typical winter. Total annual snowfalls average 43.3 in (110.0 cm) in Boston and 69.1 in (175.5 cm) in Worcester. The ground is often covered with snow for weeks at a time in January and February.
Although Massachusetts has a humid climate, its climate is sunny compared to other humid climates at the same latitude. In Boston, the average percentage of possible sunshine for every month is at least 50%. In summer and early autumn, the average percentage of possible sunshine is greater than 60%, according to National Weather Service data. The hottest temperature recorded was 108 degrees Fahrenheit (42.8 degrees Celsius).
The primary biome of inland Massachusetts is temperate deciduous forest. Although much of the state had been cleared for agriculture, leaving only traces of old growth forest in isolated pockets, secondary growth has regenerated in many rural areas as farms have been abandoned. The areas most affected by human development include the Greater Boston area in the east, the smaller Springfield metropolitan area in the west, and the largely agricultural Pioneer Valley. Animals that have become locally extinct over the past few centuries include gray wolves, elk, wolverines, and mountain lions.
A number of species are doing well, despite, and in some cases because of the increased urbanization of the commonwealth. Peregrine falcons utilize office towers in larger cities as nesting areas, and the population of coyotes, whose diet may include garbage and roadkill, has been increasing in recent decades. White-tailed deer, raccoons, wild turkeys and eastern gray squirrels are also found throughout Massachusetts. In more rural areas in the western part of the state, larger mammals such as moose and black bears have returned, largely due to reforestation following the regional decline in agriculture.
Massachusetts is located along the Atlantic Flyway, a major route for migratory waterfowl along the Atlantic coast. Lakes in central Massachusetts provide habitat for the common loon, while a significant population of long-tailed ducks winter off Nantucket. Small offshore islands and beaches are home to roseate terns and are important breeding areas for the locally threatened piping plover. Protected areas such as the Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge provide critical breeding habitat for shorebirds and a variety of marine wildlife including a large population of gray seals.
Freshwater fish species in the commonwealth include bass, carp, catfish, and trout, while saltwater species such as Atlantic cod, haddock and American lobster populate offshore waters. Other marine species include Harbor seals, the endangered North Atlantic right whales, as well as humpback whales, fin whales, minke whales and Atlantic white-sided dolphins.
Most of Massachusetts is forested. Even suburban eastern Massachusetts is heavily wooded. Trees tend to grow around houses in this region, such that when one looks out over eastern Massachusetts from the top of a high hill, one sees a vista of treetops, punctuated only occasionally by a church steeple, smokestack, or radio tower.
According to U.S. government data , 46% of Massachusetts land is devoted to forest. Another 7% is rural parkland, which is also mainly forested. Urban and suburban development takes up 36% of the state’s land, but even this land, outside of the main urban centers, consists largely of houses on wooded properties. About 4% of the state’s land is cropland, and less than 1% is pasture. About 2% of the state’s land is marsh or other wetland. The remainder of the land is taken up with other uses, such as transportation.
Three ecoregions comprise the natural environment of Massachusetts. Atlantic coastal pine barrens occur on Cape Cod, Nantucket, and Martha's Vineyard. These are fire-prone temperate coniferous forests growing on the sandy soils of the coastal plain. The other two ecoregions are temperate broadleaf and mixed forests. Across most of the state, including eastern Massachusetts, south central Massachusetts, and the Connecticut River Valley, the Northeastern coastal forests are a mix of hardwood deciduous oak, maple, beech, and hickory and coniferous pine trees. In the Berkshires and north central Massachusetts, the more boreal New England-Acadian forests prevail. These consists mainly of coniferous spruce and hemlock, occasional pine, and deciduous birch trees. Roughly since the Civil War, farms have reverted to woodland. Lumbering activity has decreased in recent decades, so the more undisturbed forests have reclaimed some characteristics of old growth.
The forests (and wooded suburbs) are home to a variety of invertebrate and vertebrate animal species. The state has an abundance of white-tailed deer, and there have been concerns about deer overpopulation because many of the deer’s natural predators, such as wolves, have historically been hunted to extinction within Massachusetts. However, coyotes have been moving into Massachusetts to fill the ecological niche formerly occupied by wolves. Bears, wild turkey, and even moose have returned from northern refuges. In 1846 Thoreau traveled to Northern Maine to observe and write about moose, which he thought were well on the way to extinction. If he were alive today, he might find them almost within walking distance of Walden Pond.
Pollution, dams, and introduction of exotic species have decimated some native fish populations. Efforts to mitigate these problems and restore Atlantic salmon to the Connecticut River watershed have had very little success. The other widespread native salmonid, the brook trout, persists in cold upland streams, particularly above waterfalls and other barriers that exclude introduced brown and rainbow trout. American shad runs have retained at least a fraction of their former abundance, and smallmouth bass, sunfish, and pike populations are healthy enough to support angling.
Wetlands, including swamps and both salt- and fresh-water marshes, are important ecologically in Massachusetts. Many of the state’s fish and bird species inhabit wetland environments.
The state’s urban environments are partly wooded but also bear a heavy load of built structures and human environments that are not hospitable to many other species. At the same time, pollutants in waterways, mainly from urban sources, can be toxic to many species or may support algae and bacteria that lead to hypoxia and the death of aquatic animals. However, Greater Boston boasts extensive parklands, and efforts have been made in Massachusetts to reduce environmental pollution in both urban and rural parts of the state.
The Northeast megalopolis extends into Massachusetts. It occupies most of eastern Massachusetts starting at Worcester as well as the Springfield-Holyoke-Northampton urbanization that joins Connecticut's Hartford-New Haven urbanization.
According to the definitions of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB), all of Massachusetts falls within a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), except for the offshore islands of Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket. According to 2005 Census estimates, 62% of the population of Massachusetts lives within the Boston MSA. Other Massachusetts metropolitan areas are the Worcester MSA (with 12% of the state's population), the Springfield MSA (11%), the Providence-Fall River-New Bedford MSA (9%), the Barnstable (Cape Cod) MSA (4%), and the Pittsfield MSA (2%).
In each of these metropolitan areas, population is concentrated in a number of densely populated cities and towns. In the Boston MSA, for example, the City of Boston and a cluster of densely populated inner suburbs within the Route 128 belt account for more than half of the population of the metropolitan area. The older cities of Lawrence, Lowell, and Brockton lie outside this urban core but are also densely populated.
However, population is growing fastest in the outer peripheries of the state's metropolitan areas, where new housing construction is adding dwelling units. While the state as a whole shows little population growth, or even a population decline in some years due to a net loss from migration, the belt of towns along Interstate 495, near the western edge of the Boston MSA, shows steady population growth.
The Springfield and Worcester MSAs include some very thinly populated rural areas. In the Berkshires and in the hills west of Worcester are a number of towns with population densities below 40 per square mile (compared with the state average of 810 per square mile).
Although the U.S. Census Bureau prepares population estimates for MSAs, these statistical units are defined by county borders. Because Massachusetts counties are relatively large and may contain several urban centers, MSAs are an imprecise way to describe the state’s urban clusters. For example, Lawrence, Lowell, and Brockton all have closer economic ties with neighboring towns than they do with one another. The Lowell region draws commuters from nearby New Hampshire who might not consider commuting all the way to Boston. Yet these areas are all part of the Boston MSA. Similarly, the cities of Leominster and Fitchburg form the core of a distinct urban cluster. Because they lie within Worcester County, however, they are considered part of the Worcester MSA.
Economic geography 
A finer-grained statistical unit than the MSA is the New England City and Town Area, or NECTA. NECTAs take advantage of the administrative subdivision of the entire territory of Massachusetts and other New England states into towns and cities. (No part of Massachusetts is unincorporated county territory.) Each NECTA consists of a cluster of cities and towns defined by commuting patterns, which therefore correspond roughly to local labor markets. While the U.S. Census Bureau defines metropolitan areas by county boundaries, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) offers data on employment by NECTA.
By far the largest NECTA in Massachusetts is the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy (Greater Boston) NECTA, which covers eastern Massachusetts and extends into southern New Hampshire. This NECTA consists of a central Boston-Cambridge-Quincy NECTA Division, including the City of Boston and the surrounding cities and suburbs. The other satellite NECTA divisions in the Greater Boston NECTA are the Brockton-Bridgewater-Easton NECTA Division, the Framingham NECTA Division, the Haverhill-North Andover-Amesbury NECTA Division (extending well into southeastern New Hampshire), the Lawrence-Methuen-Salem NECTA Division (extending into southern New Hampshire), the Lowell-Billerica-Chelmsford (or Lowell) NECTA Division (extending into southern New Hampshire), the Lynn-Peabody-Salem NECTA Division, the Nashua NECTA Division (mainly in New Hampshire but including a few Massachusetts towns), and the Taunton-Norton-Raynham NECTA Division.
The other Massachusetts metropolitan NECTAs are the Barnstable Town NECTA (covering most of Cape Cod), the Leominster-Fitchburg-Gardner NECTA (in north central Massachusetts), the New Bedford NECTA (in southeastern Massachusetts), the Pittsfield NECTA (in far western Massachusetts), the Springfield NECTA (in the Pioneer Valley and extending into northern Connecticut), and the Worcester NECTA (in central Massachusetts, extending into northeastern Connecticut).
According to the BLS, total nonfarm employment in Massachusetts in 2005 was about 3.2 million. About half of these jobs were located in the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy NECTA Division, which lies entirely within Massachusetts, although this NECTA accounted for only about 43% of the state’s population, according to 2005 Census estimates. This indicates either a higher labor participation rate in central Greater Boston or a surplus of commuters traveling to work from other parts of Massachusetts or neighboring states. Clearly, Greater Boston dominates the employment and economy of Massachusetts.
The other major centers of employment in Massachusetts are the Springfield and Worcester NECTAs. The Springfield NECTA accounts for slightly more than 10% of the jobs in Massachusetts, while the Worcester NECTA accounts for slightly less than 10% of the state’s jobs. (Although both of these NECTAs extend into Connecticut, the towns that they include in Connecticut account for only a small portion of their population and, probably, of their employment).
In every Massachusetts NECTA, service-sector jobs far outnumber goods-producing (natural resources, construction, and manufacturing) jobs. Beyond this generalization, there are some differences in the employment and economic structures of the state’s NECTAs and NECTA divisions.
In the far southeastern corner of Massachusetts, the Barnstable Town NECTA, nearly coterminous with the summer resort region of Cape Cod, has an atypical employment structure. It has the lowest share of employment in goods-producing jobs, which account for only 9.5% of its employment. Most of these jobs are in the construction sector. Manufacturing jobs account for only 3.3% of employment, compared with 9.6% for the state as a whole. On the other hand, the Cape Cod NECTA has the state’s highest percentages of employment in retail trade (17.9%, versus 11.1% for the state) and in leisure and hospitality (16.9%, versus 9.1% for the state). These numbers reflect the continuing importance to Cape Cod of summer tourism.
The central Boston-Cambridge-Quincy division of the larger NECTA with the same name also has a relatively low percentage (6.7%) of manufacturing employment. Although this division accounts for about half of the state’s total employment, it has only about a third of the state’s manufacturing jobs. Its largest manufacturing subsector is the production of computers and electronic products (28% of the division’s manufacturing jobs). This subsector is centered not in Boston’s urban core, but in the suburbs to the north and west, along Route 128. The economy of central Greater Boston is even more biased toward service provision than that of the rest of the state.
The particular economic strength of central Greater Boston is knowledge-intensive activities. It accounts for 62.2% of the state’s information sector jobs, and 66.0% of the jobs in the software-publishing subsector. Central Greater Boston has 68.8% of the state’s financial sector jobs, and 92.5% of the jobs in the investment subsector. It has 69.3% of the state’s jobs in management and technical consulting. Greater Boston is noted nationwide for its prestigious institutions of higher education, such as Harvard University and MIT, and the region is home to 77.8% of the state’s higher-education employment. Together, the knowledge-intensive information, financial, professional and business services, and education sectors account for 36.6% of the jobs in central Greater Boston, compared with 28.8% of the jobs in Massachusetts as a whole and 23.2% for the United States as a whole.
The satellite NECTA divisions that lie on the periphery of the Greater Boston NECTA all have higher percentages of employment in manufacturing than central Greater Boston or than Massachusetts as a whole. Many of these satellite NECTA divisions are centered on historic manufacturing cities, such as Haverhill, Lawrence, Lowell, Lynn, and Brockton. The BLS breaks down manufacturing employment only for the Framingham and Lowell NECTA divisions, to the west and northwest of Boston, respectively. In both of these divisions, computer and electronics manufacturing accounts for well over half of manufacturing employment. Except for Lowell, these satellite NECTA divisions also have higher shares of employment in retail trade than central Greater Boston or Massachusetts as a whole. These divisions, located along the major highways radiating from Boston, are particularly rich in shopping centers and wholesalers. The Lowell and Framingham divisions have even higher shares of employment in the information sector than central Greater Boston. This reflects the strength of these regions in the software publishing and telecommunications subsectors. On the other hand, these satellite divisions have lower shares of employment in financial services and in health and education services than the state average, reflecting the regional dominance of central Greater Boston in these areas. The Framingham division, however, has the state’s highest percentage of jobs in professional and business services (18.5% of employment versus 14.4% statewide), reflecting that region’s strength in technology.
The New Bedford NECTA has the state’s second-highest percentage (16.6%) of manufacturing employment. It has the state’s lowest percentages of employment in the financial sector (3.1%) and in professional and business services (6.25%).
The Leominster-Fitchburg-Gardner NECTA has the state’s highest percentage (17.8%) of manufacturing employment. It has by far the state’s lowest percentage of employment (1.0%) in the information sector and the second-lowest rate of employment in professional and business services (6.73%). On the other hand, this NECTA has the state’s highest percentage of employment (16.4%) in government.
The Worcester NECTA has a relatively high percentage (12.0%) of employment in manufacturing. Next to the Barnstable Town NECTA, it has a high percentage (14.9%) of employment in the healthcare sector. It has the lowest percentage of employment (8.7%) in the leisure and hospitality sector, reflecting the relative underdevelopment of its tourism industry.
The Springfield NECTA also has relatively high (12.9%) manufacturing employment. It has the state’s largest percentage of employment in the transportation and utilities subsector (4.5%, versus 2.6% for the state as a whole). It has the second-highest percentage (16.3%) of jobs in government.
Despite the small size of the Pittsfield NECTA, its employment by sector is similar to that of Massachusetts as a whole for most sectors. However, it has the state’s highest percentage of employment (20.4%) in the education and healthcare sector. It also has the second-highest share of employment (13.2%) in the leisure and hospitality sector. This reflects the importance of tourism in the Berkshires to the region’s economy.
See also 
- List of mountains in Massachusetts
- List of Massachusetts rivers
- Northern boundary of Massachusetts
- "Population, Housing Units, Area, and Density (geographically ranked by total population): 2000". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 2010-05-30.
- "Charles River Watershed". Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
- The North Quabbin Woods: www.northquabbinwoods.org
- PDF (390 KB) (map; see text on map). Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved January 14, 2007.
- "Massachusetts". National Park Service. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Massachusetts State Parks". Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Trail Maps". Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Getting Wet!". Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Elevations and Distances in the United States". U.S Geological Survey. 29 April 2005. Retrieved November 6, 2006.
- Forest Physiography: Physiography of the United States and Principles of Soils in Relation to Forestry, Isaiah Bowman (New York: Wiley and Sons, 1911): p. 681.
- "A Short Introduction to Terrestrial Biomes". www.nearctica.com. Retrieved 2009-10-17.
- Stocker, Carol. Old growth, grand specimens drive big-tree hunters  The Boston Globe. Novemberttp://www.umass.edu/ruralmass/currentresearch.html
- "Massachusetts Forests". MassWoods Forest Conservation Program — The University of Massachusetts. Retrieved 2009-03-19.
- "Northeastern Coastal Zone — Ecoregion Description". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2009-10-17.
- "State Mammal List". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2009-10-17.
- "Peregrine Falcon". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Eastern Coyote in Massachusetts". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Wild Turkey in Massachusetts". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Moose in Massachusetts". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Black Bears in Massachusetts". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Atlantic Flyway". University of Nebraska. Retrieved 2010-05-22.
- "Common Loon". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-28.
- "Telemetry Research:Long-Tailed Ducks". Mass Audubon. Retrieved 2010-05-28.
- "Roseate Tern". Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife. Retrieved 2010-05-28.
- "Coastal Waterbird Program". Mass Audubon. Retrieved 2010-05-28.
- "Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge - Wildlife and Habitat". United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Retrieved 2010-05-26.
- "Best Bets for Fishing". Massachusetts Division of Wildlife & Fisheries. Retrieved 2010-05-30.
- "Species Profiles". Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries. Retrieved 2010-05-30.
- Olson, D. M, E. Dinerstein, et al (2001). "Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth". BioScience 51 (11): 933–938. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0933:TEOTWA]2.0.CO;2.
||This article needs additional citations for verification. (August 2008)|

Next: Common Underpinnings
Up: Extensible Security Architectures for
Previous: Security in Java
We now present three different strategies for resolving the inflexibility
of the Java sandbox model. All three strategies assume the presence
of digital signatures to identify what principal is responsible
for the program. This principal is mapped to a security policy. After
that, we have identified three different ways to enforce the policy:
- A number of traditional operating systems were based
on unforgeable pointers which could be safely given to user code.
Java provides a perfect environment for implementing capabilities.
- Extended stack introspection
- The current Java method of
inspecting the stack for unprivileged code can be extended to include
principals on the call stack.
- Name space management
- An interesting property of dynamic loading is
the ability to create an environment where different applets see different
classes with the same names. By restricting an applet's name space,
we can limit its activities.
In this section, we will focus on how each method implements
interposition of protective code between potentially dangerous
primitives and untrusted code. In section 4, we will
compare these systems against a number of security-relevant criteria.

Please Read How You Can Help Keep the Encyclopedia Free
The term ‘homosexuality’ was coined in the late 19th century by a German psychologist, Karoly Maria Benkert. Although the term is new, discussions about sexuality in general, and same-sex attraction in particular, have occasioned philosophical discussion ranging from Plato's Symposium to contemporary queer theory. Since the history of cultural understandings of same-sex attraction is relevant to the philosophical issues raised by those understandings, it is necessary to review briefly some of the social history of homosexuality. Arising out of this history, at least in the West, is the idea of natural law and some interpretations of that law as forbidding homosexual sex. References to natural law still play an important role in contemporary debates about homosexuality in religion, politics, and even courtrooms. Finally, perhaps the most significant recent social change involving homosexuality is the emergence of the gay liberation movement in the West. In philosophical circles this movement is, in part, represented through a rather diverse group of thinkers who are grouped under the label of queer theory. A central issue raised by queer theory, which will be discussed below, is whether homosexuality, and hence also heterosexuality and bisexuality, is socially constructed or purely driven by biological forces.
- 1. History
- 2. Historiographical Debates
- 3. Natural Law
- 4. Queer Theory and the Social Construction of Sexuality
- 5. Conclusion
- Academic Tools
- Other Internet Resources
- Related Entries
As has been frequently noted, the ancient Greeks did not have terms or concepts that correspond to the contemporary dichotomy of ‘heterosexual’ and ‘homosexual’. There is a wealth of material from ancient Greece pertinent to issues of sexuality, ranging from dialogues of Plato, such as the Symposium, to plays by Aristophanes, and Greek artwork and vases. What follows is a brief description of ancient Greek attitudes, but it is important to recognize that there was regional variation. For example, in parts of Ionia there were general strictures against same-sex eros, while in Elis and Boiotia (e.g., Thebes), it was approved of and even celebrated (cf. Dover, 1989; Halperin, 1990).
Probably the most frequent assumption of sexual orientation is that persons can respond erotically to beauty in either sex. Diogenes Laeurtius, for example, wrote of Alcibiades, the Athenian general and politician of the 5th century B.C., “in his adolescence he drew away the husbands from their wives, and as a young man the wives from their husbands.” (Quoted in Greenberg, 1988, 144) Some persons were noted for their exclusive interests in persons of one gender. For example, Alexander the Great and the founder of Stoicism, Zeno of Citium, were known for their exclusive interest in boys and other men. Such persons, however, are generally portrayed as the exception. Furthermore, the issue of what gender one is attracted to is seen as an issue of taste or preference, rather than as a moral issue. A character in Plutarch's Erotikos (Dialogue on Love) argues that “the noble lover of beauty engages in love wherever he sees excellence and splendid natural endowment without regard for any difference in physiological detail.” (Ibid., 146) Gender just becomes irrelevant “detail” and instead the excellence in character and beauty is what is most important.
Even though the gender that one was erotically attracted to (at any specific time, given the assumption that persons will likely be attracted to persons of both sexes) was not important, other issues were salient, such as whether one exercised moderation. Status concerns were also of the highest importance. Given that only free men had full status, women and male slaves were not problematic sexual partners. Sex between freemen, however, was problematic for status. The central distinction in ancient Greek sexual relations was between taking an active or insertive role, versus a passive or penetrated one. The passive role was acceptable only for inferiors, such as women, slaves, or male youths who were not yet citizens. Hence the cultural ideal of a same-sex relationship was between an older man, probably in his 20's or 30's, known as the erastes, and a boy whose beard had not yet begun to grow, the eromenos or paidika. In this relationship there was courtship ritual, involving gifts (such as a rooster), and other norms. The erastes had to show that he had nobler interests in the boy, rather than a purely sexual concern. The boy was not to submit too easily, and if pursued by more than one man, was to show discretion and pick the more noble one. There is also evidence that penetration was often avoided by having the erastes face his beloved and place his penis between the thighs of the eromenos, which is known as intercrural sex. The relationship was to be temporary and should end upon the boy reaching adulthood (Dover, 1989). To continue in a submissive role even while one should be an equal citizen was considered troubling, although there certainly were many adult male same-sex relationships that were noted and not strongly stigmatized. While the passive role was thus seen as problematic, to be attracted to men was often taken as a sign of masculinity. Greek gods, such as Zeus, had stories of same-sex exploits attributed to them, as did other key figures in Greek myth and literature, such as Achilles and Hercules. Plato, in the Symposium, argues for an army to be comprised of same-sex lovers. Thebes did form such a regiment, the Sacred Band of Thebes, formed of 500 soldiers. They were renowned in the ancient world for their valor in battle.
Ancient Rome had many parallels in its understanding of same-sex attraction, and sexual issues more generally, to ancient Greece. This is especially true under the Republic. Yet under the Empire, Roman society slowly became more negative in its views towards sexuality, probably due to social and economic turmoil, even before Christianity became influential.
Exactly what attitude the New Testament has towards sexuality in general, and same-sex attraction in particular, is a matter of sharp debate. John Boswell argues, in his fascinating Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality, that many passages taken today as condemnations of homosexuality are more concerned with prostitution, or where same-sex acts are described as “unnatural” the meaning is more akin to ‘out of the ordinary’ rather than as immoral (Boswell, 1980, ch.4; see also Boswell, 1994). Yet others have criticized, sometimes persuasively, Boswell's scholarship (see Greenberg, 1988, ch.5). What is clear, however, is that while condemnation of same-sex attraction is marginal to the Gospels and only an intermittent focus in the rest of the New Testament, early Christian church fathers were much more outspoken. In their writings there is a horror at any sort of sex, but in a few generations these views eased, in part due no doubt to practical concerns of recruiting converts. By the fourth and fifth centuries the mainstream Christian view allowed for procreative sex.
This viewpoint, that procreative sex within marriage is allowed, while every other expression of sexuality is sinful, can be found, for example, in St. Augustine. This understanding leads to a concern with the gender of one's partner that is not found in previous Greek or Roman views, and it clearly forbids homosexual acts. Soon this attitude, especially towards homosexual sex, came to be reflected in Roman Law. In Justinian's Code, promulgated in 529, persons who engaged in homosexual sex were to be executed, although those who were repentant could be spared. Historians agree that the late Roman Empire saw a rise in intolerance towards sexuality, although there were again important regional variations.
With the decline of the Roman Empire, and its replacement by various barbarian kingdoms, a general tolerance (with the sole exception of Visigothic Spain) of homosexual acts prevailed. As one prominent scholar puts it, “European secular law contained few measures against homosexuality until the middle of the thirteenth century.” (Greenberg, 1988, 260) Even while some Christian theologians continued to denounce nonprocreative sexuality, including same-sex acts, a genre of homophilic literature, especially among the clergy, developed in the eleventh and twelfth centuries (Boswell, 1980, chapters 8 and 9).
The latter part of the twelfth through the fourteenth centuries, however, saw a sharp rise in intolerance towards homosexual sex, alongside persecution of Jews, Muslims, heretics, and others. While the causes of this are somewhat unclear, it is likely that increased class conflict alongside the Gregorian reform movement in the Catholic Church were two important factors. The Church itself started to appeal to a conception of “nature” as the standard of morality, and drew it in such a way so as to forbid homosexual sex (as well as extramarital sex, nonprocreative sex within marriage, and often masturbation). For example, the first ecumenical council to condemn homosexual sex, Lateran III of 1179, stated that “Whoever shall be found to have committed that incontinence which is against nature” shall be punished, the severity of which depended upon whether the transgressor was a cleric or layperson (quoted in Boswell, 1980, 277). This appeal to natural law (discussed below) became very influential in the Western tradition. An important point to note, however, is that the key category here is the ‘sodomite,’ which differs from the contemporary idea of ‘homosexual’. A sodomite was understood as act-defined, rather than as a type of person. Someone who had desires to engage in sodomy, yet did not act upon them, was not a sodomite. Also, persons who engaged in heterosexual sodomy were also sodomites. There are reports of persons being burned to death or beheaded for sodomy with a spouse (Greenberg, 1988, 277). Finally, a person who had engaged in sodomy, yet who had repented of his sin and vowed to never do it again, was no longer a sodomite. The gender of one's partner is again not of decisive importance, although some medieval theologians single out same-sex sodomy as the worst type of sexual crime.
For the next several centuries in Europe, the laws against homosexual sex were severe in their penalties. Enforcement, however, was episodic. In some regions, decades would pass without any prosecutions. Yet the Dutch, in the 1730's, mounted a harsh anti-sodomy campaign (alongside an anti-Gypsy pogrom), even using torture to obtain confessions. As many as one hundred men and boys were executed and denied burial (Greenberg, 1988, 313-4). Also, the degree to which sodomy and same-sex attraction were accepted varied by class, with the middle class taking the narrowest view, while the aristocracy and nobility often accepted public expressions of alternative sexualities. At times, even with the risk of severe punishment, same-sex oriented subcultures would flourish in cities, sometimes only to be suppressed by the authorities. In the 19th century there was a significant reduction in the legal penalties for sodomy. The Napoleonic code decriminalized sodomy, and with Napoleon's conquests that Code spread. Furthermore, in many countries where homosexual sex remained a crime, the general movement at this time away from the death penalty usually meant that sodomy was removed from the list of capital offenses.
In the 18th and 19th centuries an overtly theological framework no longer dominated the discourse about same-sex attraction. Instead, secular arguments and interpretations became increasingly common. Probably the most important secular domain for discussions of homosexuality was in medicine, including psychology. This discourse, in turn, linked up with considerations about the state and its need for a growing population, good soldiers, and intact families marked by clearly defined gender roles. Doctors were called in by courts to examine sex crime defendants (Foucault, 1980; Greenberg, 1988). At the same time, the dramatic increase in school attendance rates and the average length of time spent in school, reduced transgenerational contact, and hence also the frequency of transgenerational sex. Same-sex relations between persons of roughly the same age became the norm.
Clearly the rise in the prestige of medicine resulted in part from the increasing ability of science to account for natural phenomena on the basis of mechanistic causation. The application of this viewpoint to humans led to accounts of sexuality as innate or biologically driven. The voluntarism of the medieval understanding of sodomy, that sodomites chose sin, gave way to the modern notion of homosexuality as a deep, unchosen characteristic of persons, regardless of whether they act upon that orientation. The idea of a ‘latent sodomite’ would not have made sense, yet under this new view it does make sense to speak of a person as a ‘latent homosexual.’ Instead of specific acts defining a person, as in the medieval view, an entire physical and mental makeup, usually portrayed as somehow defective or pathological, is ascribed to the modern category of ‘homosexual.’ Although there are historical precursors to these ideas (e.g., Aristotle gave a physiological explanation of passive homosexuality), medicine gave them greater public exposure and credibility (Greenberg, 1988, ch.15). The effects of these ideas cut in conflicting ways. Since homosexuality is, by this view, not chosen, it makes less sense to criminalize it. Persons are not choosing evil acts. Yet persons may be expressing a diseased or pathological mental state, and hence medical intervention for a cure is appropriate. Hence doctors, especially psychiatrists, campaigned for the repeal or reduction of criminal penalties for consensual homosexual sodomy, yet intervened to “rehabilitate” homosexuals. They also sought to develop techniques to prevent children from becoming homosexual, for example by arguing that childhood masturbation caused homosexuality, hence it must be closely guarded against.
In the 20th century sexual roles were redefined once again. For a variety of reasons, premarital intercourse slowly became more common and eventually acceptable. With the decline of prohibitions against sex for the sake of pleasure even outside of marriage, it became more difficult to argue against gay sex. These trends were especially strong in the 1960's, and it was in this context that the gay liberation movement took off. Although gay and lesbian rights groups had been around for decades, the low-key approach of the Mattachine Society (named after a medieval secret society) and the Daughters of Bilitis had not gained much ground. This changed in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, when the patrons of the Stonewall Inn, a gay bar in Greenwich Village, rioted after a police raid. In the aftermath of that event, gay and lesbian groups began to organize around the country. Gay Democratic clubs were created in every major city, and one fourth of all college campuses had gay and lesbian groups (Shilts, 1993, ch.28). Large gay urban communities in cities from coast to coast became the norm. The American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from its official listing of mental disorders. The increased visibility of gays and lesbians has become a permanent feature of American life despite the two critical setbacks of the AIDS epidemic and an anti-gay backlash (see Berman, 1993, for a good survey). The post-Stonewall era has also seen marked changes in Western Europe, where the repeal of anti-sodomy laws and legal equality for gays and lesbians has become common.
Broader currents in society have influenced the ways in which scholars and activists have approached research into sexuality and same-sex attraction. Some early 20th century researchers and equality advocates, seeking to vindicate same-sex relations in societies that disparaged and criminalized it, put forward lists of famous historical figures attracted to persons of the same sex. Such lists implied a common historical entity underlying sexual attraction, whether one called it ‘inversion’ or ‘homosexuality.’ This approach (or perhaps closely related family of approaches) is commonly called essentialism. Historians and researchers sympathetic to the gay liberation movement of the late 1960s and 1970s produced a number of books that implicitly relied on an essentialist approach. In the 1970s and 1980s John Boswell raised it to a new level of methodological and historical sophistication, although his position shifted over time to one of virtual agnosticism between essentialists and their critics. Crompton’s work (2003) is a notable contemporary example of an essentialist methodology.
Essentialists claim that categories of sexual attraction are observed rather than created. For example, while ancient Greece did not have terms that correspond to the heterosexual/homosexual division, persons did note men who were only attracted to person of a specific sex. Through history and across cultures there are consistent features, albeit with meaningful variety over time and space, in sexual attraction to the point that it makes sense of speak of specific sexual orientations. According to this view, homosexuality is a specific, natural kind rather than a cultural or historical product. Essentialists allow that there are cultural differences in how homosexuality is expressed and interpreted, but they emphasize that this does not prevent it from being a universal category of human sexual expression.
In contrast, in the 1970s and since a number of researchers, often influenced by Mary McIntosh or Michel Foucault, argued that class relations, the human sciences, and other historically constructed forces create sexual categories and the personal identities associated with them. For advocates of this view, such as David Halperin, how sex is organized in a given cultural and historical setting is irreducibly particular (Halperin, 2002). The emphasis on the social creation of sexual experience and expression led to the labeling of the viewpoint as social constructionism, although more recently several of its proponents have preferred the term ‘historicism.’ Thus homosexuality, as a specific sexual construction, is best understood as a solely modern, Western concept and role. Prior to the development of this construction, persons were not really ‘homosexual’ even when they were only attracted to persons of the same sex. The differences between, say, ancient Greece, with its emphasis on pederasty, role in the sex act, and social status, and the contemporary Western role of ‘gay’ or ‘homosexual’ are simply too great to collapse into one category.
In a manner closely related to the claims of queer theory, discussed below, social constructionists argue that specific social constructs produce sexual ways of being. There is no given mode of sexuality that is independent of culture; even the concept and experience of sexual orientation itself are products of history. For advocates of this view, the range of historical sexual diversity, and the fluidity of human possibility, is simply too varied to be adequately captured by any specific conceptual scheme.
There is a significant political dimension to this seemingly abstract historiographical debate. Social constructionists argue that essentialism is the weaker position politically for at least two reasons. First, by accepting a basic heterosexual/homosexual organizing dichotomy, essentialism wrongly concedes that heterosexuality is the norm and that homosexuality is, strictly speaking, abnormal and the basis for a permanent minority. Second, social constructionists argue that an important goal of historical investigations should be to put into question contemporary organizing schemas about sexuality. The acceptance of the contemporary heterosexual/homosexual dichotomy is conservative, perhaps even reactionary, and forecloses the exploration of new possibilities. (There are related queer theory criticisms of the essentialist position, discussed below.) In contrast, essentialists argue that a historicist approach forecloses the very possibility of a ‘gay history.’ Instead, the field of investigation becomes other social forces and how they ‘produce’ a distinct form or forms of sexuality. Only an essentialist approach can maintain the project of gay history, and minority histories in general, as a force for liberation.
Today natural law theory offers the most common intellectual defense for differential treatment of gays and lesbians, and as such it merits attention. The development of natural law is a long and very complicated story, but a reasonable place to begin is with the dialogues of Plato, for this is where some of the central ideas are first articulated, and, significantly enough, are immediately applied to the sexual domain. For the Sophists, the human world is a realm of convention and change, rather than of unchanging moral truth. Plato, in contrast, argued that unchanging truths underpin the flux of the material world. Reality, including eternal moral truths, is a matter of phusis. Even though there is clearly a great degree of variety in conventions from one city to another (something ancient Greeks became increasingly aware of), there is still an unwritten standard, or law, that humans should live under.
In the Laws, Plato applies the idea of a fixed, natural law to sex, and takes a much harsher line than he does in the Symposium or the Phraedrus. In Book One he writes about how opposite-sex sex acts cause pleasure by nature, while same-sex sexuality is “unnatural” (636c). In Book Eight, the Athenian speaker considers how to have legislation banning homosexual acts, masturbation, and illegitimate procreative sex widely accepted. He then states that this law is according to nature (838-839d). Probably the best way of understanding Plato's discussion here is in the context of his overall concerns with the appetitive part of the soul and how best to control it. Plato clearly sees same-sex passions as especially strong, and hence particularly problematic, although in the Symposium that erotic attraction could be the catalyst for a life of philosophy, rather than base sensuality (Cf. Dover, 1989, 153-170; Nussbaum, 1999, esp. chapter 12).
Other figures played important roles in the development of natural law theory. Aristotle, with his emphasis upon reason as the distinctive human function, and the Stoics, with their emphasis upon human beings as a part of the natural order of the cosmos, both helped to shape the natural law perspective which says that “True law is right reason in agreement with nature,” as Cicero put it. Aristotle, in his approach, did allow for change to occur according to nature, and therefore the way that natural law is embodied could itself change with time, which was an idea Aquinas later incorporated into his own natural law theory. Aristotle did not write extensively about sexual issues, since he was less concerned with the appetites than Plato. Probably the best reconstruction of his views places him in mainstream Greek society as outlined above; the main issue is that of active versus a passive role, with only the latter problematic for those who either are or will become citizens. Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, was, according to his contemporaries, only attracted to men, and his thought had no prohibitions against same-sex sexuality. In contrast, Cicero, a later Stoic, was dismissive about sexuality in general, with some harsher remarks towards same-sex pursuits (Cicero, 1966, 407-415).
The most influential formulation of natural law theory was made by Thomas Aquinas in the thirteenth century. Integrating an Aristotelian approach with Christian theology, Aquinas emphasized the centrality of certain human goods, including marriage and procreation. While Aquinas did not write much about same-sex sexual relations, he did write at length about various sex acts as sins. For Aquinas, sexuality that was within the bounds of marriage and which helped to further what he saw as the distinctive goods of marriage, mainly love, companionship, and legitimate offspring, was permissible, and even good. Aquinas did not argue that procreation was a necessary part of moral or just sex; married couples could enjoy sex without the motive of having children, and sex in marriages where one or both partners is sterile (perhaps because the woman is postmenopausal) is also potentially just (given a motive of expressing love). So far Aquinas' view actually need not rule out homosexual sex. For example, a Thomist could embrace same-sex marriage, and then apply the same reasoning, simply seeing the couple as a reproductively sterile, yet still fully loving and companionate union.
Aquinas, in a significant move, adds a requirement that for any given sex act to be moral it must be of a generative kind. The only way that this can be achieved is via vaginal intercourse. That is, since only the emission of semen in a vagina can result in natural reproduction, only sex acts of that type are generative, even if a given sex act does not lead to reproduction, and even if it is impossible due to infertility. The consequence of this addition is to rule out the possibility, of course, that homosexual sex could ever be moral (even if done within a loving marriage), in addition to forbidding any non-vaginal sex for opposite-sex married couples. What is the justification for this important addition? This question is made all the more pressing in that Aquinas does allow that how broad moral rules apply to individuals may vary considerably, since the nature of persons also varies to some extent. That is, since Aquinas allows that individual natures vary, one could simply argue that one is, by nature, emotionally and physically attracted to persons of one's own gender, and hence to pursue same-sex relationships is ‘natural’ (Sullivan, 1995). Unfortunately, Aquinas does not spell out a justification for this generative requirement.
More recent natural law theorists, however, have tried a couple different lines of defense for Aquinas' ‘generative type’ requirement. The first is that sex acts that involve either homosexuality, heterosexual sodomy, or which use contraception, frustrate the purpose of the sex organs, which is reproductive. This argument, often called the ‘perverted faculty argument’, is perhaps implicit in Aquinas. It has, however, come in for sharp attack (see Weitham, 1997), and the best recent defenders of a Thomistic natural law approach are attempting to move beyond it (e.g., George, 1999, dismisses the argument). If their arguments fail, of course, they must allow that some homosexual sex acts are morally permissible (even positively good), although they would still have resources with which to argue against casual gay (and straight) sex.
Although the specifics of the second sort of argument offered by various contemporary natural law theorists vary, the common elements are strong (Finnis, 1994; George, 1999). As Thomists, their argument rests largely upon an account of human goods. The two most important for the argument against homosexual sex (though not against homosexuality as an orientation which is not acted upon, and hence in this they follow official Catholic doctrine; see George, 1999, ch.15) are personal integration and marriage. Personal integration, in this view, is the idea that humans, as agents, need to have integration between their intentions as agents and their embodied selves. Thus, to use one's or another's body as a mere means to one's own pleasure, as they argue happens with masturbation, causes ‘dis-integration’ of the self. That is, one's intention then is just to use a body (one's own or another's) as a mere means to the end of pleasure, and this detracts from personal integration. Yet one could easily reply that two persons of the same sex engaging in sexual union does not necessarily imply any sort of ‘use’ of the other as a mere means to one's own pleasure. Hence, natural law theorists respond that sexual union in the context of the realization of marriage as an important human good is the only permissible expression of sexuality. Yet this argument requires drawing how marriage is an important good in a very particular way, since it puts procreation at the center of marriage as its “natural fulfillment” (George, 1999, 168). Natural law theorists, if they want to support their objection to homosexual sex, have to emphasize procreation. If, for example, they were to place love and mutual support for human flourishing at the center, it is clear that many same-sex couples would meet this standard. Hence their sexual acts would be morally just.
There are, however, several objections that are made against this account of marriage as a central human good. One is that by placing procreation as the ‘natural fulfillment’ of marriage, sterile marriages are thereby denigrated. Sex in an opposite-sex marriage where the partners know that one or both of them are sterile is not done for procreation. Yet surely it is not wrong. Why, then, is homosexual sex in the same context (a long-term companionate union) wrong (Macedo, 1995)? The natural law rejoinder is that while vaginal intercourse is a potentially procreative sex act, considered in itself (though admitting the possibility that it may be impossible for a particular couple), oral and anal sex acts are never potentially procreative, whether heterosexual or homosexual (George, 1999). But is this biological distinction also morally relevant, and in the manner that natural law theorists assume? Natural law theorists, in their discussions of these issues, seem to waver. On the one hand, they want to defend an ideal of marriage as a loving union wherein two persons are committed to their mutual flourishing, and where sex is a complement to that ideal. Yet that opens the possibility of permissible gay sex, or heterosexual sodomy, both of which they want to oppose. So they then defend an account of sexuality which seems crudely reductive, emphasizing procreation to the point where literally a male orgasm anywhere except in the vagina of one's loving spouse is impermissible. Then, when accused of being reductive, they move back to the broader ideal of marriage.
Natural law theory, at present, has made significant concessions to mainstream liberal thought. In contrast certainly to its medieval formulation, most contemporary natural law theorists argue for limited governmental power, and do not believe that the state has an interest in attempting to prevent all moral wrongdoing. Still, they do argue against homosexuality, and against legal protections for gays and lesbians in terms of employment and housing, even to the point of serving as expert witnesses in court cases or helping in the writing of amicus curae briefs. They also argue against same sex marriage (Bradley, 2001; George, 2001).
With the rise of the gay liberation movement in the post-Stonewall era, overtly gay and lesbian perspectives began to be put forward in politics, philosophy and literary theory. Initially these often were overtly linked to feminist analyses of patriarchy (e.g., Rich, 1980) or other, earlier approaches to theory. Yet in the late 1980's and early 1990's queer theory was developed, although there are obviously important antecedents which make it difficult to date it precisely. There are a number of ways in which queer theory differed from earlier gay liberation theory, but an important initial difference can be gotten at by examining the reasons for opting for the term ‘queer’ as opposed to ‘gay and lesbian.’ Some versions of, for example, lesbian theory portrayed the essence of lesbian identity and sexuality in very specific terms: non-hierarchical, consensual, and, specifically in terms of sexuality, as not necessarily focused upon genitalia (e.g., Faderman, 1985). Lesbians arguing from this framework, for example, could very well criticize natural law theorists as inscribing into the very “law of nature” an essentially masculine sexuality, focused upon the genitals, penetration, and the status of the male orgasm (natural law theorists rarely mention female orgasms).
This approach, based upon characterizations of ‘lesbian’ and ‘gay’ identity and sexuality, however, suffered from three difficulties. First, it appeared even though the goal was to critique a heterosexist regime for its exclusion and marginalization of those whose sexuality is different, any specific or “essentialist” account of gay or lesbian sexuality had the same effect. Sticking with the example used above, of a specific conceptualization of lesbian identity, it denigrates women who are sexually and emotionally attracted to other women, yet who do not fit the description. Sado-masochists and butch/fem lesbians arguably do not fit this ideal of ‘equality’ offered. A second problem was that by placing such an emphasis upon the gender of one's sexual partner(s), other possible important sources of identity are marginalized, such as race and ethnicity. What is of utmost importance, for example, for a black lesbian is her lesbianism, rather than her race. Many gays and lesbians of color attacked this approach, accusing it of re-inscribing an essentially white identity into the heart of gay or lesbian identity (Jagose, 1996).
The third and final problem for the gay liberationist approach was that it often took this category of ‘identity’ itself as unproblematic and unhistorical. Such a view, however, largely because of arguments developed within poststructuralism, seemed increasingly untenable. The key figure in the attack upon identity as ahistorical is Michel Foucault. In a series of works he set out to analyze the history of sexuality from ancient Greece to the modern era (1980, 1985, 1986). Although the project was tragically cut short by his death in 1984, from complications arising from AIDS, Foucault articulated how profoundly understandings of sexuality can vary across time and space, and his arguments have proven very influential in gay and lesbian theorizing in general, and queer theory in particular (Spargo, 1999; Stychin, 2005).
One of the reasons for the historical review above is that it helps to give some background for understanding the claim that sexuality is socially constructed, rather than given by nature. Moreover, in order to not prejudge the issue of social constructionism versus essentialism, I avoided applying the term ‘homosexual’ to the ancient or medieval eras. In ancient Greece the gender of one's partner(s) was not important, but instead whether one took the active or passive role. In the medieval view, a ‘sodomite’ was a person who succumbed to temptation and engaged in certain non-procreative sex acts. Although the gender of the partner was more important than in the ancient view, the broader theological framework placed the emphasis upon a sin versus refraining-from-sin dichotomy. With the rise of the notion of ‘homosexuality’ in the modern era, a person is placed into a specific category even if one does not act upon those inclinations. What is the common, natural sexuality expressed across these three very different cultures? The social constructionist answer is that there is no ‘natural’ sexuality; all sexual understandings are constructed within and mediated by cultural understandings. The examples can be pushed much further by incorporating anthropological data outside of the Western tradition (Halperin, 1990; Greenberg, 1988). Yet even within the narrower context offered here, the differences between them are striking. The assumption in ancient Greece was that men (less is known about women) can respond erotically to either sex, and the vast majority of men who engaged in same-sex relationships were also married (or would later become married). Yet the contemporary understanding of homosexuality divides the sexual domain in two, heterosexual and homosexual, and most heterosexuals cannot respond erotically to their own sex.
In saying that sexuality is a social construct, these theorists are not saying that these understandings are not real. Since persons are also constructs of their culture (in this view), we are made into those categories. Hence today persons of course understand themselves as straight or gay (or perhaps bisexual), and it is very difficult to step outside of these categories, even once one comes to seem them as the historical constructs they are.
Gay and lesbian theory was thus faced with three significant problems, all of which involved difficulties with the notion of ‘identity.’ Queer theory thus arose in large part as an attempt to overcome them. How queer theory does so can be seen by looking at the term ‘queer’ itself. In contrast to gay or lesbian, ‘queer,’ it is argued, does not refer to an essence, whether of a sexual nature or not. Instead it is purely relational, standing as an undefined term that gets its meaning precisely by being that which is outside of the norm, however that norm itself may be defined. As one of the most articulate queer theorists puts it: “Queer is … whatever is at odds with the normal, the legitimate, the dominant. There is nothing in particular to which it necessarily refers. It is an identity without an essence” (Halperin, 1995, 62, original emphasis). By lacking any essence, queer does not marginalize those whose sexuality is outside of any gay or lesbian norm, such as sado-masochists. Since specific conceptualizations of sexuality are avoided, and hence not put at the center of any definition of queer, it allows more freedom for self-identification for, say, black lesbians to identify as much or more with their race (or any other trait, such as involvement in an S & M subculture) than with lesbianism. Finally, it incorporates the insights of poststructuralism about the difficulties in ascribing any essence or non-historical aspect to identity.
This central move by queer theorists, the claim that the categories through which identity is understood are all social constructs rather than given to us by nature, opens up a number of analytical possibilities. For example, queer theorists examine how fundamental notions of gender and sex which seem so natural and self-evident to persons in the modern West are in fact constructed and reinforced through everyday actions, and that this occurs in ways that privilege heterosexuality (Butler, 1990, 1993). Also examined are medical categories which are themselves socially constructed (Fausto-Sterling, 2000, is an erudite example of this, although she is not ultimately a queer theorist). Others examine how language and especially divisions between what is said and what is not said, corresponding to the dichotomy between ‘closeted’ and ‘out,’ especially in regards to the modern division of heterosexual/homosexual, structure much of modern thought. That is, it is argued that when we look at dichotomies such as natural/artificial, or masculine/feminine, we find in the background an implicit reliance upon a very recent, and arbitrary, understanding of the sexual world as split into two species (Sedgwick, 1990). The fluidity of categories created through queer theory even opens the possibility of new sorts of histories that examine previously silent types of affections and relationships (Carter, 2005).
Another critical perspective opened up by a queer approach, although certainly implicit in those just referred to, is especially important. Since most anti-gay and lesbian arguments rely upon the alleged naturalness of heterosexuality, queer theorists attempt to show how these categories are themselves deeply social constructs. An example helps to illustrate the approach. In an essay against gay marriage, chosen because it is very representative, James Q. Wilson (1996) contends that gay men have a “great tendency” to be promiscuous. In contrast, he puts forward loving, monogamous marriage as the natural condition of heterosexuality. Heterosexuality, in his argument, is an odd combination of something completely natural yet simultaneously endangered. One is born straight, yet this natural condition can be subverted by such things as the presence of gay couples, gay teachers, or even excessive talk about homosexuality. Wilson's argument requires a radical disjunction between heterosexuality and homosexuality. If gayness is radically different, it is legitimate to suppress it. Wilson has the courage to be forthright about this element of his argument; he comes out against “the political imposition of tolerance” towards gays and lesbians (Wilson, 1996, 35).
It is a common move in queer theory to bracket, at least temporarily, issues of truth and falsity (Halperin, 1995). Instead, the analysis focuses on the social function of discourse. Questions of who counts as an expert and why, and concerns about the effects of the expert's discourse are given equal status to questions of the verity of what is said. This approach reveals that hidden underneath Wilson's (and other anti-gay) work is an important epistemological move. Since heterosexuality is the natural condition, it is a place that is spoken from but not inquired into. In contrast, homosexuality is the aberration and hence it needs to be studied but it is not an authoritative place from which one can speak. By virtue of this heterosexual privilege, Wilson is allowed the voice of the impartial, fair-minded expert. Yet, as the history section above shows, there are striking discontinuities in understandings of sexuality, and this is true to the point that, according to queer theorists, we should not think of sexuality as having any particular nature at all. Through undoing our infatuation with any specific conception of sexuality, the queer theorist opens space for marginalized forms.
Queer theory, however, has been criticized in a myriad of ways (Jagose, 1996). One set of criticisms comes from theorists who are sympathetic to gay liberation conceived as a project of radical social change. An initial criticism is that precisely because ‘queer’ does not refer to any specific sexual status or gender object choice, for example Halperin (1995) allows that straight persons may be ‘queer,’ it robs gays and lesbians of the distinctiveness of what makes them marginal. It desexualizes identity, when the issue is precisely about a sexual identity (Jagose, 1996). A related criticism is that queer theory, since it refuses any essence or reference to standard ideas of normality, cannot make crucial distinctions. For example, queer theorists usually argue that one of the advantages of the term ‘queer’ is that it thereby includes transsexuals, sado-masochists, and other marginalized sexualities. How far does this extend? Is transgenerational sex (e.g., pedophilia) permissible? Are there any limits upon the forms of acceptable sado-masochism or fetishism? While some queer theorists specifically disallow pedophilia, it is an open question whether the theory has the resources to support such a distinction. Furthermore, some queer theorists overtly refuse to rule out pedophiles as ‘queer’ (Halperin, 1995, 62) Another criticism is that queer theory, in part because it typically has recourse to a very technical jargon, is written by a narrow elite for that narrow elite. It is therefore class biased and also, in practice, only really referred to at universities and colleges (Malinowitz, 1993).
Queer theory is also criticized by those who reject the desirability of radical social change. For example, centrist and conservative gays and lesbians have criticized a queer approach by arguing that it will be “disastrously counter-productive” (Bawer, 1996, xii). If ‘queer’ keeps its connotation of something perverse and at odds with mainstream society, which is precisely what most queer theorists want, it would seem to only validate the attacks upon gays and lesbians made by conservatives. Sullivan (1996) also criticizes queer theorists for relying upon Foucault's account of power, which he argues does not allow for meaningful resistance. It seems likely, however, that Sullivan's understanding of Foucault's notions of power and resistance are misguided.
The debates about homosexuality, in part because they often involve public policy and legal issues, tend to be sharply polarized. Those most concerned with homosexuality, positively or negatively, are also those most engaged, with natural law theorists arguing for gays and lesbians having a reduced legal status, and queer theorists engaged in critique and deconstruction of what they see as a heterosexist regime. Yet the two do not talk much to one another, but rather ignore or talk past one another. There are some theorists in the middle. For example, Michael Sandel takes an Aristotelian approach from which he argues that gay and lesbian relationships can realize the same goods that heterosexual relationships do (Sandel, 1995). He largely shares the account of important human goods that natural law theorists have, yet in his evaluation of the worth of same-sex relationships, he is clearly sympathetic to gay and lesbian concerns. Similarly, Bruce Bawer (1993) and Andrew Sullivan (1995) have written eloquent defenses of full legal equality for gays and lesbians, including marriage rights. Yet neither argue for any systematic reform of broader American culture or politics. In this they are essentially conservative. Therefore, rather unsurprisingly, these centrists are attacked from both sides. Sullivan, for example, has been criticized at length both by queer theorists (e.g., Phelan, 2001) and natural law theorists (e.g., George, 1999).
Yet as the foregoing also clearly shows, the policy and legal debates surrounding homosexuality involve fundamental issues of morality and justice. Perhaps most centrally of all, they cut to issues of personal identity and self-definition. Hence there is another, and even deeper, set of reasons for the polarization that marks these debates.
- Bawer, Bruce, 1993, A Place at the Table: The Gay Individual in American Society. New York: Poseidon Press.
- –––, 1996. Beyond Queer: Challenging Gay Left Orthodoxy. New York: The Free Press.
- Berman, Paul, 1993, “Democracy and Homosexuality” in The New Republic. Vol.209, No.25 (December 20): pp.17-35.
- Boswell, John, 1980, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
- –––, 1994, Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe. New York: Vintage Books.
- Bradley, Gerard V., 2001, “The End of Marriage” in Marriage and the Common Good. Ed. by Kenneth D. Whitehead. South Bend, IN: St. Augustine's Press.
- Butler, Judith, 1990, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge.
- –––, 1993, Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex”. New York: Routledge.
- Carter, Julian, 2005, “On Mother-Love: History, Queer Theory, and Nonlesbian Identity” Journal of the History of Sexuality, Vol.14: 107-138.
- Cicero, 1966, Tusculan Disputations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Crompton, Louis, 2003, Homosexuality and Civilization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Dover, K.J., 1978, 1989, Greek Homosexuality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Faderman, Lillian, 1985, Surpassing the Love of Men: Romantic Friendship and Love Between Women from the Renaissance to the Present. London: The Women's Press.
- Fausto-Sterling, Anne, 2000, Sexing the Body: Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality. New York: Basic Books.
- Finnis, John, 1994, “Law, Morality, and ‘Sexual Orientation’” Notre Dame Law Review 69: 1049-1076.
- Foucault, Michel, 1980, The History of Sexuality. Volume One: An Introduction. Translated by Robert Hurley. New York: Vintage Books.
- –––,1985, The History of Sexuality. Volume Two: The Use of Pleasure. New York: Pantheon Books.
- –––, 1986, The History of Sexuality. Volume Three: The Care of the Self. New York: Pantheon.
- George, Robert P., 1999, In Defense of Natural Law. New York: Oxford University Press.
- –––, 2001, “‘Same-Sex Marriage’ and ‘Moral Neutrality’” in Marriage and the Common Good. Ed. by Kenneth D. Whitehead. South Bend, IN: St. Augustine's Press.
- Greenberg, David F., 1988, The Construction of Homosexuality. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
- Halperin, David M., 1990, One Hundred Years of Homosexuality: and other essays on Greek love. New York: Routledge.
- –––, 1995, Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Jagose, Annamarie, 1996, Queer Theory: An Introduction. New York: New York University Press.
- Macedo, Stephen, 1995, “Homosexuality and the Conservative Mind” Georgetown Law Journal 84: 261-300.
- Malinowitz, Harriet, 1993, “Queer Theory: Whose Theory?” Frontiers, Vol.13: 168-184.
- Nussbaum, Martha, 1999, Sex and Social Justice. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Phelan, Shane, 2001, Sexual Strangers: Gays, Lesbians, and Dilemmas of Citizenship. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Plato, The Symposium. Translated by Walter Hamilton. New York: Penguin Books, 1981.
- Plato, The Laws. Translated by Trevor Saunders. New York: Penguin Books, 1970.
- Rich, Adrienne, 1980, “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence” in Women, Sex, and Sexuality. Edited by Catharine Stimpson and Ethel Spector Person. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Sandel, Michael J., 1995, “Moral Argument and Liberal Toleration: Abortion and Homosexuality” in New Communitarian Thinking: Persons, Virtues, Institutions, and Communities. Edited by Amitai Etzioni. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
- Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, 1990, Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Shilts, Randy, 1993, Conduct Unbecoming: Gays and Lesbians in the U.S. Military. New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Spargo, Tasmin, 1999, Foucault and Queer Theory. New York: Totem Books.
- Stychin, Carl F., 2005, “Being Gay” Government and Opposition, Vol.40: 90-109.
- Sullivan, Andrew, 1995, Virtually Normal: An Argument about Homosexuality. New York: Knopf.
- Weitham, Paul J., 1997, “Natural Law, Morality, and Sexual Complementarity” in Sex, Preference, and Family: Essay on Law and Nature. Edited by David M. Estlund and Martha C. Nussbaum. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Wilson, James Q., 1996, “Against Homosexual Marriage” Commentary, Vol.101, No.3 (March): 34-39.
How to cite this entry. Preview the PDF version of this entry at the Friends of the SEP Society. Look up this entry topic at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO). Enhanced bibliography for this entry at PhilPapers, with links to its database.

Painting (c.1610) of Nicolas Poussin (1594-1665) entitled "The Triumph of Neptune and
Click on image for full size
Image courtesy of the Philadelphia Museum of Art: The George W. Elkins Collection.
Amphitrite was one of the sea-nymphs called the Nereids. One day the sea god Poseidon saw her dancing and fell desperately in love with her. He promptly asked her to marry him but unfortunately she refused.
Not discouraged by Amphitrite's refusal, Poseidon (Neptune) sent one of his servants, a dolphin to convince her. The dolphin pleaded Neptune's cause so well that
she changed her mind. Neptune and Amphitrite married and as a reward for his help, Neptune placed the image of the dolphin among the stars as the constellation Dolphinus, the Dolphin.
Among their children was a son, Triton, whose name was given to the principal moon of the planet Neptune. They also had a daughter, Rhodes after whom is named the island of Rhodes.
The next largest moon of the planet Neptune was discovered by Gerard P. Kuiper in 1949 and named Nereid to celebrate Amphitrite.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
on science education, ranging from evolution
, classroom research
, and the need for science and math literacy
You might also be interested in:
Ahsonnutli was the sky father and chief god for the Navajo. He created heaven, Earth, and the sky. Each of the four directions, or cardinal points, are supported by a giant. Each direction is symbolized...more
Amphitrite was one of the sea-nymphs called the Nereids. One day the sea god Poseidon saw her dancing and fell desperately in love with her. He promptly asked her to marry him but unfortunately she refused....more
Aphrodite was the Greek goddess of love and beauty. She was known to the Romans as Venus. To the perfection of her figure and the purity of her features she added an innocent grace. On her sweet face she...more
In Greek mythology, Apollo was the son of Jupiter(in Greek Zeus) and Leto (Letona). He was the god of the Sun, logic, and reason, and was also a fine musician and healer. Leto travelled all over Greece...more
According to an ancient Greek legend, the figure of a gigantic crab was placed in the nighttime sky by the goddess Hera to form the constellation Cancer. Hera swore to kill Heracles, the most famous Greek...more
In the Northern Hemisphere sky is the constellation Cepheus, king of Ethiopia, and that of his wife Cassiopeia. Cassiopeia claimed that she and her daughter Andromeda were more beautiful than the sea nymphs,...more
According to Navajo mythology, the Milky Way was created by the mischievous behavior of the god, Coyote. When the world was created, the Holy People gathered around Black God to place the stars in the...more

Learning Goals and Objectives
Goal 1: Students will demonstrate knowledge of the major concepts, historical and theoretical perspectives, and empirical findings in microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Goal 2: Students will demonstrate ability to apply economic principles and theories to a range of economic and social problems and issues.
Goal 3: Students will understand and apply basic research methods in economics, including data analysis and reporting.
Goal 4: Students will use critical and creative thinking skills and hone communication skills.

A comprehensive history of the 82nd Airborne Division in World War II, from an officer of that famed unit.
Wartime Chief of Staff George Marshall viewed airborne troops, at the division level, as a means to transform the battlefield as a whole, and incorporated the idea in his 1941 draft invasion plan for April 1943. He backed the officers like Matthew Ridgway and James Gavin who brought the division into existence and organized its tactics and supplies. However, after the unit's first mission in Sicily, Eisenhower, who was unsure of a deployment based on relatively independent small units acting on their own initiative, wanted the division units disbanded. Marshall prepared a “Plan C” for Eisenhower's consideration for D-Day in 1944, suggesting a proposal to drop two or three divisions of airborne troops into the Orleans Gap 85 miles inland from the Normandy beaches to cut German supply lines and communications. Marshall called this proposal “vertical envelopment.” As LoFaro ably shows, this strategic conception was subordinated to both staff caution and inter-allied intrigue, which limited the application of the unit's potential but not the heroism of its troopers in combat against the Germans. They were never deployed in the way Marshall envisioned. LoFaro singles out as exemplary both Ridgway and Gavin, who led their troops from the front.
A tour de force for military historians and WWII buffs, and a lesson on the leadership skills required to effectively conceive and coordinate a mission.

Gov‘t strengthens regulations on asbestos levels
The government said Tuesday it will tighten regulations on the use of asbestos by examining levels of the carcinogenic construction material in public buildings and other sites.
Asbestos exposure becomes a health concern when high concentrations of asbestos fibers are inhaled over time, causing asthma, respiratory disease or even lung cancer. South Korea has banned the material's use in new construction projects since the late 1990s for health and safety reasons.
At a weekly Cabinet meeting presided over by Prime Minister Kim Hwang-sik, the government passed an enforcement ordinance to require all state or public institution buildings with a total floor area of 500 square meters or more to survey their asbestos levels.
Buildings with at least 50 square meters of asbestos-containing material will have to take control measures, Cabinet members agreed.
The government said it will also limit the permissible level of asbestos near sites removing the material to 0.01 part per cubic centimeter.
Any imports or production of material possibly containing asbestos will need the approval of the environment minister, it added. (Yonhap)

The late Harvard law professor Derrick Bell joins the list of radical bogeyman influences on Barack Obama – alongside the activist and educator Bill Ayers and the Chicago community leader and pastor Jeremiah Wright. Bell, one of the originators of "critical race theory," has been recently "discovered" by conservative commentators, who claim that Bell was a “radical” and a “racist” – and a dangerous influence on the young, naïve then-student Obama.
Riled-up conservatives got some things right: Bell was, undoubtedly, a radical in that he dared to challenge the prevailing idea and notions of society on which this society was based. And he did have an influence – as he did on many of his students – on Obama, possibly for the better. The issue where his detractors stumble is the notion of "critical race theory," lumping in a genuinely progressive view on society with radical, violent racism. Bell never advocated for a violent overthrow of society; he only asked that society consider what prejudices it secretly carried.
Critical race theory assumes that the causes of racial inequality were not necessarily the products of institutionalized legal oppression alone – from slavery to Jim Crow to segregation – but were also perpetuated by social institutions, attitudes, and ideologies. Dismantling legal racism was only the first step in a long road to equality.
Tearing down formal racial barriers was one thing. That was the goal of the Civil Rights movement, requiring the bravery, selflessness, and strength of millions to shame and discredit racism’s legal protection. It took a tremendous, coordinated national effort – and finally, in some cases, the long arm of the federal government and the military – to shatter segregation but this was done at little cost – except maybe a blow to inflated egos and pride – to dominant white society. Political, economic, and social power was still – overwhelmingly and disproportionately – in the hands of the white middle- and upper-classes.
The next step – and what critical race theory prescribes – is to make progress in establishing justice for all, ensuring – in some distant future – that equal opportunities are truly available regardless of background. This is where things get rather tricky and where critical race theory made its most important criticisms. Racism wasn’t embedded in any single legal structure – it wasn’t just prevalent in slavery, or segregation, or in always and only electing a white president – it had, and has, deep-seated roots in perceptions, ideas, and society. In other words, it was institutional. Race, and issues about race, pervades practically all interracial interactions, distorting – consciously and subconsciously – attitudes and policies.
This idea isn’t so far-fetched or outdated as critics of Bell’s work might make it out to be. It wasn’t so long ago that the dominant narrative on welfare depicted a sub-class of government-dependent African-Americans. Perceptions of criminality – and attendant conviction and incarceration rates – also paint a heavily racially-skewed picture in contemporary America. Immigration laws in certain Southern states may no longer explicitly mention race but instead rely on other racially-suggestive criteria to demand “one’s papers."
And race still divides society at large. In a supposedly-national economic downturn, African Americans still suffer the highest unemployment rate.
So when conservatives decry Bell as a radical, it’s true. He was radical in the sense that he wanted society to truly understand how race and racism had shaped America – and in that way, he wanted to revolutionize society. He saw the fight for justice as an ongoing struggle, requiring constant evaluation and reevaluation. The dismantling of legal structures of oppression was not enough – and never sufficient in of itself. Justice, instead, required a constant struggle and vigilance – and courage, always courage to see what was needed and what could be done – to probe and analyze the deeper, underlying mechanisms of race.
And if Obama picked up that lesson, then it made him a better man and – possibly – a better president.
Photo Credit: Wikimedia Commons

(SOURCE: University of Colorado Cancer Center, news release, Sept. 24, 2012)
SUNDAY, Sept. 30 (HealthDay News) -- Mailing sun-protection kits, which contain information about the dangers of exposure to the sun's harmful UV rays and skin cancer, as well as swim shirts, hats and sunscreen, increases the number of people who take steps to protect their children from sun exposure, according to a new study.
Researchers from the Colorado School of Public Health and the University of Colorado Cancer Center found that the kits prompted more people to provide their kids with sun-protective clothing, hats and sunscreen. The kits also encouraged more people to avoid midday sun.
The investigators noted that because the kits were inexpensive and delivered by mail, they could be widely distributed.
"This is a low-cost, effective intervention that could be an important component in efforts to reduce sun exposure in children during the years that they acquire much of their risk for skin cancer," the study's first author, Lori Crane, investigator at the Cancer Center and chair of the department of community and behavioral health at the Colorado School of Public Health, said in a news release from the center.
The study involved 676 children, all 6-year-olds, and their parents. All participants were surveyed to assess their level of sun-protective behaviors as well as parents' knowledge about melanoma and their understanding of their child's lifetime risk for this form of skin cancer. Skin exams also revealed the children's level of tanning and number of potentially dangerous moles they had. Half of the participating families were randomly selected to receive sun-protection kits in the mail in April and May of 2005, 2006 and 2007.
The study, published in the October issue of the American Journal of Preventive Medicine, revealed that those who received the sun-protection kits gained more awareness about sun exposure and had greater adherence to sun-protective behaviors. The most significant behavioral changes the people reported were those emphasized in each yearly kit, the researchers noted.
"After we emphasized long clothing in the spring of 2005, we saw a difference in clothing behavior in the summers of 2005 and 2006, not in 2007. Then after emphasizing hats in 2006, we saw a difference in hat use that year. And then after highlighting shade in 2007, we saw a corresponding increase in parents' awareness and use of shade as a sun-protective behavior," Crane explained in the news release.
More research is needed to determine how the kits affect children's risk for skin cancer and if it changes behavior in the long term, the study authors added.
The researchers warned in the news release that children and teens who develop a blistering sunburn have a more than doubled risk of skin cancer in adulthood, and long-term sun exposure accumulated over many years may be equally harmful.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more about sun protection.
Copyright © 2013 ScoutNews, LLC. All rights reserved.
HealthDayNews articles are derived from various sources and do not reflect federal policy. healthfinder.gov does not endorse opinions, products, or services that may appear in news stories. For more information on health topics in the news, visit Health News on healthfinder.gov.

Monday, April 04, 2005
Origin of the term "Sons of the Republic"
It has often been inquired of the Sons of the Republic regarding the origin of our name. Granted, there are other names that are shorter and more easily entered into a Web browser. However, the term has significance to us for a number of reasons.
First, we are, after all, sons of the Republic of the United States of America. We were born and raised in this blessed land. We owe what we have, what we are, and what we will become in our lifetimes to our forebears, our liberties as protected by our government, and most of all, the God that created us and this "more perfect union."
The term "Son of the Republic," however, has additional and less well known significance. The following is a reprint of an account told by General George Washington while at Valley Forge, PA. In this account, General Washington tells of receiving a heavenly messenger who refers to him as "Son of the Republic."
Read account of General George Washington's experience at Valley Forge...

Smithsonian American Art Museum: Teaching with 19th-Century Art
"Landscape with Rainbow"
Suzannah Niepold: Alright, gather up where you can see this painting. I'm covering up the label on purpose; I want you to look before we get any sort of background information. What's the whole picture about?
Teacher 1: I begin by looking for what's underneath the rainbow.
Suzannah Niepold: Okay. What is underneath the rainbow?
Teachers: A home. A church; it looks like a church.
Suzannah Niepold: So you notice this tiny little house, sometimes that takes a while to see. And that's at the foot of the rainbow; so what's that about? Why did the artist do that?
Teacher 2: Well, homestead. Out west that was the big American dream—have your own land, have your own house, and not be subject to anybody's control.
Suzannah Niepold: Fantastic. So that's the American dream—to have your own spot surrounded by land. Okay. What else do you notice? We've used the words beauty, paradise, how else would you describe this particular landscape?
Teachers: Vast, open.
Teacher 3: You've got two little [unintelligible] over here. I mean, it's not totally alone but it's pretty [unintelligible].
Suzannah Niepold: You're not totally alone, but you don't have right next-door neighbors to deal with. The house is really small; it is really hard to see. What does the artist do to make sure your eye goes there eventually? How does he point it out?
Teachers: The rainbow.
Suzannah Niepold: Right, it's right at the end of the rainbow. But that really wasn't enough for him. How else does your eye go there?
Teacher 4: You've got that slope coming from here too that angles up.
Suzannah Niepold: You have what coming up?
Teacher 4: The slope, the road. It comes up right here and you've got a lot of water right here.
Suzannah Niepold: Absolutely.
[unintelligible mummers and answers from visitors]
Suzannah Niepold: Fantastic, you have all of these lines—this little sort of drop of light leading up here, the water, the path, the pointing. So that really let's you know that this is the main subject of the story. It's kind of the American dream. The title is Landscape with Rainbow, it was painted in 1859, and the artist is Robert Duncanson, Robert Scott Duncanson. So, if this is painted in 1859, why would you choose this subject at about that time in American history? Lets consider, first of all, what's going on. . . .
Teacher 5: People are beginning to go West, also.
Teacher 6: The American dream, with all the politics going on, is in some ways disappearing.
Suzannah Niepold: The American dream, this idea has come up several times, so that's really maybe challenged, is that what you're saying?
Teacher 6: I'm saying with the conflict, the regional conflict, some of the ideals of America are in question.
Suzannah Niepold:: The other thing to add that isn't on this label—but it is available on our website in the biography of the artist—is that this artist is African American. Does that change the painting for you at all? Okay, I'm hearing "Oh, oh, interesting."
Teacher 3: Going north to the promised land.
Suzannah Niepold:: So it's not just the American dream, it's the promised land?
Teacher 1: Yeah, but then why would he put two white people there?
Teacher 3: Dominant cultures.
Teacher 2: Because he's hiding behind his work. His work's not going to be respected. He's an African American. So he paints white people on it because a white man's going to look at a painting with white people in it, they're not going to look at a painting if there's a black one in it.
Suzannah Niepold: It's going to change the meaning. If you’re thinking of contemporary viewers, you're right; it's going to change the meaning. Duncanson was funded by abolitionists, and their goal was to show how ridiculous this idea [was] that a race was lesser by showing how skilled an African American artist could be. So he's showing off technical skill, as well as maybe this dream—this kind of American dream on the eve of the Civil War.
There are kind of three eras of African American art. Everything before the Harlem Renaissance in the 1920s is kind of what you see here of trying to say, "We're just as good; this is ridiculous, we can do everything that you can do." It's not until the Harlem Renaissance that it's saying, "We don't have to show your world, we can show our own."
"Among the Sierra Nevada, California"
Teacher 1: Wouldn't you like to just be standing right there on the water?
Teacher 2: Okay, that's the whole point. That's what you're supposed to do. That's what he was doing. He's been on traveling shows to encourage people go to out West.
Teacher 1: Oh!
Teacher 2: So you got it.
Suzannah Niepold: In fact the way the curators hung this, with this curtain here is meant to kind of hint at that history. And that Bierstadt painted these giant landscapes and that he would tour with them, and he would keep them behind a curtain and you would pay admission. Then he would whip back the curtain. But how does Bierstadt accomplish what we just talked about? How does he make you want to step into this landscape and just say, "Wow!"
Teacher 2: Its size.
Teacher 3: It's a huge picture. It's not just a picture [where] you're like, "Hey, I wonder what that is?"
Teachers: It's like a window; it looks peaceful.
Suzannah Niepold: Peaceful. How does he create this idea of peacefulness?
Teachers: The deer; the calm water; calm waterfalls; the light; the soft clouds; the softness of the whole picture.
Teacher 3: It's almost alluding kind of like Heaven and angels right where all the top comes out and the clouds are. You kind of think you would see this in a church or whatever, and a church is supposed to be one of the most peaceful places.
Teacher 1: And everything goes up. All the trees go up, the mountains go up, everything is pointing up.
Suzannah Niepold: Things that you notice and the specific details that you're pointing out. Like how still the water is and how the deer—they're not spooked, there's nothing coming up behind them. And we have this . . . some people call it the "Godly light" kind of peeking through. What role does God play in this period of American history? Why might he have a part of this landscape, or why might he. . . .
Teacher 1: Manifest destiny. God wants us to go there.
Suzannah Niepold: Manifest destiny. God wants us to go there.
Teacher 2: When was this painted?
Suzannah Niepold: Look at the label over here.
Suzannah Niepold: 1868. Yes, it's called Among the Sierra Nevada. So it's California in 1868. So, again, why might he paint this in 1868?
Teacher 3: It's after the Civil War. It's a calming . . . well, it's supposed to be calming because what's really going on between the South and the North during Reconstruction still is not very calm. And this is an escape. It's an escape for everyone.
Teacher 4: But it's also the year that the Transcontinental Railroad is finished.
Suzannah Niepold: But it's funny that you don't see any of that, right? You don't see the modernity, the advancement of civilization has no place here; it's still this ideal. And I think it's going to what you're saying is that the Civil War ripped up the East Coast. If you search our website for Civil War photographs, we have plenty, you'll see just destroyed landscapes. You just walked down that hallway past Niagara and all these sort of "New Eden"-y paintings. We sort of saw ourselves as the new world, new opportunity, and the Civil War maybe destroyed that image a little bit. And so the East Coast loses its "shininess" and we start looking out here for our peace and our majesty and our hope.
Teacher 1: May I?
Suzannah Niepold: Go ahead.
Teacher 1: It's like a staircase almost, with the sides. It goes up there, and it goes on, and it takes you into. . . .
Suzannah Niepold: To make sure your eye goes all the way back there.
"Storm King on the Hudson"
Suzannah Niepold: Okay, let's start with this one just by looking at the right-hand side; just block out—just pretend the other half isn't there. Okay, so, it's nice and peaceful, how else would you describe it?
Teacher 1: Old-school. You see the boats with the sails and the hand fishing in the rowboat. It's kind of the way they've always done it.
Suzannah Niepold: Okay, so the way it's always been done. And what is being done? What's going on on these boats?
Teacher 2: In the front one they’re fishing.
Suzannah Niepold: And how are they powered?
Teacher 3: It's manual.
Suzannah Niepold: Still on the right side. So [by] oar. It's manpower.
Teachers: Sailing; wind; natural.
Suzannah Niepold: Alright, switching to the left-hand side, what do you see over there?
Teacher 4: Pollution.
Suzannah Niepold: Yeah, it's funny when we look at it with our eyes you see smog, pollution, this horrible environmental travesty. How might they have seen it in 1866?
Teachers: Progress; power of progress.
Suzannah Niepold: So you have to consider the transition in how our modern eyes see things versus how they might have been perceived back then. Different kinds of power—maybe steam power, progress, industry. Look at the landscape on both sides, how is it different?
Teacher 5: This over here [on the right] is clear, you can see…
Teacher 6: It's greener.
Suzannah Niepold: So which do you think the artist liked better, the "old school" or the "new school." Which did he support in this painting and how can you tell? I don't know the answer to this. It's a matter of. . . .
Teacher 1: To me it looks like old school because he paints that front rowboat so very, very clear; sitting from back here you can see just about every detail of the gentlemen.
Teacher 7: But the industry is made larger. It's much larger; more powerful. And it's closer to you. So he wants you to look at this.
Suzannah Niepold: We talked some about light and dark, and how artists can use that. Which side has the sunlight?
Teacher 5: They both do. You're focusing here, and then you're focusing there. It's almost like you're doing this—
Teacher 7: When you look at the sky, this one is lighter [right side]; but when you look down, this one is lighter [left side].
Teacher 5: Yeah, on the water. He's presenting both sides of the issue.
[Indecipherable, multiple teachers talk at once]
Teacher 1: It's like you said, most of the sunlight is on this side [left side], but look at the smoke coming from it. It's changing it, it's turning it dark.
Suzannah Niepold: I want to come back to what you were saying though; because look there is sort of this blue sky up here, and here it's the man-made smoke that's covering that up. But here [right side], we have the natural storm. So again, he's almost setting up that equivalent.
Teacher 8: Well, you just said the word storm. Is the storm bringing in this change?
"Lee Surrendering to Grant at Appomattox"
Suzannah Niepold: You came from Gettysburg—am I right about that?
Teachers: Yes ma'am; yeah.
Suzannah Niepold: So the Civil War is fresh in your mind, right? This is a tiny little scene of Appomattox—feel free to come closer, maybe, you know, take a look, and then let someone else come in. It is a challenge sometimes to work with these much smaller paintings. This is the scene of the surrender; Grant and Lee are meeting in order to officially end the war. Although of course, it wouldn't exactly end right at this moment. How has the artist chosen to present the scene? If you're all the way over here, feel free to come in and fill in the front.
Teacher 1: You can tell who won.
Suzannah Niepold: You can tell who won. That's very interesting. How can you tell who won?
Teacher 1: Well, because the Union soldier is in the front, and he's got his hand on the desk and his whole chest is facing out towards the audience. It's almost like a teacher stance with somebody, if you're scolding a child. You're looking at them like, "I can't believe you just did this." That's what he's doing. Because Lee was such a highly regarded officer in the military at the time, it's almost like he's looking at him like "Why did you do this to yourself, and to us?" Kind of like he's being scolded.
Suzannah Niepold: What about Lee though? It's not exactly like he's cowering in a corner. How does the artist show him? How did he show this highly respected, regarded man in this tough moment?
Teacher 2: I think he's got his hands up like, "I can't believe I had to do this, that it came to this."
Suzannah Niepold: So it's very hard for him to do this. What else do you notice about the scene?
Teacher 3: You've got light right on the midline. So that . . . I don't know if that means like, the light, the focus is in the middle where they're agreeing, maybe, to quit fighting.
Suzannah Niepold: That is, maybe, the highlight of the moment where the two sides are coming together. And let's use that to talk about composition. It is two sides, right? With the uniforms. How are those two sides equal? Are they?
Teacher 4: We've got three soldiers on one end and two soldiers on the other end.
Suzannah Niepold: Okay, so there's a little bit more weight over here. Even if you just look at the height of the two generals, [it's] roughly equal the way they're presented. You're right that Grant is slightly forward in that sort of authority stance. But if you look into surrender orders, the fact that Lee was allowed to keep his sword is a huge step. What does this say about what the North was hoping for the end of the war? The way that this scene is presented in terms of a surrender. How did they want to treat the South now that everything was over?
Teacher 1: In this moment, it looks like they want to . . . it's like brothers fighting, [it's] done, over, let's go back to the way things were, let's forget about it. And of course we're history teachers, and we know that doesn't actually happen.
Teacher 4: Yeah, but when you look at this guy's—
Teacher 3: He's not real happy.
Teacher 4: [He's like,] "Hey, you know, I really don't care about this."
Teacher 3: Grant wasn't wearing his general bars.
Suzannah Niepold: A few things are historically accurate. We know that he had mud on his pants, he had rushed there on his horse.
Teacher 3: He had borrowed a jacket, so he wasn't wearing his general's jacket.
Suzannah Niepold: But he wasn't wearing his general's jacket. So anytime you see an inaccuracy—or you see something you know is actually wrong from the way it happened. For me, that's actually the most valuable part of an artwork because that's pointing out a decision that the artist made in order to help tell a story.
Teacher 3: Washington Crossing the Delaware.
Suzannah Niepold: Exactly! So actually if we read the accounts of this scene, and there are many of them, there were a ton of people in this room. So why might the artist have chosen just to show a few?
Teacher 3: Make it more intimate.
Suzannah Niepold: How does that help tell the story.
Teacher 1: He had to illustrate the significance of the famous Lee having to surrender, which ultimately became the turning point in the war.
Suzannah Niepold: Okay, so it highlights him more if there are fewer people in the room, okay.

You need to see your doctor.
Doctors call yellow discoloration of the eyes jaundice. Its almost always related to elevated levels of bilirubin in the blood. This is especially true if you also have urine that is tan or brown in color.
Bilirubin is produced during the normal turnover of red blood cells. When old red blood cells die, hemoglobin is released into the blood stream. The old hemoglobin is converted to bilirubin.
Bilirubin circulating in the blood is picked up by the liver. Then, its processed by liver cells for delivery to the bile ducts. In a healthy person, the process keeps the blood bilirubin level less than 1.2 milligrams per deciliter.
There are many reasons for high blood bilirubin levels. These include:
- Excessive destruction of red blood cells. If many red cells break down at the same time (a problem called hemolytic anemia), this produces more bilirubin than the liver can handle.
- Liver cell abnormalities. Hepatitis from any cause can impair the liver cells' ability to release bilirubin into the bile. So, it backs up into the blood stream.
- Liver enzyme deficiencies. Otherwise normal liver cells may have an enzyme defect that does not allow the normal movement of bilirubin into the bile ducts. The most common disorder is Gilbert's syndrome.
- Blocked bile duct. A blocked bile duct from a stone or tumor can raise the blood bilirubin level.
- Cirrhosis. A damaged, scarred liver cannot process bilirubin normally. It will also elevate the blood level.

Cholera in Sierra Leone - update
8 September 2012 - The Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) is closely working with partners at national and international levels to step up response to the cholera outbreak that has affected Sierra Leone since the beginning of the year.
As of 5 September 2012, a total of 16 360 cases including 255 deaths with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 1.6% have been reported from 12 out of 13 districts. The western area of the country where the capital city of Freetown is located, reported more than 60% of all new cases.
The President of Sierra Leone has declared the cholera epidemic a "humanitarian crisis". A high level Presidential Cholera Task Force was established to oversee coordination, mobilization of resources and guide the response. A multi-sectoral approach to the response has been adopted involving the MOHS and other line ministries such as Finance, Information and Communication, and local governments together with partners and stakeholders.
With support from national and international partners and donors, including UNICEF, Oxfam, British Red Cross, Save the Children, Care, Concern MSF, DFID, OCHA, IRC, and WHO, the MOHS is scaling up the response particularly in the areas of coordination of the overall response, surveillance and case management.
A Cholera Control and Command Center (C4) has been established at the WHO Country Office in Freetown to strengthen coordination, and support the MOHS and other health providers to implement activities related to the Cholera Preparedness and Response Operation Plan (CPROP), in order to bring the epidemic under control as soon as possible. The C4 will also provide information to guide the decision-making of the national task force.
Emphasis is being placed on early detection of cases and timely provision of treatment at the district levels in order to reduce deaths. Cholera cases are managed in cholera treatment units (CTUs) and where there are no established CTUs, emphasis is placed on designating specific areas within the health facilities for isolation purposes.
WHO through the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) has provided experienced case management and laboratory experts from the International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B) to build capacity among health-care workers and laboratory technicians in case management and laboratory diagnosis.
Laboratories at the national level are being supplied with appropriate materials and reagents to collect, transport and analyze laboratory specimens. Laboratory confirmation is important, particularly in new areas experiencing the cholera outbreak.
There are ongoing community interventions on cholera prevention and control activities. More than 200 traditional healers have been oriented on cholera. Community meetings are organized in Freetown to raise awareness of the importance of avoiding drinking water from unprotected water sources. Text messages are also being used to channel information to the public by telephone companies. UNICEF and other partners are supporting water, sanitation and hygiene activities.
With respect to this event, WHO does not recommend that any travel or trade restrictions be applied to Sierra Leone.

Space Station Deploys Five CubeSats
Five research CubeSats – all with Amateur Radio communication systems – were successfully deployed from the International Space Station beginning around 1430 UTC today. The satellites were launched from the Kibo station module using a specially equipped robotic arm.
The group includes…
TechEdSat, a collaboration among NASA’s Ames Research Center; San Jose State University; the Swedish National Space Board (SNSB) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), will be sending AX.25 packet telemetry at 437.465 MHz. The TechEdSat team is asking for assistance from amateurs in decoding and relaying data. Follow the mission on their Twitter page. More information about decoding and submitting packet data is available here.
FITSAT-1, designed and built at the Fukuoka Institute of Technology, Japan, will test the feasibility of high-speed microwave data downlinks in low Earth orbit. It will transmit telemetry on 437.445 MHz and 5.84 GHz. They welcome signal reports from amateurs at their website.
WE WISH, from the Meisei Electric Company Radio Club, Japan, will send CW telemetry and occasional SSTV images at 437.505 MHz.
RAIKO, designed and built by students at Wakayama University, Japan, will transmit high-speed data at 2.2 and 13 GHz.
F-1, built by students at FPT University in Hanoi, Vietnam will send telemetry at 145.980 and 437.485 MHz using 1200-baud packet and CW. Amateurs are asked to monitor and submit reports. More information is available here.

If you work in a loud environment, you have many options for protecting your ears. Why protect your ears? Prolonged exposure to loud noise can damage hair cells in your ears, leading to permanent hearing loss.
You may have to try several different types of ear protection until you find one that is comfortable enough to wear for the length of your work shift.
Expandable foam plugs are made from a formable material. You can roll the plugs into a small cylinder, then insert them into your ear canals. The foam will expand into the shape of your ear. People with smaller ears and ear canals may have trouble rolling the plugs small enough to fit into the ear canal, although some manufacturers do offer smaller sized plugs. However, you should make sure your hands are clean before rolling and inserting the plugs.
Pre-molded plugs may be made from silicone, plastic, or rubber. They are often available in several sizes, and should seal the ear canal without being uncomfortable. You may need to try several different sizes to find one that fits right; you may also need a different size for each ear. Pre-molded plugs are relatively inexpensive, washable, and reusable.
Canal caps are earplugs on a flexible band. The band may go over the head, under the chin, or behind the neck. When the work area is quiet, you can use the band to hang the earplugs around your neck. The earplugs are handy when the noise level goes up again.
Earmuffs block noise by completely covering the outer ear. Ear cup size varies; many different models are available. If you have a heavy beard, sideburns, or glasses, you may have a hard time getting the earmuffs to completely seal out noise. Earmuffs can also be hot and heavy in some environments.

The Names Of The Nine Muses
The nine Muses were daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne, daughter of Gaia and Uranus, the personification of memory. According to the myth, after his prevalence over the Titans, Zeus was united with Mnemosyne for nine consecutive nights on the mountain of Pieria. One year later, Mnemosyne gave him nine daughters, the nine Muses that personify the inspiration for creation and protectresses of all the arts. Their names were Calliope, Cleio, Euterpe, Thaleia, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Erato, Polyhymnia and Urania. Leader of the muses’ chorus was Apollo, god of sun and music and for this he is often called “musagetis” (muses’ leader). The oldest chant of the muses is supposed to be the one that they were singing when the Olympians defeated the Titans, to celebrate the birth of a new world. The Muses were living in the mountain of Olympus, where they were entertaining the gods with their music – other locations that people believed as the Muses’ residences are either the mountains of Pieria or in Elikon or even around the fountains of Hippokrene and Aganippe, where many poets were going to find their inspiration.
According to a myth, Pieria’s king, Pieros had also nine daughters that are often mistaken for muses. The Pierides dared to challenge the Muses on a contest, on which of course the Muses prevailed. After this, Apollo, as a punishment, transformed Pieros’ daughters into magpies. Also the Sirens dared to challenge the Muses on a song contest – the Sirens were winged creatures that by bewitching sailors with their song, they were calling them to come to their shores and then they would eat them (we find them in the myths of the Argonauts and in Odyssey). Naturally the Muses prevailed on this contest as well, they chopped their opponents’ wings and the Sirens were drowned in to the sea.
There is no specific myth about the Muses. We mostly find them intervening as bards (singers) in the great feasts of the gods. They appear at the wedding of Thetis and Peleus, parents of Achilles, or at the wedding of Cadmus, founder of Thebes, and Harmony, daughter of Ares and Aphrodite. They also appear as judges in musical contests, such as the one between Apollo and Marsyas. Marsyas was a Silenus, a kind of satyr (creatures with goat-legs and horns on their heads, as Panas was, that were usually Dionysus’ companions). According to the myth, goddess Athena created the double-flute using deer bones and that she played the new instrument in a symposium of the gods. But Hera and Aphrodite laughed at her as her cheeks inflated while she was blowing the flute. Athena became so frustrated, that she threw the flute, which fell on the land of Phrygia, cursing at the same time anyone that would find it. The flute was found by Marsyas – according to some myths Marsyas was actually the one that created the instrument – who was very proud of his discovery. Thinking that this was the finest music in the world, Marsyas on his pride dared to challenge Apollo, god of music, into a music contest. Apollo accepted the challenge and they agreed that the Muses were the most appropriate judges for this contest. At first where was no result, as both the flute and the lyre produced divine melodies. Then Apollo started playing his lyre by holding it upside down – of course Marsyas could not do the same with his flute.
The Muses ruled Apollo as winner and Marsyas’ punishment for challenging a god was terrible – Apollo hanged him from a tree (a pine or a platan tree) and skinned him. After this punishment thought, Apollo regretted for his act and on his sorrow he crushed his lyre and transformed Marsyas into a river.
Who Are The Nine Muses
Calliope: Calliope was at the highest rank, the first and most prominent among the Muses. Protector of all fine arts and particularly of Epic Poetry, she is the one that epic poets were invoking in order to gain her favour, to remember all their words and be inspired to praise the deeds of the heroes. “Tell me, o muse, about the ingenious man that travelled far for many years after he had conquered Troy’s sacred castle…” – this is how Homer’s Odyssey begins, with an invocation to the muse Calliope, to sing for him the deeds of Ulysses (Odysseus). Also in Iliad, Homer asks Calliope’s help to sing about the wrath of the mighty Achilles: “sing, goddess, the destructive wrath of Peleus’ son, Achilles, which brought countless woes upon the Achaeans and sent to Hades many valiant souls of heroes made them spoil for dogs and birds…”.
Calliope is often depicted wearing a golden crown – which according to Hesiod indicates her superiority among the Muses – and she is also carrying quills and tablets and sometimes a trumpet. Calliope, whose name means “she that has a beautiful face”, is considered to be the mother of the legendary musician Orpheus, by the god Apollo, and also mother of the famous musician Linos.
Cleio: Cleio was the muse of History. Her name derives from the word cleos (glory). Herodotus, known as the father of history, named his first book after this muse. Cleio is often depicted wearing a laurel garland and carrying parchments. She is considered mother of Hyacinth by the king Pieros.
Terpsichore: Terpsichore was initially the muse of Dance – her name means the one that likes to dance – and also the muse of Lyric Poetry. She is depicted holding a lyre and she is considered to be mother of the Sirens.
Melpomene: Melpomene was initially the muse of chants and lyric songs and then the muse of Tragedy (theatre). She is often depicted wearing a cypress garland and holding a tragedy mask on her left hand and a bat on her right. She also considered being the mother of the Sirens, by the river Achelous.
Thaleia: Thaleia was the muse of Comedy. She is often depicted holding a comedy mask and wearing an ivy garland.
Euterpe: Euterpe was the muse of Music and the art of flute. She is considered to be the mother of Ressus by the river Strymonas, chief of the Thracians, who was killed in the war of Troy by Diomedes, king of Argos. She is often depicted holding a flute and she was the one that gave the inspiration for the creation of Panas’ flute and Marsyas’ double flute – according to other myths Euterpe was the one that actually created the flute.
Polyhymnea: Polyhymnia, whose name means “many hymns”, was initially the muse that inspired the Hymns in honour of the gods and heroes and then she became the muse of Learning and Memorization. In the Roman times she was considered as the muse of Mimetic Art. She is always depicted pensive and sometimes she is mistaken for her mother, Mnemosyne.
Erato: Erato is the muse of Hymns and Lyric and Love Poetry. She is often depicted half-naked and she is the one that Apollonious from Rhodes invokes at his fourth book of Argonautica, in order to inspire him to sing about the love of Jason and Medea.
Urania:Urania was the muse of Astronomy. She is depicted wearing a star crown, holding the celestial sphere on her left hand and a diabetes on her right. She was also known for her prophetic abilities.
You may also interested in: Encyclopedia of Mythology
You may also interested in: Penguin Books Coupons
Author: Tessy Parker

|Travels in Tahiti|
Despite urbanization, much of Tahiti’s former beauty still remains. In the interior of the island, tropical forests ascend into the central mountains, and some of the forest trails end in lovely tall waterfalls, whose pools of clear fresh water are surrounded by lush vegetation. One of the best views on the island is from the overlook on Taharaa Point, which Captain Cook had once named “One-Tree Hill” for the large Banyan tree a few yards uphill from the lookout point. From here, the view across Matavai Bay toward Moorea (Tahiti’s sister island) is spectacular, framed with palm trees, Bougainvillea, and breadfruits. Matavai Bay was the place where the British explorer Samuel Wallis first anchored when he visited Tahiti in 1767, the first European to land on the island. The bay was also a favorite anchorage of Captain Cook, as famously depicted in a painting by William Hodges (ship’s artist during Cook’s second voyage of 1772-1775).
Not far from Taharaa Point is Point Venus, named for Captain Cook’s observations of that planet during his first voyage of 1768-1771. Cook set out to observe the ‘transit of Venus’ across the face of the sun (which astronomers at England’s Royal Observatory in Greenwich predicted would occur in 1769). The transit would be timed in three different parts of the world, and it was hoped that this information would allow the distance from the earth to the sun to be calculated. (Unfortunately, contemporary scientific instruments were not accurate enough to achieve this, despite Cook’s efforts.) Today, Point Venus is a popular beach and picnic spot. There is a lighthouse (built in 1867), tree-lined paths to walk along, several souvenir shops, and a (very un-Tahitian) hot dog stand. A look around reminds one how much things can change in two and a half centuries.
Another lovely spot on Tahiti is the Gauguin Museum, situated on the southeast of the island near the peninsula of Tahiti Iti (“Little Tahiti”). There is a scenic view over the bay toward the peninsula, whose green hills slope downward toward the coast. The artist Paul Gauguin lived and worked here in the 1890s, and the Tahitian-themed images he painted during this time did much to influence Western views of this island. The museum’s buildings encircle a wide expanse of grass, on which sit several tiki (traditional carved statues) and a memorial to Gauguin. Few of the artist’s original paintings are on display, but the exhibits provide a good description of his life on Tahiti, including a reconstruction of the house in which he lived.
Although only 40 minutes by high-speed ferry (the Arimiti 4, spacious, air conditioned, and populated mostly by Australian tourists), a visit to the neighboring island of Moorea is like a journey back in time, to what Tahiti once was like. Like Tahiti, Moorea is a high island, with volcanic peaks and a green carpet of vegetation, and fringing coral reefs. Now mainly geared toward tourism and agriculture, Moorea is a quiet island, where the pace of life is slow. The scenery here is even more breathtaking than on Tahiti. Strolling down the nearly empty roads lined with coconut palms and frangipani, with the mist-covered mountains rising in the distance, you really do feel like you are in the midst of a tropical paradise. I was amazed by the picturesqueness of the landscape. It seemed that almost every view could have been a painting, a perfect harmony of colors and contrasts: the shadowed greens and browns of the volcanic hills, the intense blue of the sky with its patches of white clouds, the clear lagoon with its shades of green and turquoise. Flowers and fruit grow in abundance along the roadsidesbright red hibiscus, pale fragrant tiare and frangipani, bananas, pineapples, breadfruit.
The breadfruit has an interesting history. This large, round, light-green fruit is native to French Polynesia, where it is known as uru or maiore. The fruit, which has a grainy texture, is a staple of Tahitian cooking. It is not really sweet, and is more comparable to a starchy vegetable like a potato. The bark of the tree is used to make a thin cloth called tapa. The breadfruit was first described by Cook’s naturalist Joseph Banks, who suggested transporting it to the West Indies to feed the enslaved Africans on plantations there. Captain William Bligh (who had accompanied Cook on his second voyage) set out to convey the plants, on his infamous voyage of 1787 aboard HMS Bounty. That ended rather badly (Bligh was set adrift in a small boat by his mutinying crew for 41 days, until he finally managed to make landfall in Timor), but Bligh made another attempt and successfully delivered the trees in 1791. Ironically, the slaves thought the fruit tasted bland, and it never really took off as a staple crop in the Caribbean.
On the way back to the ferry terminal, my travel companion and I spotted a humorous contrast to the lush surrounding vegetation: a cell phone tower disguised aswhat else?a palm tree. It was good for a laugh, but in a sense it also gives one pause, a sign that 21st century life is fast encroaching in this region.
There is at least one place in the Society Islands that still seems very far removed from the 21st century, and that is Tetiaroa. It is an atolla low-lying ring of coral islets (called motu) surrounding a shallow central lagoon. Although only 40 km from Tahiti, Tetiaroa seems about as remote as an island can be. The entire small atoll (55 km in circumference; 7 km in diameter) was owned by the reclusive actor Marlon Brando until his death in 2004, when the only hotel on the atoll was permanently closed. Regular transport to the island also ceased, and now the only way to get there is by chartered boat. We went by catamaran, leaving from Papeete harbor at 7 a.m. The two and a half hour sail was brisk and refreshing, spent sipping black coffee and chatting with the mostly French crew, one or two of whom were casting fishing lines from the stern and reeling in the occasional catch.
Website designed by Lisa Breslof and Jay Holmes
Copyright 2008 John Burroughs Association, All Rights Reserved
Content Specialist: Lisa Breslof
Webmaster: Jay Holmes

- The way copyright infringements are signalled in relation to lexicological content
- Do we want to emulate what others have done, or are we masters of our own destiny
- Where are the French, the Swahili, the Kannada and the words of all the other languages that are equally deserving attention
With WiktionaryZ we have the opportunity to use Wikipedia as our corpus. In Wikipedia we find the words as they are used today. When we concentrate our effort on these words, we provide added value to the information contained in Wikipedia and at the same time Wikipedia adds value to WiktionaryZ because it allows us to show words in context. In Wikipedia we have people from many countries that contribute, they do use words that are normal in their locale. With the "OED and AHD" we do not necessarily get these words.
It is not a bad thing that people interested in English concentrate on English. As such I welcome this effort. However, in my opinion the emphasis is too much on main languages like English. In these languages it is hard for WiktionaryZ to become relevant. To become relevant we have to do things that others do not. Relevancy can be gained in many ways; translation to minor languages is a way for some, counting the characters in a word makes is a way for others.
From my perspective, we become relevant by harbouring communities, special interest groups and allow them to make WiktionaryZ their project. When we maintain our core values of Freedom, of inclusiveness, of non-discriminatory access, of open standards we will be relevant to some if not to all.

More challenge, not less, turns kids onto math
William Johntz was casting about for ways to engage inner-city remedial students in math. Finally, it hit him: Give them harder material.Skip to next paragraph
Subscribe Today to the Monitor
The year was 1963. But the counterintuitive approach that the mathematician, psychologist, and math teacher set in motion during his lunch hours in Berkeley, Calif., is going strong four decades later.
The failure of all American students to excel at math, particularly at high levels, has become a top issue among US educators. But minority students are an even greater concern. According to the 1996 National Assessment for Educational Progress, 78 percent of black students and 68 percent of Hispanic eighth-graders scored below the basic level for math achievement, as opposed to 39 percent of white students.
Project SEED (Special Elementary Education for the Disadvantaged) is out to balance that equation - based on Mr. Johntz's hunch that such students connect far better with rigorous math than they do with the remedial fare they are often offered.
The Socratic method
Its approach has remained largely unchanged since its start. Mathematicians are recruited to teach algebra, geometry, and calculus to kids in Grades 3 to 8 in participating public schools. They're trained in what SEED officials call the "Socratic method" of teaching: rapid-fire delivery of a series of questions designed to stimulate student thought. In an ideal SEED lesson, the teacher poses between 140 and 150 questions, but never answers a single one. The students ultimately provide all the answers.
The class analyzes wrong answers as earnestly as correct ones, until everyone understands what works and why. In order to keep all engaged, every student is called on at least once during the lesson, although any student who isn't comfortable volunteering an answer may simply pass the question on to a classmate.
To keep things lively, the kids learn hand signals (a shake of the hands means "disagree" and a wave of the arms means "agree") so there is rarely a moment during class when the students are not physically participating in what's being said or put on the board.
SEED lessons have a crispness and energy that begins the moment the instructor steps in front of the blackboard and greets the students with the words, "Good morning [or afternoon], mathematicians." It carries on throughout the class as students are required to both use correct mathematical terms and demonstrate proper classroom etiquette when they provide answers, make comments, or ask questions.
Sixth-grader Aprile Reynolds, for example, has just spent the past 45 minutes engaged in a lively classroom discussion about the multiplication and division of exponents in algebraic equations. She's a student at an inner-city Philadelphia public middle school with test scores that sag well below the average. Her class is not a grouping of advanced students, but rather a mix of kids of all ability levels, including several classified as "special education" students.
Asked to sum up her feelings about algebra, Aprile shoots back: "Fun!"

For the first time ever, a child infected with HIV has been declared cured by scientists.
An unnamed two-year-old child in Mississippi no longer shows any detectable levels of HIV following aggressive treatment of antiretroviral drugs in its first days alive, and after receiving no medication for the past 10 months.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases announced the findings today, and they will be formally presented at a medical conference in Atlanta on Monday by doctors Deborah Persaud and Katherine Luzriaga, who lead the case.
This is only the second well-documented case of anyone being cured of HIV. Timothy Ray Brown, also known as the “Berlin Patient,” was cured in 2011 after receiving a stem cell transplant. The hope from today’s announcement, of course, is that scientists will be able to replicate the technique to help other children infected with HIV.
“Despite the fact that research has given us the tools to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV, many infants are unfortunately still born infected,” NIAID director Dr. Anthony Fauci said in a statement today. “With this case, it appears we may have not only a positive outcome for the particular child, but also a promising lead for additional research toward curing other children.”
The child was born prematurely to a mother who didn’t receive prenatal care or antiretroviral medication. The child began liquid antiretroviral treatment at just 30 hours, and it was discharged after a week in the hospital with slightly different liquid treatment. After a month, the detected viral load in the child had fallen significantly (less than 50 copies of HIV per millileter of blood, according to the NIAID). The child continued to receive treatment until it was 18 months old (January 2012).
When the child was tested again in the fall of 2012, doctors found undetectable levels of the virus. The child is now being treated by Dr. Hannah Gay at the University of Mississippi Medical Center.
“This case suggests that providing antiretroviral therapy within the very first few days of life to infants infected with HIV through their mothers via pregnancy or delivery may prevent HIV from establishing a reservoir, or hiding place, in their bodies and, therefore, achieve a cure for those children,” Dr. Persaud said in a statement today.
Today’s announcement will likely go down as a major milestone for how children with HIV are treated. We’ll be exploring similar medical milestones, as well as the rise of smart health technology in general, at our HealthBeat conference later this year.

- Special Sections
As I walked around our backyard, I noticed that our rose bushes and various perennial plants are becoming green and lush. The tulip and daffodil bulbs have sprouted, dotting our landscape with flowers in shades of red and yellow. After our mild winter, I am mapping out our container gardens and flower beds.
Yes, I like growing things. After all, â€śGardenâ€ť is my middle name. I couldnâ€™t resist saying that.
I canâ€™t wait to get my hands dirty and test out the skills I learned in the Master Gardener classes last year. If you never have considered participating in this Extension Service program available in most states, if not all, think about it.
Many people save gardening for their retirement years. Actually, gardening can have positive health benefits throughout life. Some researchers have found that when you live near a garden or participate in gardening as a child, you are more likely to show an interest in gardening as you grow older.
However, if childhood gardening wasnâ€™t part of your life, donâ€™t be deterred. Be aware of the health benefits and the satisfaction that comes with gardening. Gardening can increase our physical activity, improve our fruit and vegetable consumption, and promote mental health.
Some researchers have linked a decreased risk for diabetes and osteoporosis to the physical activity accumulated during gardening and other yard work. Physical activities, as well as balanced nutrition, are keys to managing diabetes. As we walk and lift, we put weight on our bones, which strengthens them and helps prevent osteoporosis.
People who grow vegetables are more likely to eat them. According to a Michigan State University survey of 766 adults, participating in a community garden resulted in eating more fruits and vegetables. In fact, they were 3.5 times as likely to eat fruits and vegetables five times per day.
Other studies have shown that gardening promotes bonding with your family and fosters life skills, including responsibility. If you have trouble sleeping or are coping with stressful life situations, gardening may help. Some researchers have found that gardening has a calming effect.
If you are inspired to garden but do not have a lot of space for gardening, consider planting in containers. Container gardens can be grown on a patio, step or even in a window box. Try a salsa garden with tomatoes and peppers or try growing herbs in a window box. Tending your minigarden will not take a lot of time but could provide you with quite a bit of food.
Here are some tips for planting in containers:
Be sure your container has drainage holes so extra water doesnâ€™t pool at the bottom and damage the roots. If you want to grow tomatoes, peppers or eggplant, gardening experts usually recommend 5-gallon containers. Smaller pots work well for green onions, lettuce and herbs.
Add potting mix, not plain soil from your yard. Your soil needs to drain well.
Choose seeds or plants. You can start your own seedlings in egg cartons or even an old cake pan. Fill the container with potting soil, add seeds and cover with about a half-inch of soil. Cover with a clear plastic bag, place in a warm, sunny area and water regularly. When the seedlings have four or more leaves, they are ready to transfer into the final pot.
Find a sunny spot for your container. If your plants arenâ€™t doing well in the spot you chose, move the container to a better place.
Water often and fertilize according to the directions on the container. Container gardens need to be watered more than regular gardens, ideally at least once every morning.
Add enough water on top of the soil so it begins to leak out the bottom.
Be sure to pull weeds regularly. Weeds compete for space, water, nutrients and sunlight.
For more information about growing plants and using your fresh produce and preserving it, see the NDSU Extension Service â€śGarden to Tableâ€ť materials available at http://www.ag.ndsu.edu/ndsuag/food-nutrition/from-garden-to-table.
Hereâ€™s a colorful one-skillet recipe that features fresh peppers and onions.
Fiesta Chicken and Vegetables
2 tsp. chili powder
1/4 tsp. pepper
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (1 pound total)
1 Tbsp. canola oil
1 (15-ounce) can kidney beans
1 cup corn (canned or frozen)
3/4 c. bell pepper, diced (red, green, yellow)
1/2 c. onion, diced
1 c. salsa
Combine the chili powder and pepper; rub over both sides of the chicken. In a large nonstick skillet, cook chicken in oil over medium heat for five to six minutes on each side or until meat thermometer reaches a temperature of 165 degrees. Remove and keep warm. Add the beans, corn, bell peppers, onion and salsa to skillet and bring to a boil. Reduce heat; cover and simmer for two to three minutes or until heated thoroughly. Transfer to serving dish and place chicken on top of the vegetable mixture.
Makes four servings. Each serving has 320 calories, 7 grams (g) of fat, 33 g of protein, 30 g of carbohydrate, 8 g of fiber and 370 milligrams of sodium.
Julie Garden-Robinson, Ph.D., R.D., L.R.D., is a North Dakota State University Extension Service food and nutrition specialist and associate professor in the Department of Health, Nutrition and Exercise Sciences.

Orange Oil and Limonene
The use of Orange Oil has become a popular alternative to harsh and sometimes dangerous household cleaners, pesticides and solvents. Because of its safeness and effectiveness, it is now considered an excellent alternative to many cleaning products and toxic chemicals that are often used as pesticides.
How Orange Oil Is Produced
The rind of an orange fruit contains glands that produce the essential Orange Oil. During the production of orange juice, this oil becomes a by-product through either steam distillation or extraction. The extraction process begins after the harvesting of oranges. The oranges are shipped to a processing and packaging plant where they are steam distilled for the production of orange juice. The essential oil of the Orange Oil is mainly composed of d-limonene that is extracted naturally from the orange rinds.
The Benefits of Orange Oil and Limonene
Limonene is considered environmentally friendly and relatively safe, which makes it a good alternative to harsh and toxic chemicals. With its powerful antiseptic abilities, it is a highly effective cleaning product. It also contains solvent properties that are often used in many products such as stain removers, strippers and adhesives. Due to its pesticide properties, it is now being used as a safe alternative to toxic poisons that are often used by the pesticide industry. Limonene is also the source of the citrus fragrance, giving Orange Oil products their pleasant citrus aroma. Due to the safeness of Limonene, which is the major ingredient of Orange Oil, using Orange Oil around plants, people and animals is considered a better choice than potentially dangerous chemicals. Because of the many positive benefits of Orange Oil, it can be found in many building supply centers and retail stores as replacements for solvents, household cleaners and pesticides.
Safety Issues of Orange Oil
Although Orange Oil is considered safe, it can cause mild skin irritation and may irritate the respiratory tract. Gloves should be worn as well as proper ventilation when using Orange Oil. These products should always be kept in a safe place away from children. They are considered safer than other synthetic and caustic chemicals, but Orange Oil can still be toxic and should never be ingested. Orange Oil products are also flammable.
Making Orange Oil Extract
The essential oil from oranges offers many health benefits. To make at home the orange peels must be dried and then grinded. They are then placed in a mason jar and covered with grain alcohol. The jar should then be shaken vigorously for a couple of minutes and then shaken again in a couple of days. Using grain alcohol that has been warmed will help produce more orange oil. The mixture should then be drained through a coffee filter and poured into a shallow dish. Cover the dish using a cloth material to allow the mixture to breathe and evaporate the alcohol. Once this is completed, the remaining liquid will be the orange oil. When making your own orange oil, be sure to wear gloves and keep away from children and open flames. This also applies to the finished product, as orange oil is very corrosive and flammable. For cleaning uses, use a quart of water mixed with a quarter of an ounce of oil. Always test the oil before using on large areas.
Read also about some citrus oils: lemon oil, lime oil and lemongrass oil. And other useful essential oils such as lavender oil and many uses in aromatherapy, jojoba oil and its incredible benefits, peppermint oil and its natural healing, grapeseed oil.

A unionized job once meant a secure path to a middle-class life. Labor unions are still big political players, but they have seen a steady decline in membership and clout since their heyday in the 1950s.
Where they stand:
President Barack Obama has signed a series of executive orders that encourage the use of union labor in federal construction projects, ease union financial reporting requirements and more. He has also appointed labor-friendly members to the National Labor Relations Board, which has approved new rules to help union organizers and has more strictly enforced laws against anti-union misconduct.
Republican Mitt Romney says he will reverse all of Obama’s executive orders that help unions, seek to prohibit unions from using automatic dues deductions for politics and strive for national right-to-work legislation that prohibits unions from collecting dues from nonmembers.
Why it matters:
Unions long have been viewed as a way for workers to gain job protections, boost wages and achieve benefits. Many business leaders see unions as limiting employer flexibility and sapping profits.
About 14.8 million Americans are members of labor unions. The number has been declining for decades as domestic manufacturing jobs go overseas and businesses take a tougher approach in opposing union organizers.
Organized labor now makes up just 11.8 percent of the work force — down from about a third of all workers in the 1950s. Union leaders have looked to the White House and Congress for help in organizing new members and increasing their influence in the workplace.
But favorable union organizing rules approved by Obama’s appointees at the National Labor Relations Board have been tied up in the courts. And an effort to get Congress to pass card-check legislation, which would let unions organize new members simply by signing cards instead of holding elections, went nowhere during Obama’s first term.
Obama didn’t do much to push the card-check law, which faced vigorous business opposition, but he did please unions with his federal bailout of the auto industry and passage of a huge stimulus package — both credited with saving thousands of union jobs. Romney opposed both moves.
Last year, the labor board’s general counsel outraged business groups when he filed a lawsuit against Boeing Co., saying the company was punishing union members in Washington state by opening a new plant in right-to-work South Carolina. While both sides ultimately settled the dispute, Romney says he wants to amend labor laws to prevent the board from interfering with business investment decisions.
In the public sector, where unions had seen some of their steadiest growth in recent years, Republican governors in states such as Wisconsin and Ohio have pushed laws seeking to curb collective bargaining rights for state workers. They argue that such limits are necessary to roll back generous pension and benefit packages that cash-strapped governments no longer can afford.
Romney has praised efforts to limit collective bargaining rights for public workers, while Obama has denounced them. In fact, the Obama administration for the first time granted limited union rights to more than 40,000 federal workers who screen passengers at the nation’s airports.
Despite massive public protests against measures limiting union rights and some court successes by organized labor, polls find unions less popular than in past decades. They were viewed favorably by 52 percent of Gallup respondents in August.
Even Democratic leaders in New York, California and other states have sought to limit pensions for state employees and make union members contribute a greater share of health benefits.
Follow Sam Hananel on Twitter: http://twitter.com/SamHananelAP
More Related Stories
- Is the Environmental Defense Fund ruining environmentalism?
- Top 5 investigative videos of the week: "Winning" Afghanistan
- Jester clowns Westboro Baptist Church
- GOP: Party of crybabies
- Developers evict historic women's shelter to build luxury hotel
- Guantánamo prisoner on hunger strike cries for help on Twitter
- 3 possible solutions to international tax avoidance
- “I just want the U.S. to send my father home”
- Army weapons engineer tied to white nationalist organizations
- Ted Cruz against the world
- David Vitter's hypocritical, punitive, horrible new amendment
- Louie Gohmert: Women should be forced to carry nonviable pregnancies to term
- Could hackers destroy the U.S. power grid?
- Democrats may be even worse than Republicans at regulating Wall Street
- Eric Holder versus journalism
- A progressive defense of drones
- There's no substitute for government disaster relief
- Holder signed off on search warrant for reporter
- Mississippi could begin prosecuting women for miscarriages
- Mike Judge: "Bowling for Columbine" made me pro-gun
- Closing Gitmo is not enough
Featured Slide Shows
The week in 10 picsclose X
- 1 of 11
Lisa Montgomery embraces her nephew Thursday after a tornado tore apart her home in Cleburne, Texas. The twister killed six people and destroyed entire swaths of the North Texas town.
Credit: AP/LM Otero
Jack McMahon, the defense attorney for abortion doctor Kermit Gosnell, speaks outside the Criminal Justice Center in Philadelphia Tuesday. His client was convicted of killing three babies in his clinic, and will serve multiple life sentences.
Credit: AP/Matt Rourke
A photo taken Monday captures Vice President Joe Biden's response to a Milwaukee second-grader's innovative proposal to end America's epidemic of gun violence. This guy!
Credit: AP/Jenny Aicher
Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., flanked by a grouper-eyed Michele Bachmann, addresses the IRS' admission that it targeted Tea Party groups in advance of the 2012 election. In an op-ed for CNN Thursday, the Kentucky senator slammed the president for his faux outrage.
Credit: AP/Molly Riley
Ousted IRS chief Steven Miller is sworn in on Capitol Hill Friday. Miller testified before the House Ways and Means Committee on the extra scrutiny the agency gave conservative groups applying for tax-exempt status.
Credit: AP/J. Scott Applewhite
Attorney General Eric Holder pauses as he testifies on Capitol Hill before the House Judiciary Committee Wednesday. Holder is under fire, among other things, for the Justice Department's gathering of phone records at the Associated Press.
Credit: AP/Carolyn Kaster
O.J. Simpson sits during an evidentiary hearing at Clark County District Court in Las Vegas, Nev., Thursday. Simpson, who is currently serving a nine-to-33-year sentence in state prison for armed robbery and kidnapping, is using a writ of habeas corpus to seek a new trial.
Credit: AP/Las Vegas Review-Journal/Jeff Scheid
Major Tom to ground control: On Sunday astronaut Chris Hadfield recorded the first music video from space, a cover of David Bowie's "Space Oddity."
Credit: AP/NASA/Chris Hadfield
When it rains it pours. President Barack Obama speaks during a news conference Thursday with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, inexplicably inspiring an #umbrellagate Twitter meme.
Credit: AP/Jacquelyn Martin
A smoke plume rises high above a road block at the intersection of County A and Ross Road east of Solon Springs, Wis., Tuesday. No injuries were reported, but the the wildfire caused evacuations across northwestern Wisconsin.
Credit: AP/The Duluth News-Tribune/Clint Austin
Recent Slide Shows
- 1 of 11

June 1, 2010 Six public health challenges and data needs are evident, based upon lessons learned from the 2009 influenza pandemic. These are the conclusions of Maria Van Kerkhove and colleagues published in this week's PLoS Medicine, which they argue can help shape the response and readiness for future pandemics.
As the global epidemiology of the pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza (H1N1pdm) virus strain unfolds into 2010, substantial policy challenges will continue to present themselves for the next 12 to 18 months. These are: measuring age-specific immunity to infection; accurately quantifying severity; improving treatment outcomes for severe cases; quantifying the effectiveness of interventions; capturing the full impact of the pandemic on mortality; and rapidly identifying and responding to antigenic variants.
The authors argue that serological surveys and monitoring time-sources are critical sources of pandemic data, which need better dissem ination. They suggest that "some of the most valuable data, such as estimates of age-specific serological attack rates, have not become available until far after the time when it would have been needed to support decision making."
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
- Van Kerkhove MD, Asikainen T, Becker NG, Bjorge S, Desenclos J-C, et al. (2010). Studies Needed to Address Public Health Challenges of the 2009 H1N1 Influenza Pandemic: Insights from Modeling. PLoS Med, 7(6):e1000275 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000275
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

The pharmaceutical industry reaps billions from the sale of statins, the top selling prescription drug in the world. But instead of taking drugs, putting some thought and discipline in a cholesterol-lowering diet could bring better results. Plus, a recent study found that a combination of cholesterol-lowering foods gets rid of more bad LDL cholesterol than a diet low in saturated fat.
As the science of dietary therapy to reduce cholesterol has evolved, eating a diet based on certain combinations of foods with cholesterol-lowering properties has shown promise, but for the first time, Dr. David Jenkins, a professor of nutrition and metabolism at University of Toronto designed a study comparing the long term effects of such a diet with conventional wisdom. His research, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, suggests that so called cholesterol-friendly foods, like soy products and tree nuts produce superior results when it comes to lowering LDL, or “bad,” cholesterol levels.
The cholesterol lowering diet
Jenkins and his colleagues recruited 351 people with high cholesterol levels from four Canadian universities. They designed two separate diets. The control diet was based on foods recommended by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration for lowering cholesterol. The alternative diet combined foods the latest research has shown to deliver the maximum benefit in lowering cholesterol and preventing heart disease, including tree nuts and lots of fiber from oats, barley and vegetables. Butter was replaced with margarine enriched with naturally occurring phytochemicals and meat was replaced with soy-based products.
After six months of the study, participants eating the alternative diet based on cholesterol-lowering foods saw their LDL “bad” cholesterol levels decrease a whopping 13 percent. Bad cholesterol for those following the traditional diet low in saturated fats decreased just 3 percent. The alternative diet produced those impressive results with a strict vegetarian regimen and many participants fell by the wayside. However, the study demonstrated that even small changes in the way one eats, if those changes are designed by a nutritionist with knowledge of the most appropriate food combinations, can significantly lower cholesterol without statin drugs.
The most potent cholesterol-lowering foods
Oatmeal, oat bran and high-fiber foods: Five to 10 grams or more of soluble fiber a day decreases your total and LDL cholesterol. Eating 1 1/2 cups of cooked oatmeal provides 6 grams of fiber. If you add fruit, such as bananas, you’ll add about 4 more grams of fiber.
Fish and omega-3 fatty acids: The highest levels of omega-3 fatty acids are in, mackerel, lake trout, herring, sardines, albacore tuna, salmon and halibut.
Walnuts, almonds and other nuts: nuts are high in calories, so a handful a day will do. (1.5 ounces, or 42.5 grams). To avoid eating too many nuts, replace foods high in saturated fat with nuts. For example, instead of using cheese, meat or croutons in your salad, add a handful of nuts.
Olive oil: contains a potent mix of antioxidants that can lower your “bad” (LDL) cholesterol but leave your “good” (HDL) cholesterol untouched. Sauté. vegetables in it, add it to a marinade, or mix it with vinegar as a salad dressing. You can also use olive oil as a substitute for butter when basting meat or as a dip for bread.
Foods with added plant stanols: stanols are natural phytochemicals that block the absorption of cholesterol. Margarines, orange juice and yogurt drinks with added plant sterols can help reduce LDL cholesterol by more than 10 percent and don’t appear to affect levels of good cholesterol.

JERUSALEM (Reuters) - Israeli archaeologists are scratching their heads over a possible 8,500-year-old murder mystery after discovering two skeletons at the bottom of an ancient well.
Flint sickle blades and arrowheads found in the eight-meter (26 foot)-deep Stone Age well in the Jezreel Valley in Israel's Galilee region, suggest it was used by the area's first farmers.
But archaeologists cannot explain why the skeletal remains of a woman, believed by archaeologists to have been aged about 19, and those of an older man were also uncovered deep inside the now-dry well.
"How did these come to be in the well? Was this an accident or perhaps murder? As of now the answer to this question remains a mystery," the Israel Antiquities Authority said in a statement.
Yotam Tepper, who directed the excavation on behalf of the Authority, said that "what is clear, is that after these unknown individuals fell into the well, it was no longer used for the simple reason that the well water was contaminated and was no longer potable".
(Writing by Jeffrey Heller, editing by Paul Casciato)

Date of this Version
One factor that potentially affects coyote (Canis latrans) abundance is recreational and commercial trapping for harvest of coyote fur. Herein I report how the economic impact of coyote pelts has changed from 1979-94 for landowners and trappers from the Texas. Pelt values accounted for over 50% of the variability observed during this 15-year period. The future of this economic incentive for managing coyotes is questionable because of the impending ban by the European Union of furs from North America.

Gorilla "Paradise" Found; May Double World Numbers
for National Geographic News
|August 5, 2008|
Deep in the hinterlands of the Republic of the Congo lies a secret ape paradise that is home to 125,000 western lowland gorillas, researchers announced today.
The findings, if confirmed, would more than double the world's estimated population of gorillas.
Western lowland gorillas are a subspecies classified as critically endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Their numbers have been devastated in recent years by illegal hunting for bush meat and the spread of the Ebola virus. Just last year scientists projected the animals' population could fall as low as 50,000 by 2011.
Now those predictions may have to be dramatically reworked to incorporate findings released today by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS).
A first ever ape census in northern Congo found 73,000 of the gorillas in that country's Ntokou-Pikounda region and 52,000 more in the Ndoki-Likouala area.
The Ndoki population includes an obscure group of nearly 6,000 gorillas living in close quarters in isolated swamps near Lac Télé.
"We knew there were apes there, we just had no idea how many," said WCS's Emma Stokes, one of the lead researchers in the two-year project.
The gorillas have thrived thanks to their remoteness from human settlements, food-rich habitats, and two decades of conservation efforts in one of the world's poorest countries, Stokes said.
Shy, But Plentiful
Lowland gorillas are more common than their mountain cousins. The animals are found in tropical forests and swamps in Angola, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon.
Wary of humans, gorillas are notoriously hard to tally in the wild.
To assess their populations, WCS researchers instead used data on the numbers and ages of so-called sleep nests, temporary bedding made of leaves and branches.
Each group of lowland gorillas has a range of about 7.7 square miles (20 square kilometers), and the animals build the nests to sleep in each night before moving on in the morning.
The census work involved crossing hundreds of miles to count nests, then loading data into a mathematical model that estimated the number of gorillas living within a defined area.
In the 17,400-square-mile (28,000-square-kilometer) Ndoki-Likouala region, for example, the nest census found an estimated population density of 1.65 gorillas per square kilometer (equal to about 0.3 square mile).
This means that about 46,200 western lowland gorillas likely live in the area, which runs west of the Sangha River to the border of the Central African Republic.
An additional 6,000 gorillas reside in the region's 646-square-mile (1,040-square-kilometer) Batanga swamps. These wetlands, which are inaccessible to humans for more than half the year, house an estimated five to six apes per square kilometer.
"That's the highest density I've seen," Stokes said, adding that the data suggest Ndoki-Likouala is the subspecies' "largest remaining stronghold."
The discovery "shows that conservation in the Republic of Congo is working," said WCS president Steven Sanderson.
Almost half the surveyed area lies within officially protected zones or inside timber concessions where logging companies have banned transport of protected animals and weapons on their roads.
Researchers hope the latest census will encourage the government of Congo to establish a new national park in the Ntokou-Pikounda region.
The census was presented today at the International Primatological Society conference in Edinburgh, Scotland, and some of the data will appear in an upcoming issue of the conservation journal Oryx.
Perils of Counting Apes
Several experts greeted the survey findings with a mix of excitement and caution.
"If these new gorilla census figures are confirmed by further surveys, it would be the most exciting ape conservation news in years," said Craig Stanford of the Jane Goodall Research Center at the University of Southern California.
"Nest census data are notorious for varying from one method to the next, however, and I think we should be cautious before assuming the world's known gorilla population has just doubled."
Nesting data were among the factors used in a 2007 IUCN population assessment that placed the western lowland gorilla on the organization's Red List of Threatened Species.
IUCN estimated the gorillas had declined by more than 60 percent over the past 25 years, and its scientists projected the apes' population could fall to 50,000 as the deadly Ebola virus penetrated deeper into their habitat.
That report came with a caveat about the reliability of nest counts: "Technical problems with the conversion of ape nest density to estimates of gorilla density preclude a rigorous estimate of range-wide gorilla abundance."
Peter Walsh of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, led the 2007 IUCN assessment. He repeated those concerns when he learned of WCS's findings in northern Congo.
"It is not that I think that the numbers are necessarily too high," Walsh said. "It is just that I do not trust the assumptions made by the estimation models that are being used."
John Oates, professor emeritus of anthropology at Hunter College in New York, noted that "what does seem clear is that there are still plenty of western gorillas in northern Congo."
He remains cautious, however, about whether the new research should signal a change in status for the great apes.
In addition to habitat loss and hunting, in recent years Ebola has ravaged gorilla habitats bordering the Ntokou-Pikounda survey area, killing 60 percent of the apes in nearby Odzala National Park.
While WCS's Stokes said her survey found "no evidence of Ebola in Ntokou-Pikounda, our general philosophy is Ebola can hit anywhere, anytime."
And with a 90 percent mortality rate among infected gorillas, Stokes thinks the animals deserve all the protection they can get.
In general, the WCS findings demonstrate that our intensely observed planet still has its biological secrets, added Richard Bergl, curator of research at the North Carolina Zoo.
"It is extraordinary that in this day and age," he said, "there could be a population of a hundred thousand or more gorillas that were essentially unknown to science."
|© 1996-2008 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.|

Can the Indian Point nuclear power plant in NY meet proposed new water intake rules?
New York environmental regulators finalized rules to reduce cooling water intake by power plants and other industrial facilities to reduce fish kills by 90 percent.
But this rule is about more than just fish and water. It could lead to the shutdown of the giant Indian Point and threaten the reliability of New York City's power supply.
The state does not want to give Entergy Corp a water permit for the 2,045-megawatt Indian Point nuclear power plant unless the New Orleans-based company spends up to $2 billion to install a new water cooling system to protect fish in the Hudson River just 45 miles north of Manhattan.
Without the state water permit, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission cannot relicense Indian Point's two reactors for another 20 years.
The current reactor licenses expire in 2013 and 2015.
The shutdown of Indian Point would cause power reliability problems and boost electric prices in New York City, according to the state's power grid operator, the New York ISO, and the city's power company, Consolidated Edison.
Power plants use water to cool plant systems and condense the steam used to turn the turbine that generates electricity back into water.
"Billions of fish are killed each year when they are caught up in the intake of cooling water for industrial processes," New York Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) Commissioner Joe Martens said in a release.
"The policy we are implementing today will reduce fish kills by 90 percent while allowing flexibility for the industry to reach our goal of protecting aquatic wildlife," he added.
The DEC said it would flexible because it recognizes that all existing facilities may not be able install a closed cycle cooling system like the one the state wants at Indian Point.
The DEC listed several existing power plants on its website that the state has allowed to modify open cycle cooling systems without installing closed cycle systems, including: NRG Energy's Dunkirk, Huntley and Arthur Kill, Entergy's FitzPatrick, GenOn Energy's Bowline, TransCanada's Ravenswood and Dynegy's Danskammer.
"Closed-cycle cooling is not always an available technology for existing facilities as issues of space availability and compatibility of new technology with the facility's original design frequently make it infeasible to implement," the DEC said.

03-21-2007 02:34 PM - last edited on 10-26-2007 11:06 AM by Jessica
About To the Lighthouse
The novel that established Virginia Woolf as a leading writer of the 20th century, To the Lighthouse is made up of three powerfully charged visions into the life of one family living in a summer house off the rocky coast of Scotland. As time winds its way through their lives, the Ramsays face, alone and simultaneously, the greatest of human challenges and triumphs -- the capacity for change. A moving portrait in miniature of family life, the novel also has profoundly universal implications, giving language to the silent space that separates people and the space that they transgress to reach each other.
About Virginia Woolf
Virginia Woolf, who would become one of the 20th century's most celebrated novelists, was born in London on January 25, 1882, to Leslie and Julia Duckworth Stephen. The Stephens were a prominent family among England's literary and cultural elite. Leslie Stephen was a leading author and critic, as well as the founding editor of the Dictionary of National Biography, and his first wife, Harriet, was the daughter of the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray. Virginia had access to the works in her erudite father's extensive library, and she read them voraciously. Unlike her brothers, however, the brilliant, self-taught young woman was denied access to a university education, a fact that would inform her influential feminist works A Room of One's Own and Three Guineas.
When Virginia was 13, her mother died, a traumatic event that triggered a mental breakdown, the first in a life intermittently plagued by severe depression. Virginia suffered another breakdown following the death of her father in 1904. While convalescing at the home of a family friend, she began to publish essays and reviews in the Guardian and the Times Literary Supplement.
Later that year, Virginia moved with her siblings Vanessa, Thoby, and Adrian to a house in the Bloomsbury section of London. There, Thoby began holding informal gatherings of his Cambridge friends. Known as the Bloomsbury Group, this legendary artistic circle included artist Clive Bell, economist John Maynard Keynes, and writers Lytton Strachey and E. M. Forster. It was within this group that Virginia met novelist Leonard Woolf, whom she married in 1912.
In 1917, Virginia and Leonard founded the Hogarth Press, which they ran from their home. Hogarth would become an influential press, publishing works by Katherine Mansfield, T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Vita Sackville-West, among others. Woolf wrote prolifically and in many forms: from extensive letters, diary entries, essays, and literary reviews to short stories and novels. She authored some of the most influential novels of the early 20th century, including Mrs. Dalloway (1925), To the Lighthouse (1927), and The Waves (1931). Her superb ear for language and her narrative conception of experience as "moments of being" earned her both renown among her contemporaries, as well as critical and financial success.
Increasing depression and the impending atrocities of World War II proved too much for Woolf's sensitive nature. After completing her final novel, Between the Acts, amid bomb warnings and nationwide anxiety, Woolf penned a short suicide note to Leonard, filled her pockets with stones, and drowned herself in the River Ouse on March 28, 1941.
Learn more about Virginia Woolf in Meet the Writers.
Message Edited by Jessica on 10-26-2007 11:06 AM

One day, a man, harried by the nagging of his wife, wandered into the Catskills near his home. The adventure that follows is one of America's most cherished folktales – Washington Irving's Rip Van Winkle. For nearly two centuries, the myth of Henry Hudson's ghost and Rip's lengthy slumber have endured, adding to the delightful enchantment the Great Northern Catskills hold for many contemporary visitors.
Rip is one of the Great Northern Catskills best-loved figureheads – a link to the past, as well as a present reminder of the region's unique place in American history. His tale goes something like this:
Set in pre-Revolutionary New York, Rip Van Winkle lives a life of ease – much to the chagrin of his wife, Dame Van Winkle. Rip's passions include wandering through the Catskill Mountains and old-growth forests, being idle and enjoying life. He doesn't work for long however, and though itinerant, he is well loved by all in town. The children especially love the fanciful stories he tells.
One day, Rip wanders off into the woods to escape his nagging wife. Hearing thunder, he unwittingly follows the ghosts of Henry Hudson's men deep into the wilderness. As the men play nine-pins, Rip imbibes a "magic potion" - quietly falling into a deep sleep. He wakens 20 years later, his beard grown long and his beloved dog, Wolf, nowhere to be found. Rip makes his way back into the village and discovers that the American Revolution has taken place. He is no longer recognizable, nor does he know any of the townspeople who greet him.
Rip's luck holds out and it isn't long before he finds his place among his grown children – though much of his family has passed on – and resumes his habitual idleness. His tale is repeated and solemnly taken to heart by hen-pecked husbands who wish they could have shared in Rip's good fortune and slept through the atrocities of war.
From the pages of Irving's cautionary tale, the sense of adventure and intrigue have taken on a life of their own. Even now, the lush mountains, verdant valleys, rivers and streams of the Great Northern Catskills have the enduring power to enchant, delight and rejuvenate.
Rip Van Winkle today
In the Great Northern Catskills of New York – Rip is everywhere. His legend is almost as big as Hudson's. From celebratory events and commemorative statues, to numerous business names and wonderful paintings at many of the historic lodges and resorts – Rip lives.
The Rip Van Winkle Wine and Cheese Festival kicks off each year in May – celebrating the bounty of regional cheese-makers, wineries and much more. Play the "Catskill Seven," a series of golf courses along the Rip Van Winkle Golf Trail offering incredible views of the mountains and valleys.
Explore the attractions such as the legendary "cloves" where Rip took his marathon nap. View the colorfully painted statues placed around the mountain-top region or hike to the top of Hunter Mountain and discover a larger-than-life sculpture of Rip Van Winkle. Envisioned by David Slutzky and carved by sculptor Kevin Van Hentenryck, the blue sandstone carving is meant to depict Rip as he awakens to discover his curious predicament.
Discover the Great Northern Catskills of Greene County – a land steeped in lore, mythologized by history and loved by visitors and literary legends alike.

Find DOE Collections
DOE Physicists at Work
Profiles of representative DOE-sponsored physicists
doing research at universities and national laboratories
Compiled by the Office of Scientific and Technical Information
How do you figure out what is underground without digging a hole?
Maybe you want to find oil, or a gas line; manage underground contamination; or locate a tunnel. A geophysicist can make measurements at the earth's surface and use that information to estimate what's underground - the structure, composition, and distribution of soil, rocks, fluids, and voids.
"Geophysics is fun," says Patricia Berge, a geophysicist by training and now Division Leader for Earth Science within the Energy and Environment Directorate at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). "It's also often cheaper, faster, safer, and more practical than digging holes." For instance, you may want to avoid excavations or drilling because you have a large area to cover, or it would be expensive to dig holes, or you might spread contaminants or disturb artifacts, or it would simply take too long.
"Now, the catch is what to measure and where," says Dr. Berge. "That is the challenge, the puzzle - where the fun really begins."
The basic idea is to identify some measurable physical property that can be observed at the earth's surface and a value that will change with changes in the subsurface. This is a combination of physics and earth science, requiring an understanding of the earth and earth materials as well as an understanding of physical properties. Examples of the physical properties geophysicists use for underground imaging are the speed of sound in rocks (seismic measurements), small local changes in the earth's gravity field, and electromagnetic properties of rocks and soils. Careful placement of measurement equipment and ready availability of fast computers makes it possible to estimate the three-dimensional picture of the subsurface from the geophysical measurements.
"Sometimes making the measurements can be tricky," says Dr. Berge. "When I worked at the U.S. Geological Survey, I flew in helicopters to put seismometers on rocky outcrops next to Alaskan glaciers." Over the course of her career, she's donned a wet suit to check a seismometer on the bottom of a lake; measured the speed of sound in the seafloor on a research ship that happened to be caught in a typhoon ("That part wasn't so much fun," says Dr. Berge); and taken measurements in 120-degree heat in Nevada.
With all the excitement geophysics offers, still Dr. Berge chose a management path in physics. "Although my own research was fascinating, I wanted to influence future directions of research at a larger scale and contribute toward solving bigger problems of concern to the taxpayers," says Dr. Berge.
Challenges include energy supply, environmental cleanup, hazard mitigation, and national security. "I would like to see the U.S. invest more research dollars in geothermal energy, cheaper and more effective monitoring of environmental cleanup, innovative hazard mitigation such as satellite-based tsunami warning systems, better methods for detecting and characterizing buried bunkers, and better methods for screening cargo containers," says Dr. Berge. "The world cannot afford to delay developing technical solutions to these difficult problems and it may take all the scientific expertise we have in the whole global population to make any progress at all," says Dr. Berge. "I became a manager in order to contribute to LLNL's vision for the future of earth science research, what areas we should be directing our efforts toward, where we should be going to solve problems that will be increasingly important over the next ten to twenty years."
Though most of these challenges are not within her subspecialty in geophysics, significant progress will require geophysics research and interdisciplinary work by large teams of scientists - and that's where management comes into play.
"As part of the management at LLNL, I can influence the future direction of research in earth science to be relevant to the nation's and the world's problems," says Dr. Berge.
Dr. Berge received a BS in Geophysics and an AB in History from Stanford University in 1982 and worked for the Seismology Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey until 1986. In 1991 she received a PhD in Geology and Geophysics from the University of Hawaii and then joined Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory as a postdoctoral researcher in the Earth Science Department. She was hired in a staff position at LLNL in 1994 and worked as a research geophysicist until 2002, when she assumed her current position.
Her research at LLNL focused on how things like sand grains, clay, fluid-filled pores, and cracks might influence the speed of sound and other physical properties. "I hope this basic research will help geophysicists to make better and better images of the subsurface, improving current techniques and inventing new ones for use in geothermal fields, environmental cleanup sites, and anywhere that we need to do underground imaging in the future," says Dr. Berge.
Dr. Berge’s articles accessed via OSTI:
Please search the Information Bridge for additional papers by this researcher.

- published: 29 Mar 2012
- views: 2435
- author: AlJazeeraEnglish
The United States has suspended food aid to North Korea in response to a planned rocket launch next month. Al Jazeera's Rosiland Jordan reports from Washington.
In international relations, aid (also known as international aid, overseas aid, or foreign aid) is a voluntary transfer of resources from one country to another, given at least partly with the objective of benefiting the recipient country. It may have other functions as well: it may be given as a signal of diplomatic approval, or to strengthen a military ally, to reward a government for behaviour desired by the donor, to extend the donor's cultural influence, to provide infrastructure needed by the donor for resource extraction from the recipient country, or to gain other kinds of commercial access. Humanitarianism and altruism are, nevertheless, significant motivations for the giving of aid.
Aid may be given by individuals, private organisations, or governments. Standards delimiting exactly the kinds of transfers that count as aid vary. For example, aid figures may or may not include transfers for military use: to cite one instance, the United States included military assistance in its aid figure until 1957 but no longer does. The most widely used measure of aid, "Official Development Assistance" (ODA) is such a figure. It is compiled by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The United Nations, the World Bank, and many scholars use the DAC's ODA figure as their main aid figure because it is easily available and reasonably consistently calculated over time and between countries. The DAC consists of 22 of the wealthiest Western industrialised countries plus the EU; it is a forum in which they coordinate their aid policies.
Humanitarian aid or emergency aid is rapid assistance given to people in immediate distress by individuals, organisations, or governments to relieve suffering, during and after man-made emergencies (like wars) and natural disasters. The term often carries an international connotation, but this is not always the case. It is often distinguished from development aid by being focussed on relieving suffering caused by natural disaster or conflict, rather than removing the root causes of poverty or vulnerability.
The provision of humanitarian aid or humanitarian response consists of the provision of vital services (such as food aid to prevent starvation) by aid agencies, and the provision of funding or in-kind services (like logistics or transport), usually through aid agencies or the government of the affected country. Humanitarian aid is distinguished from humanitarian intervention, which involves armed forces protecting civilians from violent oppression or genocide by state-supported actors.
The Geneva Conventions give a mandate to the International Committee of the Red Cross and other impartial humanitarian organizations to provide assistance and protection of civilians during times of war. The ICRC, has been given a special role by the Geneva Conventions with respect to the visiting and monitoring of prisoners of war.
The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is mandated to coordinate the international humanitarian response to a natural disaster or complex emergency acting on the basis of the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/182.
The Sphere Project handbook, Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response, which was produced by a coalition of leading non-governmental humanitarian agencies, lists the following principles of humanitarian action:
Development aid is aid given by developed countries to support development in general which can be economic development or social development in developing countries. It is distinguished from humanitarian aid as being aimed at alleviating poverty in the long term, rather than alleviating suffering in the short term.
Official Development Assistance (ODA), mentioned above, is a commonly used measure of developmental aid. Development aid is given by governments through individual countries' international aid agencies and through multilateral institutions such as the World Bank, and by individuals through development charities such as ActionAid, Caritas, Care International or Oxfam.
The offer to give development aid has to be understood in the context of the Cold War. The speech in which Harry Truman announced the foundation of NATO is also a fundamental document of development policy:
In addition, we will provide military advice and equipment to free nations which will cooperate with us in the maintenance of peace and security. Fourth, we must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas. More than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more prosperous areas. For the first time in history, humanity possesses the knowledge and skill to relieve the suffering of these people.
Aid from various sources can reach recipients through bilateral or multilateral delivery systems. Bilateral refers to government to government transfers. Multilateral institutions, such as the World Bank or UNICEF, pool aid from one or more sources and disperse it among many recipients.
Aid is often pledged at one point in time, but disbursements (financial transfers) might not arrive until later.
Private giving includes aid from charities, philanthropic organizations or businesses to recipient countries or programs within recipient counties.
Most monetary flows between nations are not counted as aid. These include market based flows such as foreign direct investments and portfolio investments. Remittances from migrant workers to their home countries are not counted in aid numbers even though, by volume, it is twice as large as what is counted as aid. Additionally, military support is not counted.
A major proportion of aid from donor nations is tied, mandating that a receiving nation spend on products and expertise originating only from the donor country.  For example, Eritrea is forced to spend aid money on foreign goods and services to build a network of railways even though it is cheaper to use local expertise and resources. US law requires food aid be spent on buying food at home, instead of where the hungry live, and, as a result, half of what is spent is used on transport. Oxfam America and American Jewish World Service report that reforming US food aid programs could extend food aid to an additional 17.1 million people around the world.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, as primary holders of developing countries' debt, attach structural adjustment conditionalities to loans which generally include the elimination of state subsidies and the privatization of state services. For example, the World Bank presses poor nations to eliminate subsidies for fertilizer even while many farmers cannot afford them at market prices. In the case of Malawi, almost five million of its 13 million people used to need emergency food aid. However, after the government changed policy and subsidies for fertilizer and seed were introduced, farmers produced record-breaking corn harvests in 2006 and 2007 as production leaped to 3.4 million in 2007 from 1.2 million in 2005, making Malawi a major food exporter. In the former Soviet states, the reconfiguration of public financing in their transition to a market economy called for reduced spending on health and education, sharply increasing poverty.
Aid is seldom given from motives of pure altruism; for instance it is often given as a means of supporting an ally in international politics. It may also be given with the intention of influencing the political process in the receiving nation. Whether one considers such aid helpful may depend on whether one agrees with the agenda being pursued by the donor nation in a particular case. During the conflict between communism and capitalism in the twentieth century, the champions of those ideologies, the Soviet Union and the United States, each used aid to influence the internal politics of other nations, and to support their weaker allies. Perhaps the most notable example was the Marshall Plan by which the United States, largely successfully, sought to pull European nations toward capitalism and away from communism. Aid to underdeveloped countries has sometimes been criticized as being more in the interest of the donor than the recipient, or even a form of neocolonialism.
S.K.B'. Asante lists some specific motives a donor may have for giving aid: defense support, market expansion, foreign investment, missionary enterprise, cultural extension. In recent decades, aid by organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank has been criticized as being primarily a tool used to open new areas up to global capitalists, and being only secondarily, if at all, concerned with the wellbeing of the people in the recipient countries.
Besides criticism of motive, aid may be criticized simply on the grounds that it is not effective: i.e., it did not do what it was intended to do or help the people it was intended to help. This is essentially an economic criticism of aid. The two types of criticism are not entirely separate: critics of the ideology behind a piece of aid are likely to see it as ineffective; and indeed, ineffectiveness must imply some flaws in the ideology. Statistical studies have produced widely differing assessments of the correlation between aid and economic growth, and no firm consensus has emerged to suggest that foreign aid generally does boost growth. Some studies find a positive correlation, but others find either no correlation or a negative correlation. In the case of Africa, Asante (1985) gives the following assessment:
Summing up the experience of African countries both at the national and at the regional levels it is no exaggeration to suggest that, on balance, foreign assistance, especially foreign capitalism, has been somewhat deleterious to African development. It must be admitted, however, that the pattern of development is complex and the effect upon it of foreign assistance is still not clearly determined. But the limited evidence available suggests that the forms in which foreign resources have been extended to Africa over the past twenty-five years, insofar as they are concerned with economic development, are, to a great extent, counterproductive.
The economist William Easterly and others have argued that aid can often distort incentives in poor countries in various harmful ways. Aid can also involve inflows of money to poor countries that have some similarities to inflows of money from natural resources that provoke the resource curse.
Many individuals and organizations criticize U.S. Aid. Emergency funds from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, for instance, are linked to a wide range of free-market policy prescriptions that some argue interfere in a country's sovereignty. Policy prescriptions from outsiders can do more harm as they might not fit the local environment. The IMF can be good at helping countries over a short problematic financial period, but for poor countries with long lasting issues it can cause harm. In his book The White Man's Burden, Easterly argued that if the IMF only gave adjustment loans to countries that can repay it, instead of forgiving debts or lending repetitively even if conditions are not met, it would maintain its credibility.
In addition to the above criticisms, the logistics in which aid delivery occurs can be problematic. An earthquake in 2003 in Bam, Iran left tens of thousands of people in need of disaster zone aid. Although aid was flown in rapidly, regional belief systems, cultural backgrounds and even language seemed to have been omitted as a source of concern. Items such as religiously prohibited pork, and non-generic forms of medicine that lacked multilingual instructions came flooding in as relief. An implementation of aid can easily be problematic, causing more problems than it solves.
James Shikwati, a Kenyan economist, has argued that foreign aid causes harm to the recipient nations, specifically because aid is distributed by local politicians, finances the creation of corrupt government such as that led by Dr Fredrick Chiluba in Zambia bureaucracies, and hollows out the local economy. In an interview in Germany's Der Spiegel magazine, Shikwati uses the example of food aid delivered to Kenya in the form of a shipment of corn from America. Portions of the corn may be diverted by corrupt politicians to their own tribes, or sold on the black market at prices that undercut local food producers. Similarly, Kenyan recipients of donated Western clothing will not buy clothing from local tailors, putting the tailors out of business. In an episode of 20/20, John Stossel demonstrated the existence of secret government bank accounts which concealed foreign aid money destined for private purposes.
Some believe that aid is offset by other economic programs such as agricultural subsidies. Mark Malloch Brown, former head of the United Nations Development Program, estimated that farm subsidies cost poor countries about US$50 billion a year in lost agricultural exports:
"It is the extraordinary distortion of global trade, where the West spends $360 billion a year on protecting its agriculture with a network of subsidies and tariffs that costs developing countries about US$50 billion in potential lost agricultural exports. Fifty billion dollars is the equivalent of today's level of development assistance."
In response to aid critics, a movement to reform U.S. foreign aid has started to gain momentum. In the United States, leaders of this movement include the Center for Global Development, Oxfam America, the Brookings Institution, InterAction, and Bread for the World. The various organizations have united to call for a new Foreign Assistance Act, a national development strategy, and a new cabinet-level department for development.
As a result of these numerous criticisms, other proposals for supporting developing economies and poverty stricken societies. Some analysts, such as researchers at the Overseas Development Institute, argue that current support for the developing world suffers from a policy incoherence and that while some policies are designed to support the third world, other domestic policies undermine its impact, examples include:
One measure of this policy incoherence is the Commitment to Development Index (CDI) published by the Center for Global Development . The index measures and evaluates 22 of the world's richest countries on policies that affect developing countries, in addition to simply aid. It shows that development policy is more than just aid; it also takes into account trade, investment, migration, environment, security, and technology.
Thus, some states are beginning to go Beyond Aid and instead seek to ensure there is a policy coherence, for example see Common Agricultural Policy reform or Doha Development Round. This approach might see the nature of aid change from loans, debt cancellation, budget support etc., to supporting developing countries. This requires a strong political will, however, the results could potentially make aid far more effective and efficient.
It is true that aid is rarely given for motives of pure altruism. However, it is important to look at where aid goes. For example, “only about one fifth of U.S. aid goes to countries classified by the OECD as ‘least developed.’” This “pro-rich” trend is not unique to the United States. According to Collier, “the middle income countries get aid because they are of much more commercial and political interest than the tiny markets and powerlessness of the bottom billion.” What this means is that, at the most basic level, aid is not targeting the most extreme poverty.
The form of aid must also be considered. The World Bank, until recently, issued only loans, meaning that the country must repay both the loan and the interest rates. In contrast, the European Commission issues grants, which countries need not worry about paying back. This means that “loans have been going to the poorest countries and the grants to the middle-income countries.”
Furthermore, consider the breakdown, where aid goes and for what purposes. In 2002, total gross foreign aid to all developing countries was $76 billion. Dollars that do not contribute to a country’s ability to support basic needs interventions are subtracted. Subtract $6 billion for debt relief grants. Subtract $11 billion, which is the amount developing countries paid to developed nations in that year in the form of loan repayments. Next, subtract the aid given to middle income countries, $16 billion. The remainder, $43 billion, is the amount that developing countries received in 2002. But only $12 billion went to low-income countries ($15 billion for all developing countries) in a form that could be deemed budget support for basic needs.
The basic criticism of aid is that it neither goes where it was intended nor helps those intended. According to Collier, there are four known traps that contribute this problem. The first such trap is known as the conflict trap. Aid should not be used to finance military endeavors. It is difficult to “design aid in such a way that it works even in the environments of poor governance and poor policy that are most at risk of conflict.” The second trap is called the natural resource trap. Countries that are resource rich already have a large volume of capital flowing into their economies. However, it is not being used to its potential. The third trap occurs when a country is entirely landlocked, making it difficult for the country to engage in global trade.
The fourth trap is that of bad governance. However, “there are three ways in which aid can potentially help turnarounds: incentives, skills, and reinforcement.” Policy conditionalities, or structural adjustments, were reservations put on aid until a government agreed to aid implemented in the 1980s. This did not work. Aid needs to somehow provide incentives for giving the people power. Power needs to be transferred from the governments to the people. Aid should be restructured in order to allow for skills building in country. According to Collier, “technical assistance is not negligible – money spent on countries with the skilled people who constitute technical assistance is a quarter of total aid flows.” The problem is not that too little money is being provided, rather that technical assistance is not country specific. Aid is also given as budget support, reinforcement for failing states. There is an opportune moment for assisting failing states but it must be done at the right time. Aid cannot be continually poured into failing states and be expected to produce a turnaround. However if aid is given at the opportune political moment, it can support turnarounds. Collier suggests that when that moment occurs “pour in the technical assistance as quickly as possible to help implement reform” and “then, after a few years, start pouring in the money for the government to spend.”
Peter Singer argues that over the last three decades, “aid has added around one percentage point to the annual growth rate of the bottom billion.” He argues that this has made the difference between “stagnation and severe cumulative decline.” Aid can make progress towards reducing poverty worldwide, or at least help prevent cumulative decline.
Currently, donor institutions make proposals for aid packages to recipient countries. The recipient countries then make a plan for how to use the aid based on how much money has been given to them. Alternatively, NGO's receive funding from private sources or the government, and then implement plans to end their specific issues. In the views of many scholars, this system is inherently ineffective. If we hope to eliminate poverty, we must reexamine how we distribute funding, and how we attack problems.
According to Sachs, we should redefine how we think of aid. The first step should be to learn what developing countries hope to accomplish and how much money they need to accomplish those goals. Goals should be made with the Millennium Development Goals in mind for these furnish real metrics for providing basic needs. The “actual transfer of funds must be based on rigorous, country-specific plans that are developed through open and consultative processes, backed by good governance in the recipient countries, as well as careful planning and evaluation.”
Possibilities are also emerging as some developing countries are experiencing rapid economic growth, they are able to provide their own expertise gained from their recent transition. This knowledge transfer can be seen in donors, such as Brazil, whose $1 billion in aid outstrips that of many traditional donors. Brazil provides most of its aid in the form of technical expertise and knowledge transfers. This has been descried by some observers as a 'global model in waiting'.
Since the 1960s, improving the efficiency of foreign aid has been a common topic of academic research. There is debate on whether foreign aid is efficacious, but for the purposes of this article we will ignore that. Given that schema, a common debate is over which factors influence the overall economic efficiency of foreign aid. Indeed, there is debate about whether aid impact should be measured empirically at all, but again, we will limit our scope to increasing the economic efficiency.
At the forefront of the aid debate has been the conflict between professor William Easterly of New York University  and his ideological opposite, Jeffrey Sachs, from Columbia University. Easterly advocates the "searcher's" approach, while Sachs advocates a more top down, broad planned approach. We will discuss both of these at length.
William Easterly offers a nontraditional, and somewhat controversial “searching” approach to solving poverty, as opposed to the “planned” approach in his famous critique of the more traditional Owen/Sachs, The White Man’s Burden. Traditional poverty reduction, Easterly claims is based on the idea that we know what is best for those countries, which are impoverished. He claims that they know what’s best. Having a top down “master plan,” he claims, is inefficient. His alternative, called the “Searchers” approach, uses a bottom up strategy. That is, this approach starts by surveying the poor in the countries in question, and then tries to directly aid individuals, rather than governments. Local markets are a key incentive structure. The primary example is of Mosquito nets in Malawi. In this example, an NGO sells Mosquito nets to rich Malawians, and uses the profits to subsidize cheap sales to the impoverished. Hospital nurses are used as middle-women, profiting a few cents on every net sold to a patient. This incentive structure has seen the usage of nets in Malawi spike over 40% in less than 7 years.
One of the central tenets in Easterly’s approach is a more bottom up philosophy of aid. This applies not only to the identification of problems, but to the actual distribution of capital to the areas in need. In effect, Easterly would have countries go to the area which needed aid, collect information about the problem, find out what the population wanted, and then work from there. In keeping with this, funds would also be distributed from the bottom up, rather than being given to a specific government.
Easterly also advocates working through currently existing Aid organizations, and letting them compete for funding. Utilizing preexisting national organizations and local frameworks would not only help give target populations a voice in implementation and goal setting, but is more efficient economically. Easterly argues that the preexisting frameworks already "know" what the problems are, as opposed to outside NGOs who tend to "guess". 
Easterly strongly discourages aid to government as a rule. He believes, for several reasons, that aid to small “bottom up” organizations and Individual groups is a better philosophy than to large governments.
Easterly states that for far too long, inefficient aid organizations have been funded, and that this is a problem. The current system of evaluation for most aid organizations is internal. Easterly claims that the process is biased because organizations have a large incentive to represent their progress in a positive light. What he proposes as an alternative is an independent auditing system for aid organizations. Before receiving funding, the organization would state their goals and how they expect to measure and achieve them. If they do not meet their goals, Easterly proposes we shift our funding to organizations who are successful. This would prompt organizations to either become efficient, or obsolete.
Easterly believes that aid goals should be small. In his opinion, one of the main failings of aid lies in the fact that we create large, utopian lists of things we hope to accomplish, without the means to actually see them to fruition. Rather than establish a utopian vision for a particular country, Easterly insists that we shift our focus to the most basic needs and improvements.If we feed, clothe, vaccinate, build infrastructure, and support markets, the macroscopic results will follow.
The “Searching Approach” is intrinsically tied to the market. Easterly claims that the only way for poverty to truly end is for the poor to be given the capability to lift themselves out of poverty, and then for it to happen. Philosophically, this sounds like the traditional “bootstrap” theory, but it isn’t. What he says is that the poor should be given the fiscal support to create their market, which would give them the ability to become self reliant in the future.
In the end of his book, Easterly proposes a voucher system for foreign aid. The poor would be distributed a certain amount of vouchers, which would act as currency, redeemable to aid organizations for services, medicines, and the like. These vouchers would then be redeemed by the aid organizations for more funding. In this way, the aid organization would be forced to compete, if by proxy.
Sachs presents a near dichotomy to Easterly. Sachs presents a broad, proscriptive solution to poverty. In his book, The End of Poverty, he explains how throughout history, countries have ascended from poverty by following a relatively simple model. First, you promote agricultural development, then industrialize, embrace technology, and finally become modern. This is the standard “western” model of development that has been followed by countries such as China and India. Sachs main idea is that there should have a broad analytical “checklist” of things a country must attain before it can reach the next step on the ladder to development. Western nations should donate a percentage of their GDP as determined by the UN, and pump money into helping impoverished countries climb the ladder. Sachs insists that if followed, his strategy would eliminate poverty by 2025.
Sachs advocates using a top down methodology, utilizing broad ranging plans developed by external aid organizations like the UN and World Bank. To Sachs, these plans are essential to a coherent and timely eradication of poverty.He surmises that if donor and recipient countries follow the plan, they will be able to climb out of poverty.
Part of Sachs’ philosophy includes strengthening the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and the United Nations. If those institutions are given the power to enact change, and freed from mitigating influences, then they will be much more effective. Sachs does not find fault in the international organizations themselves. Instead, he blames the member nations who compose them. The powerful nations of the world must make a commitment to end poverty, then stick to it.
Sachs believes it is best to empower countries by utilizing their existing governments, rather than trying to circumnavigate them. He remarks that while the corruption argument is logically valid in that corruption harms the efficiency of aid, levels of corruption tend to be much higher on average for countries with low levels of GDP. He contends that this hurdle in government should not disqualify entire populations for much needed aid from the west.
Sachs does not see the need for independent evaluators, and sees them as a detractor to proper progress. He argues that many facets of aid cannot be effectively quantified, and thus it is not fair to try to put empirical benchmarks on the effectiveness of aid.
Sachs’ view makes it a point to attack and attempt to disprove many of the ideas that the more “pessimistic” Easterly stands on.
First, he points to economic freedom. One of the common threads of logic In aid is that countries need to develop economically in order to rise from Poverty. On this, there is not a ton of debate. However, Sachs contends that Easterly, and many other neo-Liberal economists believe high levels of Economic freedom in these emerging markets is almost a necessity to Development. Sachs himself does not believe this. He cites the lack of Correlation between the average degrees of Economic Freedom in countries And their yearly GDP growth, which in his data set is completely Inconclusive.
Also, Sachs contends that democratization is not an integral part of having Efficient aid distribution. Rather than attach strings to our aid dollars, or only Working with democracies or “good governments”, Sachs believes we should Consider the type of government in the needy country as a secondary Concern.
Sachs’ entire approach stands on the assertion that abject poverty could be Ended worldwide by 2025.
Dollar/Collier showed that current allocations of aid are allocated inefficiently. They came to the conclusion that aid money is given in many cases as an incentive to change policy, and for political reasons, which in many cases can be less efficient than the optimal condition. They agree that bad policy is detrimental to economic growth, which is a key component of poverty reduction, but have found that aid dollars do not significantly incentivize governments to change policy. In fact, they have negligible impact. As an alternative, Dollar proposes that aid be funneled more towards countries with “good” policy and less than optimal amounts of aid for their massive amounts of poverty. With respect to “optimal amounts” Dollar calculated the marginal productivity of each additional dollar of foreign aid for the countries sampled, and saw that some countries had very high rates of marginal productivity (each dollar went further), while others [with particularly high amounts of aid, and lower levels of poverty] had low [and sometimes negative] levels of marginal productivity. In terms of economic efficiency, aid funding would be best allocated towards countries whose marginal productivities per dollar were highest, and away from those countries who had low to negative marginal productivities. The conclusion was that while an estimated 10 million people are lifted from poverty with current aid policies, that number could be increased to 19 million with efficient aid allocation.
In a followup study to Collier, Dalgaard finds that regardless of policies and utility, aid seems to be less efficient per dollar in the tropics. He states that aid dollars are likely to be just as effective anywhere, so there must be a mitigating externality that is not being accounted for.
New Conditionality is the term used in a paper to describe somewhat of a compromise between Dollar and Hansen. Paul Mosely describes how policy is important, and that aid distribution is improper. However, unlike Dollar, “New Conditionality” claims that the most important factors in efficiency of aid are income distributions in the recipient country and corruption.
One of the problems in foreign aid allocation is the marginalization of the fragile state. The fragile state, with its high volatility, and risk of failure scares away donors. The people of those states feel harm and are marginalized as a result. Additionally, the fate of neighboring states is important, as economies of the directly adjacent states to those impoverished, volatile “fragile states” can be negatively impacted by as much as 1.6% of their GDP per year. This is no small figure. McGillivray advocates for the reduced volatility of aid flows, which can only be attained through analysis and coordination.
Beynon revisits Collier/Dollar’s “efficient aid allocation” and finds much of the same results, although he believes that the model needs to be more robust, with more samplings, and take into account other Millennium Development Goals.
Aid often comes with conditions on its allocation. This is called Aid Conditionality. The two types of conditionality are Outcome and Process based conditionality. Outcome conditionality ties aid to a certain goal, while process conditionality ties aid to a certain method of implementation. These two forms of conditionality are often seen together. The problem with aid conditionality is that it not only restricts the local legislatures in how they shape their own country, but often removes local populations from the goal setting and decision making process entirely.
Academic research has shown that in many instances, aid is conditionally tied due to political motives, rather than notions of proper policy and implementation.
The European Union double standard of trade policy mentioned above is more illustrated in its trade with Latin America. In their April 2002 publication,Oxfarm Report reveals that aid tied to trade Liberalization by the donor countries such as the EU with the aim of achieving economic objective is becoming detrimental to developing countries.For example, the EU subsidizes its agricultural sectors in the expense of Latin America who must liberalize trade in order to qualify for aid. Latin America having, a comparative advantage on agriculture and mainly forms its export sector losts $ 4bn annually due to the EU farm subsidy policies. The aid money actually, instead of being used to finance other development infrastructure, ends up being used to fund terms of trade deficit brought about by trade liberalization. This inequalities and many others imposed upon developing countries have actually benefited the donor rather than the recipient.This cases clearly illustrate the evolution of development aid assistance from providing financial resource to fuel development to being a foreign policy tool used by donor countries to promote their domestic interests. while this can be considered controversial issues, addressing them adequately may help attain some effectiveness in development aid assistance goals.
Axel Dreher showed that over the period 1951-2004, there was a robust positive relationship between United Nations Security Council membership and participation in Internation Monetary Fund programs. Additionally, conditions placed on Security Council member nations' aid are lower in number and severity.  Member nations of the UNSC received on average .8 more World Bank loans per year. 
Seemingly in support of Bill Easterly's searcher's approach, Carlos Santiso found evidence that conditionality is quite harmful to development, and advocates a "radical approach in which donors cede control to the recipient country".
Santiso also argues that neither good governance or democracy is sustainable without the other. 
Former USAID official Carol Lancaster, in her book Foreign Aid (2007) defines foreign aid as: "a voluntary transfer of public resources, from a government to another independent government, to an NGO, or to an international organization (such as the World Bank or the UN Development Program) with at least a 25 percent grant element, one goal of which is to better the human condition in the country receiving the aid." (p 9.)
Both definitions employ the concept that benefit to the people of the receiving country must be one but not necessarily the only objective.
The World News (WN) Network, has created this privacy statement in order to demonstrate our firm commitment to user privacy. The following discloses our information gathering and dissemination practices for wn.com, as well as e-mail newsletters.
We do not collect personally identifiable information about you, except when you provide it to us. For example, if you submit an inquiry to us or sign up for our newsletter, you may be asked to provide certain information such as your contact details (name, e-mail address, mailing address, etc.).
We may retain other companies and individuals to perform functions on our behalf. Such third parties may be provided with access to personally identifiable information needed to perform their functions, but may not use such information for any other purpose.
In addition, we may disclose any information, including personally identifiable information, we deem necessary, in our sole discretion, to comply with any applicable law, regulation, legal proceeding or governmental request.
We do not want you to receive unwanted e-mail from us. We try to make it easy to opt-out of any service you have asked to receive. If you sign-up to our e-mail newsletters we do not sell, exchange or give your e-mail address to a third party.
E-mail addresses are collected via the wn.com web site. Users have to physically opt-in to receive the wn.com newsletter and a verification e-mail is sent. wn.com is clearly and conspicuously named at the point ofcollection.
If you no longer wish to receive our newsletter and promotional communications, you may opt-out of receiving them by following the instructions included in each newsletter or communication or by e-mailing us at michaelw(at)wn.com
The security of your personal information is important to us. We follow generally accepted industry standards to protect the personal information submitted to us, both during registration and once we receive it. No method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100 percent secure, however. Therefore, though we strive to use commercially acceptable means to protect your personal information, we cannot guarantee its absolute security.
If we decide to change our e-mail practices, we will post those changes to this privacy statement, the homepage, and other places we think appropriate so that you are aware of what information we collect, how we use it, and under what circumstances, if any, we disclose it.
If we make material changes to our e-mail practices, we will notify you here, by e-mail, and by means of a notice on our home page.
The advertising banners and other forms of advertising appearing on this Web site are sometimes delivered to you, on our behalf, by a third party. In the course of serving advertisements to this site, the third party may place or recognize a unique cookie on your browser. For more information on cookies, you can visit www.cookiecentral.com.
As we continue to develop our business, we might sell certain aspects of our entities or assets. In such transactions, user information, including personally identifiable information, generally is one of the transferred business assets, and by submitting your personal information on Wn.com you agree that your data may be transferred to such parties in these circumstances.

Clippings (Books, newspapers, etc.); Death notices
Two newspaper clippings in plastic. The top clipping is smaller than the bottom clipping. Both clippings begin with "DEATH OF THE LORD JUSTICE CLERK --". Black paper inserted to offset page during scanning process.
Dried rose petal. The bottom of the rose petal is a light brown color, and the middle and top of the rose petal are a dark brown color. The left side of the petal folds over. Blue paper inserted to offset page during scanning process.
Dried petals in plastic. There are four individual dried flower petals, and two dried flowers with the stem and the petals still connected -one of the dried flowers has three petals still connected and the other dried flower has four petals still...
Dried petals and a stem in plastic. The petals are light brown edged with dark brown. The stem is dark brown. There are four petals - two on each side of the stem. Green paper inserted to offset page during scanning process.

Angioi, Simonetta Agostina and Rau, Domenico and Nanni, Laura and Bellucci, Elisa and Papa, Roberto and Attene, Giovanna (2011) The Genetic make-up of the European landraces of the common bean. Plant Genetic Resources: characterization and utilization, Vol. 9 (2), p. 197-201. eISSN 1479-263X. Article.
Full text not available from this repository.
Here, we present a brief overview of the main studies conducted on the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) in Europe and other countries outside its centres of origin. We focus on the proportions of the Andean and Mesoamerican gene pools, and on the inter-gene pool hybridization events. In Europe, for chloroplast microsatellites, 67% of European germplasm is of Andean origin. Within Europe, interesting trends have been seen; indeed, the majority of the Andean type is found in the three macro-areas of the Iberian Peninsula, Italy and central-northern Europe, while, in eastern and south-eastern Europe, the proportion of the Mesoamerican type increased. On a local scale, the contribution of the Mesoamerican type is always low. On other continents, various situations are seen using different markers: in China and Brazil, the Mesoamerican gene pool prevails, while in an African sample, overall, both gene pools are equally represented, with differences in individual countries. The frequency of European bean genotypes deriving from at least one hybridization event was 44% with an uneven distribution. Interestingly, hybrids tend to have intermediate seed size in comparison with ‘pure’ Andean or Mesoamerican types. On other continents, very few hybrids are found, probably because of the different marker systems used.
I documenti depositati in UnissResearch sono protetti dalle leggi che regolano il diritto d'autore
Repository Staff Only: item control page

Ryder's wealth derived from a simple idea that revolved around an easier way to package and sell seeds. You know those little paper envelopes that seeds can be purchased in? It was Ryder who first came up with the idea of selling seeds in packets.
And the Ryder Cup competition germinated from another of his ideas. The Walker Cup, pitting teams of British and American amateur golfers, began play in 1922. A London newspaper report from 1925 states that Ryder had proposed such a competition for professional golfers. In 1926, Ryder commissioned and paid for the trophy that now bears his name, and the first official Ryder Cup competition was played in 1927.
Back to Ryder Cup FAQ Index

The Brazilian compose, Heitor Villa-Lobos, learned music from his father, who was a widely-read, highly-cultured amateur of music and a librarian. By the turn of the century Villa-Lobos had turned himself into a professional musician. He earned his living as a cafe musician; his instrument was the cello.
n 1905 Heitor Villa-Lobos made the first of his trips to Brazil's north-eastern states, to collect folk music. Such trips would continue in the future, though Villa-Lobos spun a web of mystery around them; his own testimony of adventures with the cannibal tribes of the North-East is not always trustworthy. Afterwards, he studied at the National Institute of Music in Rio de Janeiro, though his compositional style never conformed to any academic norms. His music remained always personal and idiosyncratic. As Villa-Lobos himself said many years later: "My music is natural, like a waterfall." Also: "One foot in the academy and you are changed for the worst!"
After another ethno-musicological trip to the Amazonian interior in 1912, Heitor Villa-Lobos returned to Rio de Janeiro. There, on November 13, 1915, he turned the city on its ear with a concert of his new music. By 1923, he had attracted enough official favour to win a government grant to study in Paris. On his return in 1930, Villa-Lobos was made director of music education in Rio de Janeiro.
Thus began Heitor Villa-Lobos' glorious second career: pedagogue of music for his country. He designed a complete system of musical instruction for generations of Brazilians, based upon Brazil's rich musical culture, and rooted in a deep and always explicit patriotism. He composed choral music for huge choirs of school children, often adaptations of folk material. His legacy in the Brazil of today, even amongst new generations brought up with the samba-schools or MTV, is a strong feeling of pride and love, intertwined with similar feelings for their country. This is surprising, considering that this is a "classical" composer dead now for more than 35 years; a North American parallel would be hard to find.
In 1944, Heitor Villa-Lobos made a trip to the United States to conduct his works, to critical and even some popular acclaim. Important new works were commissioned by American orchestras, and he even wrote a movie score for Hollywood, for the interesting 1945 film The Green Mansions. The 1940's were a period of triumph on an international scale. As a composer and conductor of his own music, Villa Lobos was lionized from Los Angeles to New York to Paris. In spite of his world travels, his home was always in Rio de Janeiro. There he died, on November 17, 1959.
Heitor Villa-Lobos' His earliest pieces originated in guitar improvisations, for example Panqueca ("Pancake") of 1900. The concert series of 1915-1921 included first performances of pieces demonstrating originality and virtuosic technique. Some of these pieces are early examples of elements of importance throughout his œuvre. His attachment to the Iberian Peninsula is demonstrated in Canção Ibéria of 1914 and in orchestral transcriptions of some of Enrique Granados' piano Goyescas (1918, now lost). Other themes that were to recur in his later work include the anguish and despair of the piece Desesperança - Sonata Phantastica e Capricciosa No. 1 (1915), a violin sonata including "histrionic and violently contrasting emotions", the birds of L'oiseau blessé d'une flèche (1913), the mother-child relationship (not usually a happy one in Villa-Lobos's music) in Les mères of 1914, and the flowers of Suíte floral for piano of 1916-1918 which reappeared in Distribuição de flores for flute and guitar of 1937.
Reconciling European tradition and Brazilian influences was also an element that bore fruit more formally later. His earliest published work Pequena suíte for cello and piano of 1913 shows a love for the cello, but is not notably Brazilian, although it contains elements that were to resurface later. His three-movement String Quartet No. 1 (Suíte graciosa) of 1915 (expanded to six movements c1947) is influenced by European opera, while Três danças características (africanas e indígenas) of 1914-1916 for piano, later arranged for octet and subsequently orchestrated, is radically influenced by the tribal music of the Caripunas Indians of Mato Grosso. With his tone poems Amazonas (1916, first performed in Paris in 1929) and Uirapurú (1916, first performed 1935) he created works dominated by indigenous Brazilian influences. The works use Brazilian folk tales and characters, imitations of the sounds of the jungle and its fauna, imitations of the sound of the nose-flute by the violinophone, and not least imitations of the uirapurú itself.
His meeting with Artur Rubinstein in 1918 prompted Heitor Villa-Lobos to compose piano music such as Simples coletânea of 1919 - which was possibly influenced by Rubinstein's playing of Ravel and Scriabin on his South American tours - and Bailado infernal of 1920. The latter piece includes the tempi and expression markings "vertiginoso e frenético", "infernal" and "mais vivo ainda" ("faster still"). Carnaval des crianças of 1919-1920 saw Villa-Lobos's mature style emerge; unconstrained by the use of traditional formulae or any requirement for dramatic tension, the piece at times imitates a mouth organ, children's dances, a harlequinade, and ends with an impression of the carnival parade. This work was orchestrated in 1929 with new linking passages and a new title, Momoprecoce. Naïveté and innocence is also heard in the piano suites A Prole do Bebê ("The Baby's Family") of 1918-1921.
Around this time he also fused urban Brazilian influences and impressions, for example in his Quarteto simbólico of 1921. He included the urban street music of the chorões, who were groups containing flute, clarinet and cavaquinho (a Brazilian guitar), and often also including ophicleide, trombones or percussion. Villa-Lobos occasionally joined such bands. Early works showing this influence were incorporated into the Suíte popular brasileiro of 1908-1912 assembled by his publisher, and more mature works include the Sexteto místico (c1955, replacing a lost and probably unfinished one begun in 1917), and Canções típicas brasileiras of 1919. His guitar studies are also influenced by the music of the chorões.
All the elements mentioned so far are fused in Villa-Lobos's Nonet. Subtitled Impressão rápida do todo o Brasil ("A brief impression of the whole of Brazil"), the title of the work denotes it as ostensibly chamber music, but it is scored for flute/piccolo, oboe, clarinet, saxophone, bassoon, celesta, harp, piano, a large percussion battery requiring at least two players, and a mixed chorus.
In Paris, his musical vocabulary established, Heitor Villa-Lobos solved the problem of his works' form. It was perceived as an incongruity that his Brazilian impressionism should be expressed in the form of quartets and sonatas. He developed new forms to free his imagination from the constraints of conventional musical development such as that required in sonata form.
The multi-sectional poema form may be seen in the Suite for Voice and Violin, which is somewhat like a triptych, and the Poema da criança e sua mama for voice, flute, clarinet, and cello (1923). The extended Rudepoema for piano, written for Rubinstein, is a multi-layered work, often requiring notation on several staves, and is both experimental and demanding. Wright calls it "the most impressive result" of this formal development.The Ciranda, or Cirandinha is a stylised treatment of simple Brazilian folk melodies in a wide variety of moods. A ciranda is a child's singing game, but Villa-Lobos's treatment in the works he gave this title are sophisticated.
Another form was the Chôro. Villa-Lobos composed more than a dozen works with this title for various instruments, mostly in the years 1924-1929. He described them as "a new form of musical composition", a transformation of thBrazilian music and sounds "by the personality of the composer". After the revolution of 1930, Villa-Lobos became something of a demagogue. He composed more backward-looking music such as the Missa São Sebastião of 1937, and published teaching pieces and ideological writings.
Heitor Villa-Lobos also composed between 1930 and 1945 nine pieces he called Bachianas brasileiras ("Brazilian Bach pieces"). These take the forms and nationalism of the Chôros, and add the composer's love of Bach. Villa-Lobos's use of archaisms was not new (an early example is his Pequena suíte for cello and piano, of 1913). The pieces evolved over the period rather than being conceived as a whole, some of them being revised or added to. They contain some of his most popular music, such as No. 5 for soprano and 8 cellos (1938-1945), and No. 2 for orchestra of 1930 (the Tocata movement of which is O trenzinho do caipira, "The little train of the Caipira"). They also show the composer's love for the tonal qualities of the cello, both No. 1 and No. 8 being scored for no other instruments. In these works the often harsh dissonances of his earlier music are less evident: or, as Simon Wright puts it, they are "sweetened". The transformation of Chôros into Bachianas brasileiras is demonstrated clearly by the comparison of No. 6 for flute and bassoon with the earlier Chôros No. 2 for flute and clarinet. The dissonances of the later piece are more controlled, the forward direction of the music easier to discern. Bachianas brasileiras No. 9 takes the concept so far as to be an abstract Prelude and Fugue, a complete distillation of the composer's national influences. Villa-Lobos eventually recorded all nine of these works for EMI in Paris, mostly with the musicians of the Orchestre National de France; these were originally issued on LP's and later reissued on CD's. He also recorded the first section of Bachianas brasileiras No. 5 with Bidu Sayão and a group of cellists for Columbia.
During his period at SEMA, Villa-Lobos composed five string quartets, Nos. 5 to 9, which explored avenues opened by his public music that dominated his output. He also wrote more music for Segovia, the Cinq préludes, which also demonstrate a further formalisation of his composition style.
After the fall of the Vargas government, Villa-Lobos returned full-time to composition, resuming a prolific rate of completing works. His concertos - particularly those for guitar, harp and harmonica— are examples of his earlier poema form. The harp concerto is a large work, and shows a new propensity to focus on a small detail, then to fade it and bring another detail to the foreground. This technique also occurs in his final opera, Yerma, which contains a series of scenes each of which establishes an atmosphere, similarly to the earlier Momoprecoce.
Villa-Lobos's final major work was the music for the film Green Mansions (though in the end, most of his score was replaced with music by Bronislaw Kaper), and its arrangement as Floresta do Amazonas for orchestra, and some short songs issued separately. In 1957, he wrote a 17th String Quartet, whose austerity of technique and emotional intensity "provide a eulogy to his craft". His Benedita Sabedoria, a sequence of a capella chorales written in 1958, is a similarly simple setting of Latin biblical texts. These works lack the pictorialism of his more public music.
Except for the lost works, the Nonetto, the two concerted works for violin and orchestra, Suite for Piano and Orchestra, a number of the symphonic poems, most of his choral music and all of the operas, his music is well represented on the world's recital and concert stages and on CD.

the Great Giovanni Belzoni
Rev. George Lee
’s change from a foreign controlled province to a territory of the
occurred in 1798.
became a state. On December 10, 1817,
was formally admitted to the
Every year more
counties were added in the state and
The present Belzoni area was at that time in the new
and was completely isolated from its county seat,
, and the rest of the county with no roads, no law, no name, no
organization of any kind, and very few settlers that we know of. This area
was known as the Dark Corner of Washington County, for it was too far away
for the county law enforcers to bother about.
became a state, the Indians were removed between 1830 and 1840, and about
7,500,000 acres of land were sold.
The wealthy aristocrats
were beginning to recognize the fact that this was rich land and began to
seek government land grants in this area by 1820 and 1830.
The corn was high, the
cotton was great, and there was no longer an Indian threat. Wild game was
plentiful and this was a land of opportunity for those willing to brave
the wild, uncleared and unhealthy territory.
The first large land
grant of this area was awarded in 1832 to William Hamer of
and probably from
Vicksburg, and Alvarez Fisk, a wealthy
aristocrat. Hamer must have been a land speculator, as his half of the
grant was sold immediately to Fisk. The first records refer to his
property as Fisk Plantation, and later it is recorded as Fisk or Belzoni
Mr. Fisk played a
prominent role in educational, philanthropic and religious activities. He
founded and donated the property for the library which was once called the
Fisk Library or the Natchez Public Library. Mr. Fisk also gave
property upon which to construct the Natchez Institute, a public school.
Mr. Fisk was a shrewd
business man and knew a good thing when he saw it. Such an opportunity
occurred in 1832 when he obtained a sizable portion of land which now
comprised the Belzoni area.
Government entry of the
Fisk-Hamer land grant is dated May 2, 1832. The consideration on the grant
was listed as $217.75.
Three years later we
find that Fisk gave a General Warranty Deed to A.T. McMurtray, Stephen
Castleman, and Oscar Ross. They were sold only a portion of the land (on
the east side of the river) for $80,000 described as a tract lying in
Washington County fronting on river, 60 miles above Manchester (the name
of Yazoo City then) consisting of 2,120 acres.
The Fisk family
retained the land on the west side of the
River, known as Fisk Landing or Belzoni Landing, a part of Belzoni Plantation,
and what is now the City of
Belzoni. Alvarez Fisk so admired The Great Belzoni that he named his plantation
for this Italian showman, engineer, and explorer of Egyptian antiquities.
The first settlement
was at Burtonia Landing, a little south of Fisk Landing, but due to the
area burning in 1888, the entire population moved farther up the river and
began to rebuild on the present site of the City of
First known as “Greasy Row” for the row of saloons along the river
front, it was in 1895 that Steve Castleman went to
to see Governor Stone and secured a charter of incorporation from the
state naming Belzoni a village. Steve Castleman was appointed the first
The first fight for
began as far back as 1870 when Col. James R. Powell, owner of Daybreak,
conceived the idea of forming a new county from parts of the other
counties. With Burtonia as the county seat, the new county was to be named
He had a survey and map
of the county made and went before the legislature that year. He fought
the battle practically alone, and went before every Legislature for
something like 12 years. When he died and efforts for the new county
seemed to have died with him, nothing more was done about it until ten
years later when Col. R. V. Powers of
caught the vision and undertook to renew the fight. He was unsuccessful in
his attempts. In 1912 the fight was renewed, but failed. In 1916 a new
administration was put in power and state politics again entered the
matter. In 1918 the fight was renewed proposing to name the
The facts and figures
published and scattered on the desks of the Senators and Representatives
were that the creation of the county would take from Washington County 155
square miles leaving that county 722 square miles. From Sharkey it would
take 18 square miles, leaving 2465; from Sunflower some 22 square miles
leaving 668; from Yazoo 143 Square miles leaving 895; and from Holmes 74
square miles leaving 760 - thus making Humphreys County 412 square miles.
was named for former Governor Benjamin Grubbs Humphreys, 1865-1868.

The paradigmatic example of “crimes against humanity” is what the Nazis did to the Jewish people. This is where the concept of “crimes against humanity” originally came from. And this is what the U.N. Human Rights Council determined that Israel is doing to the Palestinian people.
- Flawed Financial System: Governments Held Hostage by the “Too Big to Fail” Banks (TBTF)
- No Bear Market In Gold. “Bullish Sentiment” in the Market for Physical Gold Bullion
- European Union Directly Funds Al Qaeda Looting of Syrian oil
- Is EVERY Market Rigged?
- Did 9/11 Justify the War in Afghanistan?
- Threat to the Hegemony of the US Dollar? Rigged Gold Bullion Market
Law and Justice
After four weeks of testimony and over 70 witnesses in a civil trial in Memphis, Tennessee, twelve jurors reached a unanimous verdict on December 8, 1999 that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.
The crimes committed in the name of 9/11 involving acts of war are far-reaching, resulting in the deaths of millions of people as well as the destruction of entire countries.

We do magic to Maps
*Image Credit: Wikimedia Commons
For more than two decades, the Emperor of Japan had instituted sweeping changes to the culture of his country, diminishing the influence of the shoguns in order to bring the nation into the 19th century politically. On February 11, 1889, a new Meiji Constitution established a European-style monarchy hinted at by the Restoration of 1868. In creating the new system, leaders created a formal legal code for the first time in Japanese history.
Much of what passed for law in Japan amounted to little more than tradition for better than a thousand years. Sometime in the 500s, a ritsuryo copied from the Chinese gave the Emperor power over a labyrinthine system of bureaucrats and local rulers. Periodically revised to provide explanations or streamline statutes for two centuries, the final document along these lines, the Yoro Code, was produced in 757.
From then on, however, the imperial government devolved into a series of shogunates. These military-focused dictatorships operated much like their European counterparts of the same era: a shogun exercised control over a wide swath of territory with a number of loyal shugos (governors) ruling smaller sections which were, in turn, divided up amongst gokenin. When the call went out to raise an army for the shogun, each level of government gathered those below it.
The imperial court, for its part, was forced to compete against the different shogunates in order to curry favor amongst the warrior class, leaving Japan with central authority defined by a group’s ability to exert military force and reward the soldiers who secured victory more than anything. In the middle of the 1800s, the most powerful faction of the Japanese ruling elite was the Tokugawa Shogunate, based in central Japan at Edo (modern Tokyo).
Sakamoto Ryoma, a young samurai working in the Tokugawa Shogunate, became enamored with the ideas for modernization espoused by his boss, Katsu Kaishu. Believing imperial control would provide the best opportunity for Japan to rise to the level of the British, Russian and American militaries increasingly exerting influence in -- and bringing trade to -- Asia, Ryoma guided a negotiation for an alliance amongst the Satsuma and Choshu provinces to exert pressure on the Tokugawa. By the end of 1867, Emperor Meiji regained the position as head of state for the country thanks to this cooperation. (Ryoma did not live to see the fruits of his efforts, had been assassinated on December 10th.)
The 16-month Boshin War followed, consolidating political power in Emperor Meiji’s Imperial Court as the remaining shoguns and samurai were slowly decimated. For the most part, the government quickly focused on the development of a more modern economy and a military capable of defending the homeland against the steel warships floating through the Sea of Japan.
Some citizens wished for more. By the early 1880s, the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement voiced frustration with the lack of an elected representative body in the new system. Eager to see European ideals instituted beyond the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy, the group clamored for civil rights and decreased taxes -- the Emperor and the small group of people surrounding him with direct control was no longer good enough.
In response, Emperor Meiji directed Ito Hirobumi to travel the world studying the constitutional systems of the United States, Britain, France, Spain and Germany. Upon his return in 1885, Ito took over as Prime Minister and established a Privy Council to advise the Emperor in affairs of state. The last remnants of the classic Japanese government -- a Chancellor and Ministers of the Right and Left -- were gone.
Following two years of discussion, evaluation and revision, the constitutional committee presented a draft to the Emperor in April 1888. Satisfied with its provisions and the protection of his role as the supreme figure in government, Emperor Meiji announced the new legal system to the public on February 11, 1889. The document would not come into force until late November 1890 but, in some ways, it hardly provided more for the Japanese public. (The only people allowed to vote, for example, were those men with enough land to pay large sums in property taxes.)
Over the next 70 years, however, the full effects of the constitution would be seen by the world: Imperial power would be central to two wars with China, one with Russia and the involvement of the United States in the Pacific Theater of World War II. Following the Japanese surrender, the Meiji Constitution was replaced by a parliamentary system on May 3, 1947.
Also On This Day:
1531 - King Henry VIII of England is recognized as the head of the Church of England
1826 - Swaminarayan composes Shikshapatri, a central text in the Swaminarayan Faith sect of Hinduism
1971 - The Seabed Treaty bans nuclear weapons testing in international waters
1979 - Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini takes control of Iran after the Islamic Revolution
1990 - Nelson Mandela is released from Victor Verster Prison near Cape Town, South Africa after 27 years behind bars

Legal Decisions Archive
This section contains legal decisions regarding native treaty fishing rights.
Quotes are taken directly from the decisions.
Many Columbia River Indians reserved in their treaties "the right of taking fish at all usual and accustomed places, in common with citizens of the Territory, and of erecting temporary buildings for curing them; together with the privilege of hunting, gathering roots and berries, and pasturing their horses and cattle upon open and unclaimed land."
Treaty between the United States and the Yakama Nation of Indians, concluded at Camp Stevens, Walla Walla Valley, 9 June 1855, ratified by the Senate, 8 March 1859, proclaimed by the President of the United States, 18 April 1859.
United States v. Winans, 1905
Only a limitation of [those aboriginal rights], however, was necessary and intended [by the treaties], not a taking away. In other words, the treaty was not a grant of rights to the Indians, but a grant of rights from them -- a reservation of those not granted.
* Upheld the right of easement over private property
Williams v. Seufert, 1916
* A test of the Winans decision in Oregon
Tulee v. Washington, 1942
* Denied the state authority to demand that Indian fishers purchase licenses when fishing off-reservation
* States can regulate Indian fishing is needed for conservation
Puyallup V. Washington, 1968
The right to fish at those respective [off-reservation] places is not an exclusive one. Rather it is one 'in common with all citizens of the Territory.' Certainly the right of the latter may be regulated. And we see no reason why the right of the Indians may not also be regulated by an appropriate exercise of the police power of the state.
* Indian off-reservation treaty fishing rights are subject to state regulation if necessary for conservation
U.S. v. Oregon, 1969
Fishers asked the court to define the legal extent of state regulation of their fisheries.
U.S. v. Oregon Judgement, 1969
* Indians have a right to a fair share of the harvestable catch
Washington v. Puyallup, 1973
The Treaty does not give the Indians a federal right to pursue the last living steelhead until it enters their nets.
* Set the standard for necessity of regulation for conservation in favor of the state
Settler v. Lameer, 1974
* Protected tribal control of off-reservation fishing sites
United States v. Washington, 1974
If alternative means and methods of . . . conservation regulation are available, the state cannot lawfully restrict the exercise of off-reservation treaty right fishing, even if the only alternatives are restriction of fishing by non-treaty fishermen, either commercially or otherwise, to the full extent necessary for conservation of fish.
* Found that many state fishing laws were discriminatory to Indians
* The state must prove that regulation is necessary for conservation
* A fair share (as introduced in U.S. v. Oregon) is fifty percent of the harvestable catch
Sohappy v. Smith, 1976
The state may limit treaty fishing only to the extent necessary to prevent the exercise of that right in a manner that will imperil the continued existence of the fish resource.
* Fourteen members of the Yakama Nation sued Washington state. The state argued that treaty fishing rights were tribal, not individual and, therefore, the individuals had no standing in the court. The court decided on behalf of the Indians.
David Sohappy was arrested several times for fishing the Columbia River. He defend his right to fish in court cases that went all the way to the Supreme Court.

Playtime can be as important as class time for helping students perform their best.
Recess is most children’s favorite period, and parents and teachers should encourage that trend, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Recess can be a critical time for development and social interaction, and in a new policy statement published in the journal Pediatrics, pediatricians from the AAP support the importance of having a scheduled break in the school day. “Children need to have downtime between complex cognitive challenges,” says Dr. Robert Murray, a pediatrician and professor of human nutrition at the Ohio State University who is a co-author of the statement. “They tend to be less able to process information the longer they are held to a task. It’s not enough to just switch from math to English. You actually have to take a break.”
The AAP committee that developed the statement began its research in 2007, expecting to discover that recess is important as a physical outlet for children. What they found, however, was that playtime’s benefits extend beyond the physical. “We came to the realization that it really affects social, emotional and cognitive development in a much deeper way than we’d expected,” she says. “It helps children practice conflict resolution if we allow them unstructured play, and it lets them come back to class more ready to learn and less fidgety.”
The policy could be a lifeline for the dwindling role recess plays in the school day as districts trim budgets and hours of instruction, and squeeze more academic subjects into existing or even fewer school days, often sacrificing recess in the process. A year ago, a national survey found that just six states — Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, Illinois and Iowa — adhere to standards from the National Association for Sports and Physical Education that schoolchildren participate in 150 minutes a week of physical education. And just three states — Delaware, Virginia and Nebraska — have 20 minutes of mandatory elementary-school recess a day, according to research published in the Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine.
Since the 1990s, 73% of elementary school students through sixth grade have some form of daily recess, though it can vary widely between districts and even from school to school. That inconsistency could have serious implications for children’s health, says Catherine Ramstetter, Murray’s co-author and a health educator at Cincinnati’s Christ College of Nursing and Health Sciences. As recess started to disappear, for example, researchers noticed a spike in childhood-obesity rates.
A school volunteer, Ramstetter has personally encountered the challenges of maintaining regular recess. The inner-city Catholic school in Cincinnati where she offers her services has no playground. Recess takes place irregularly in the school gym or at a local park, and only for students through fourth grade. And teachers often withhold recess as punishment.
She and her fellow committee members say that could be a mistake. Banning unruly kids from recess can backfire since these students are precisely those who may potentially benefit the most from the break that recess represents.
It’s also important to distinguish recess from physical education, says Ramstetter. While gym class offers kids a chance to stretch their legs and get their heart rate up, it is still considered instructional time, with very different goals from those of the unstructured downtime of recess. Likewise, it’s important to let kids play what they want — that means playground monitors shouldn’t organize kids to play kickball or soccer. “When it’s structured, it’s not a break in the day,” she says.
The new statement is not meant to be a recipe for rescuing recess; it does not specify how long recess should last, but calls for more studies to determine the optimal length of breaks in the school day. But the authors do advise that recess should be a protected time, a sacrosanct period of free play that is no less important than the hours devoted to math or reading.
That understanding reflects a growing body of research documenting the power of some time off for improving concentration and even creativity. “Everyone, not just kids, benefits from regular breaks in the day,” says Murray. Adults rarely sit down and spend two or three hours focusing on a single task. “We get up, we get coffee, we mix and match our tasks during the day so our concentration can stay sharp,” says Murray. “With kids, we have to schedule these breaks.”
Without such intentional periods of play, the AAP committee says, it’s not just children’s waistlines that may suffer, but their ability to pay attention, and ultimately their academic performance as well.

Gwen Keyes Fleming: Florida making progress on water pollution
Published: Sunday, December 2, 2012 at 9:40 a.m.
Last Modified: Sunday, December 2, 2012 at 9:40 a.m.
Nutrient pollution, the excess nitrogen and phosphorus that causes algal blooms and fish kills, is a major source of water quality impairment across the state of Florida. Nutrient pollution threatens human health and the environment, hurts businesses and costs jobs, reduces property values, diminishes recreational opportunities and impacts your quality of life.
EPA has long held that limits are necessary to protect Florida’s waters from nutrient pollution. The Clean Water Act (CWA) designates primary responsibility for protecting water quality with states, and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) has worked for years to collect data on the condition of statewide waters and adopt its own numeric nutrient standards. Recently, EPA approved FDEP’s revised rules to reduce nutrient pollution in Florida’s treasured waters.
After careful review, EPA determined FDEP’s rules and supporting documentation meet CWA requirements and applicable federal regulations for the water bodies they cover. EPA commends the FDEP for taking this significant step towards protecting and restoring the quality of Florida’s waters.
FDEP’s rules use scientifically sound approaches to protect the many uses of Florida’s waters; from fishing and swimming to drinking. Because Florida and EPA worked together to develop the science, the numeric limits for nitrogen and phosphorus in springs, lakes and streams (outside South Florida) are virtually identical to those in EPA’s 2010 rule developed to protect these same waters. DEP also has adopted additional biological and chemical indicators that are used to identify and prevent nutrient pollution in streams and protect sensitive downstream waters. These tools were used by FDEP in the Santa Fe River to determine that it was impaired and needed restoration. Using numeric limits has also helped protect estuaries in Tampa Bay, Sarasota Bay, Charlotte Harbor, and South Florida marine waters.
We are pleased that FDEP has also recently adopted numeric limits for nutrient pollution in additional Panhandle estuaries, and we look forward to receiving these for review under the CWA. However, in accordance with a 2009 consent decree with the Florida Wildlife Federation, EPA is also proposing two federal nutrient rules for only those waters not already protected by Florida's new standards.
The first rule proposes numeric limits on the amount of nutrient pollution allowed in Florida’s estuaries and coastal waters, as well as in flowing waters in South Florida. The other serves to clarify some provisions in EPA’s 2010 rule and proposes numeric limits on the amount of nutrient pollution for those inland waters not addressed in the FDEP’s current rules. These common sense measures will help protect the water that communities across Florida use for drinking, swimming, and fishing. EPA welcomes public comment on its proposals and will host a public information session and web-based public hearings to gather input.
While EPA is prepared to finalize these rules next year under its consent decree obligations, it is also prepared not to move forward and instead defer to Florida's rules for any Florida waters that become protected under state law in accordance with CWA requirements.
Clean water is vital for Florida, and the state is now on a path to establishing and implementing its own nutrient pollution rules that will allow everyone to enjoy cleaner water.
Gwen Keyes Fleming,
EPA Southeast Regional Administrator
EPA Region 4’s website is: www.epa.gov/region4

Regions of Ireland
SUB-NATIONAL GOVERNANCE IN IRELAND
The Republic of Ireland, which covers a land area of 68,895 sq. km and has a population of 4.1 million (2006), has a relatively centralised administration. However, the local and regional levels have important responsibilities in a number of key areas. Local authorities are the main providers of local government services at county/city level. At regional level 8 Regional Authorities ( NUTS III) co-ordinate certain activities of the local authorities and play a monitoring role in relation to the use of EU Structural Funds. The country is further designated into two NUTS II Regions and two Regional Assemblies are responsible for managing the Objective 2 Regional Competitiveness & Employment programmes.
An amendment to the Constitution of Ireland in 1999 gave clear constitutional status to local government for the first time and made it a mandatory requirement for local elections to be held every five years. There are no direct elections to the two regional levels: instead members are nominated to these levels by their local authorities.

Warts are a surface infection caused by human papilloma virus (HPV). They may occur on any area of the skin, including around the nose, mouth, and genitalia. Children frequently have warts, but they occur in adults as well. They are mildly contagious and may be spread from person-to-person by touching or from one part of the body to another by scratching. Warts are in the very top layer of skin and so they do not effectively trigger the body’s immune system. One can be a completely healthy person and still have warts.
There is no perfect way to treat warts, and no one can guarantee the success of wart treatment. Warts are stubborn and frequently more than one or two treatments are needed. Treatments vary depending on the area of skin or mucous membrane involved, the age of the patient, and the number of warts.
- Liquid nitrogen. This treatment involves a a very cold liquid that is sprayed or applied to the warts causing a small controlled area of frostbite. The frozen area usually develops a blister (sometimes a blood blister) that heals in about two weeks. Freezing is painful. It hurts for the 10-15 seconds it takes to freeze the warts and for the minute or two afterwards while the area thaws. Often children can tolerate having one or two warts frozen, but even the toughest adult may not be able to stand having many warts frozen. The Cheyenne Skin Clinic almost never freezes warts on the bottom of the foot, as this is extremely painful.
- Bleomycin. A dilute form of chemotherapy agent injected into the wart kills cells which are growing more rapidly, like those with the wart virus in them. The injection itself hurts, and there is usually a little pain afterward.
- Diphenciprone (DPCP) immunotherapy. DPCP has been useful when other treatments have been unsuccessful or when a child has had several warts and cannot tolerate other treatments. A small amount of medicine is applied to the skin and left on for two hours. Treatment begins by applying a small bandaid with medicine on it to the hip. An area of skin covered by clothing is used because often there is a brown mark that remains for several months. A rash develops in the area indicating the body’s immune system recognizes the medication.
Three weeks later, the patient has a follow up appointment with the Cheyenne Skin Clinic for the physician or nurse to apply a dilute concentration of the DPCP to the warts. Ideally, a mild irritation develops around the warts, and they slowly go away over a period of 2-3 months. Frequently, several visits spaced every 3-4 weeks are needed. Sometimes the irritation is more pronounced, and the skin becomes very inflamed. If this occurs, one has to decrease the use of medicine tiering the amount used with the amount of irritation. This is a slow approach, but is inexpensive, a relatively painless, and can be used on any new warts that arise during the course of treatment.
- Carbon dioxide laser. This laser can be used to vaporize the stubborn warts. First the area is numbed with an injection of local anesthetic, which in itself is somewhat painful. Next the laser destroys the wart and surrounding skin leaving an ulcer which slowly heals in over a period of two to four weeks. For the first week the ulcer is often painful, and there is usually a scar when healing is complete.
- Topical Acid. This treatment comes in the form of either a liquid, gel, or pad that can be applied to the wart. This peels off the top layers of the skin where the wart lives. This is a slow approach to taking an average of one to two months, but is inexpensive, relatively painless, and can be used on any new warts that appear during the course of treatment.
Genital warts, caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), are moderately contagious and may be spread from person-to- person by sexual contact. Warts are in the very top layer of skin and thus do no effectively trigger the body’s immune system. One can be a completely healthy person and still have warts.
It is very important to treat genital warts, as research shows there has been an increase in cervical carcinoma in some patients with genital warts.
- Podophyllin. This medicine is derived from a brown liquid plant extract that kills cells that are growing rapidly. It is usually applied to warts on mucous membranes like that in the vulvar and perianal region. After the first treatment, the medication should be removed by bathing after two to four hours. (The medication will work better if it is left on longer after subsequent treatments.) Podophyllin stings a little when first applied and the areas may become more painful over the next two to three days. It can only be applied in our office as it can cause serious reactions, including seizures, if it is applied too generously.
- Condylox (podophyllotoxin). This treatment can be applied at home. The medication is applied for three days in a row followed by four days of rest, repeating this each week for four weeks.
- Liquid nitrogen. This very cold liquid is sprayed or applied to the warts causing a small controlled area of frost bite. The frozen area usually develops a blister (sometimes a blood blister) that heals in about two weeks. Freezing is painful. It hurts for the 10-15 seconds it takes to freeze the warts and for the minute or two afterwards while the area thaws.
- Carbon dioxide laser. With this treatment , the area is numbed with an injection of local anesthetic, which in itself is somewhat painful. Next the laser destroys the wart and surrounding skin leaving an ulcer which slowly heals in over a period of two to four weeks. For the first week the ulcer is often painful and there is usually a scar when healing is complete.
- Aldara Cream. This prescription cream is applied to the warts Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at bedtime for up to 12 weeks. Unfortunately, this is a very expensive medication.
HERPES SIMPLEX (COLD SORES AND GENITAL HERPES)
Herpes is a name used for some 50 related viruses. Herpes simplex is related to the viruses for infectious mononucvleosis (Epstein-Barr Virus) and for chicken pox and shingles (varicella zoster virus). The herpes simplex virus can cause blister-like sores almost anywhere on a person’s skin. It usually occurs around the mouth and nose or the buttocks and genitals. HSV infections can be very annoying because they can reappear. The sores may be painful and embarrassing. For some chronically ill people and newborn babies, the viral infections can be serious but rarely fatal.
There are two types of HSV-Type 1 and Type 2.
- Type 1. Studies show that most people get Type 1. It affects the lips, mouth, nose, chin or cheeks during infancy or childhood. They usually catch it from close contact with family members or friends who carry the virus. If can be transmitted by kissing or by using the same eating utensils and towels. A rash or cold sores in the mouth and gums appear shortly after exposure. Symptoms may be barely noticeable or may need medical attention for relief of pain.
- Type 2. It most often appears following sexual contact with an infected person. It has reached epidemic numbers, affecting anywhere between 5 and 20 million persons in the United States, or up to 20% of all sexually active adults.
Herpes Simplex Type 1
Called fever blisters or cold sores, HSV Type 1 infections are tiny, clear, fluid filled blisters most often seen on the face. Type 1 infections may also, less often, occur in the genital area. Type 1 may also develop in wounds on the skin. Nurses, physicians, dentists, and other health care workers sometimes contract a herpetic sore after HSV enters a break in the skin of their fingers
The number of blisters varies from one to a whole cluster. Before the blisters appear, the soon-to-be affected skin may itch or become very sensitive. The blisters then break by themselves or as a result of minor injury, allowing the fluid inside the blisters to ooze. Eventually, crusts form and fall off, leaving slightly red skin. Though the primary infection heals completely, rarely leaving a scar, the virus that caused it remains in the body. It migrates to nerve cells where it remains in a resting phase
Hot news about cold sores
Some individuals suffer from "sun blisters" that develop on their lips after exposure to the sun. Boating, beaching, gardening, or bicycling are activities frequently associated with this problem in the summer. The eruption is caused by the herpes simplex virus. Its appearance may be heralded by itching, burning, or swelling of the lips, followed by the rapid outbreak of groups of blisters. The rash, which can be painful, can spread to the face, and might take one to two weeks to resolve. In some cases, infection with bacteria can complicate the problem. Professional evaluation by a dermatologist is a wise idea since other conditions can produce blisters on the lips. Treatment can include oral medications and antiviral cream. The regular use of high SPF sunscreens on the lips can help prevent outbreaks of sun blisters.
Many products that women use cosmetically now contain sunscreen. But what about men? Men need not wear lipstick to protect their lips from UV light; there are many natural looking, non-greasy lip balms that contain sunscreen. And there is no reason for men not to use a plain moisturizing lotion containing sunscreen on a daily basis.
Herpes Simplex Type 2
Infection with herpes simplex virus Type 2 usually is below the waist, on the buttocks, penis, vagina, or cervix, two to twenty days after contact with an infected person. Sexual intercourse is the most frequent means of contracting the infection. Symptoms of both primary and repeat attacks can include a minor rash or itching, painful ulcers, fever, aching muscles, and a burning sensation during urination. HSC Type 2 can also occur in locations other than the genital area.
As with Type 1, sites and frequency of return bouts vary. The initial episode can be so mild that a person does not realize that he or she has a herpetic infection. Years later, when there is recurrence of HSV, it may be mistaken for an initial attack. This can lead to unfair accusations by a sexual partner.
After the initial attack, the virus moves to nerve cells near the brain or spinal cord remaining there until set off again by a menstrual period, fever, physical contact, stress or something else. Pain or unusual tenderness of the skin may begin between one to several days before both primary and recurrent infections may develop. This is called prodrome.
How are the HSV infections diagnosed?
The appearance of HSV is often so typical that no further testing is necessary to confirm an HSV infection. However, if the diagnosis is uncertain, as it may be in the genital or cervix areas, a specimen may be taken and sent to the laboratory for analysis.
How do you prevent transmission?
Between 200,000 and 500,000 persons “catch” genital herpes each year and the number of Type 1 infections is many times higher. Prevention of this disease, which is contagious before and during an outbreak, is important.
If tingling, burning, itching, or tenderness-signs of recurrence-occur in an area of the body where you had a herpes infection, then that area should be kept away from other people. With mouth lesions, one should avoid kissing and sharing cups or lip balms. For persons with genital, this means avoiding sexual relations and oral and/or genital contact during the period of symptoms or active lesions. Towels should not be shared nor clothing exchanged. Studies have shown viral shedding between attacks.
Other serious implications of HSV
- Eye infections
- Infections in babies
- HSV and the seriously ill
There is no vaccine that prevents this disease from occurring. Oral anti-viral medications, acyclovir and valacyclovir, have been developed for severe or frequently recurring infections. Low doses of medications are helpful in reducing the number of herpes attacks in people with frequent outbreaks.
Molluscum contagiosum is a virus-caused growth which appears as a small bump on the skin, often with a small, central, dimple-like depression. It may occur on any part of the body and there may be a single growth or as many as 50 or more.
As the name suggests, these growths are contagious and are spread from place to place on the body and to other people by physical contact. Sometimes they are spread by sexual contact and if this is the case, sexual partners should be examined for presence of lesions.
Treatment consists of physically removing these superficial growths from the skin. This may be done by curettement (scraping them off with a special surgical instrument), application of various medicines to the growths or by freezing them with liquid nitrogen. Molluscum contagiosum lesions may also become infected with bacteria and may sometimes require antibiotic therapy. Since molluscum contagiosum lesions sometimes go away by themselves, treatment by cautery or surgery requiring stitches is avoided because of the scarring that results from these methods.
Sometimes new lesions keep appearing after treatment. This is probably because some growth were in an early stage at the time of the treatment and could not be seen with naked eye. Eventually, after all visible and incubating lesions have been destroyed the appearance of new molluscum contagiosum lesions will stop.
Herpes Zoster, also known as shingles or zoster, is a viral infection caused by the same virus that causes chicken pox. Anyone who has had chicken pox can develop develop herpes zoster. The virus remains dormant or inactive in certain nerve root cells of the body and only when it reactivates does herpes zoster occur. About 20% of those people who have had chicken pox will get zoster at some time during their lives. Fortunately, most people will get zoster only once.
It is not clear what prompts the virus to reactivate or “awaken” in healthy people. A temporary weakness in immunity ( the bodies ability to fight infection) may allow the virus to multiply and move along nerve fibers toward the skin. Although children can get zoster, it is more common in people over age 50. Illness, trauma, and stress may trigger a zoster attack.
What are the symptoms of Zoster?
The first symptom of zoster is burning pain, tingling, or extreme sensitivity in one area of the skin usually limited to one side of the body. This may be present for one to three days before a red rash appears at that site. There may also be fever or headache. The rash soon turns into groups of blisters that look a lot like chicken pox. The blisters generally last for two to three weeks. The blisters start out clear but then pus or dark blood collects in the blisters before they crust over (scab) and begin to disappear. The pain may last longer. It is unusual but possible to have pain without blisters or blisters without pain.
Where does zoster usually appear on the body?
Zoster is most common on the trunk and buttocks but it can also appear on the face, arms, or legs if nerves in these areas are involved. Great care is needed if the blisters involve the eye because permanent eye damage can result. Blisters on the tip of the nose signal possible eye involvement. A dermatologist will usually refer the patient to an ophthalmologist (eye specialist) immediately.
What are the complications of zoster?
Post-herpectic neuralgia is constant pain or periods of pain that can continue after the skin has healed. It can last for months or even years and is more common in older people. The use of medication in the early stages of the zoster may help prevent this complication. A bacterial infection of the blisters can occur, and can delay healing. If pain and redness increase or reappear, you should return to the dermatologist. Antibiotic treatment may be needed.
Another complication is the spread of zoster all over the body or to internal organs. This can also happen with chicken pox. It occurs rarely and most often in those with weakened immunity.
How is zoster diagnosed?
The diagnosis is based on the way blisters look and a history of pain before the rash on one side of the body. The dermatologist may scrape skin cells from a blister onto a glass slide for examination. The glass slide is then examined under a microscope for changed characteristic of zoster. If there is any doubt, blister fluid containing virus can be sent to the laboratory for special testing.
Is zoster contagious?
The virus that causes zoster can only be passed on to others who have not had chicken pox and then they will develop chicken pox, not zoster. Zoster
s much less contagious than chicken pox. Persons with zoster can only transmit the virus if blisters are broken. Newborns or those with decreased immunity are at the highest risk for contracting chicken pox from someone who has zoster. Patients with zoster rarely require hospitalization.
Herpes usually clears on its own in a few weeks and seldom recurs. Pain relievers and cool compresses are helpful in drying the blisters. If diagnosed early, oral anti-viral drugs can be prescribed to decrease both viral shedding and the duration of skin lesions. They are routinely prescribed for severe cases of zoster -with eye involvement for example- or for those with decreased immunity.
Corticosteriods, sometimes in combination with anti-viral drugs, also are used for severe infection such as in the eyes and to reduce severe pain. Nerve blocks can also help to control pain.
Now, two new drugs appear to be more effective than the old standby medication for shingles, acyclovir, in slowing the virus down before it can do permanent nerve damage. For maximum effect, famciclovir should be taken within 3 days after acute pain begins. It, like valaciclovir (another recently approved drug), seems to work well to reduce the pain of shingles and slow its progression. Also, a new vaccine call Zostavax is available for persons age 60 and over. The vaccine decreases the incidence by 2/3 and those who do get shingles, the severity is decreased by 2/3 too.

Slope and deep-sea abundance across scales: Southern Ocean isopods show how complex the deep sea can be
Kaiser, Stefanie; Barnes, David; Brandt, Angelika. 2007 Slope and deep-sea abundance across scales: Southern Ocean isopods show how complex the deep sea can be. Deep Sea Research II, 54 (16-17). 1776-1789. 10.1016/j.dsr2.2007.07.006Full text not available from this repository.
How animals are distributed in the world's largest surface environment, the deep sea, is poorly understood. The ANDEEP (ANtarctic benthic DEEP-sea biodiversity, colonisation history and recent community patterns) III cruise probed richness and abundance of one group, peracarid crustaceans (isopods, amphipods, cumaceans, tanaidaceans, mysidaceans), as a model of deep-sea fauna across Southern Ocean (SO) sites. Analysis of samples from the ANDEEP cruises reveals SO isopods to be highly abundant, rich and endemic as many other taxa in the region are known to be. Samples taken across three spatial scales include sites tens, hundreds and thousands of kilometers apart, sites stretching from the Southern Cape Basin (South Atlantic) to continental Antarctica and including depths from 1030 to 5000 m. Across these spatial scales we investigated ecological success (abundance) of peracarids at order, family, and species levels. Remarkably no significant relationship was found between abundance and spatial scale at any taxonomic level. That is, the variability in abundance at major regional scale is no different to that across just tens of kilometres. Most taxa were represented in only a few samples, but we suggest most inhabitants of the deep Weddell Sea environment to be very patchy rather than rare. Separate plots of family, genus, and species abundance by sample number revealed this to be true—nearly all genera and species are an order of magnitude more abundant than ‘background’ levels in just one or two samples. Our isopod and amphipod samples reveal the Atlantic sector of the SO, one of the most dynamic and important regions influencing the global deep-sea environment, to be highly complex. Our study suggests that, at least with regard to the study taxa and area, the typical comparisons of regions that are made by ecologists miss the scale at which crucial ecological variability happens. Even without ice scours creating topographical complexity (as on the shelf) the deep Weddell Sea is clearly complex at scales smaller than that measured to date.
|Programmes:||BAS Programmes > Global Science in the Antarctic Context (2005-2009) > Biodiversity, Functions, Limits and Adaptation from Molecules to Ecosystems|
|Additional Keywords:||Patchiness; Antarctica; Peracarida; Rarity; Ecological success|
|NORA Subject Terms:||Marine Sciences
|Date made live:||05 May 2009 14:44|
Actions (login required)

Category Archives: War Crimes and Criminals
Current British premier David Cameron praised Lady Thatcher for having “saved Britain” and for making the has-been colonial power “great again”.
Tributes poured forth from French and German leaders, Francoise Hollande and Angela Merkel, while US President Barack Obama said America had lost a “special friend”.
Former American secretary of state Henry Kissinger and former Russian leader Mikhail Gorbachev also lamented the loss of “an historic world figure”. Polish ex-president Lech Walesa hailed Margaret Thatcher for having brought down the Soviet Union and Communism.
Such fulsome praise may be expected coming from so many war criminals. But it is instructive of how history is written by the victors and criminals in high office. Obama, Cameron, Hollande and Merkel should all be arraigned and prosecuted for war crimes in Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Syria, Pakistan, Somalia and Mali, among other places. Kissinger has long evaded justice for over four decades for his role in the US genocide in Southeast Asia during the so-called Vietnam War in which over three million people were obliterated in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
The British state is to give Thatcher, who died this week aged 87, a full military-honours funeral. The praise, eulogies, wreaths and ceremonies are all self-indictments of association with one of the most ruthless and criminal political figures in modern times.
So, here is a people’s history of Thatcher’s legacy.
She will be remembered for colluding with the most reactionary elements of Rupert Murdoch’s squalid media empire to launch a war over the Malvinas Islands in 1982, a war that caused hundreds of lives and involved the gratuitous sinking of an Argentine warship, the Belgrano,
by a British submarine.
By declaring war, rather than conducting political negotiations with Argentina over Britain’s ongoing colonial possession of the Malvinas, Thatcher salvaged her waning public support in Britain, and the bloodletting helped catapult her into a second term of office in Downing Street. Her political “greatness” that so many Western leaders now eulogize was therefore paid in part by the lives of Argentine and British soldiers, and by bequeathing an ongoing source of conflict in the South Atlantic.
It wasn’t just foreigners that Thatcher declared war on. Armed with her snake-oil economic policies of privatisation, deregulation, unleashing finance capitalism, pump-priming the rich with tax awards subsidised by the ordinary working population, Thatcher declared war on the British people themselves. She famously proclaimed that “there was no such thing as society” and went on to oversee an explosion in the gap between rich and poor and the demolition of social conditions in Britain. That legacy has been amplified by both successive Conservative and Labour governments and is central to today’s social meltdown in Britain – more than two decades after Thatcher resigned. Laughably, David Cameron, a protégé of Thatcher, claims that she “saved” Britain. The truth is Thatcher accelerated the sinking of British capitalism and society at large. What she ordered for the Belgrano has in a very real way come to be realised for British society at large.
During her second term of office in the mid-1980s, the Iron Lady declared war on the “enemy within”. She was referring to Britain’s strongly unionised coal-mining industry. Imagine declaring war on your own population. That is a measure of her pathological intolerance towards others who did not happen to share her obnoxious ideological views – ideological views that have since become exposed as intellectually and morally bankrupt.
For over a year around 1984, her Orwellian mindset and policies starved mining communities in the North of England into submission. Her use of paramilitary police violence also broke the resolve and legitimate rights of these communities. Miners’ leader Arthur Scargill would later be vindicated in the eyes of ordinary people, if not in the eyes of the mainstream media. Britain’s coalmines were systematically shut down, thousands of workers would be made unemployed, and entire communities were thrown on the social scrap heap. All this violence and misery was the price for Thatcher’s ideological war against working people and their political rights.
The class war that Thatcher unleashed in Britain is still raging. The rich have become richer, the poor decidedly more numerous and poorer. The decimation of workers’ rights and the unfettered power given to finance capital were hallmarks of Thatcher’s legacy and are to this day hallmarks of Britain’s current social decay. But that destructive legacy goes well beyond Britain. The rightwing nihilistic capitalism that Thatcher gave vent to was and became a zeitgeist for North America, Europe and globally. The economic malaise that is currently plaguing the world can be traced directly to such ideologues as Margaret Thatcher and former US President Ronald Reagan.
A final word on Thatcher’s real legacy, as opposed to the fakery from fellow war criminals, is her role in Ireland’s conflict. Her epitaph of “Iron Lady” is often said with admiration or even sneaking regard for her supposed virtues of determination and strength. In truth, her “iron” character was simply malevolent, as can be seen from her policies towards the Irish struggle for independence from Britain. In 1981, 10 Irish republican prisoners, led by a young Belfast man by the name of Bobby Sands, died from hunger strikes. The men died after more than 50 days of refusing prison food because they were demanding to be treated as political prisoners, not as criminals. Thatcher refused to yield to their demands, denouncing them as criminals and callously claiming that they “took their own lives”. No matter that Bobby Sands had been elected by tens of thousands of Irish voters to the British House of Parliament during his hunger strike. He was merely a criminal who deserved to die, according to the cold, unfeeling Thatcher.
As a result of Thatcher’s intransigence to negotiate Irish rights, the violence in the North of Ireland would escalate over the next decade, claiming thousands of lives. As with Las Malvinas dispute with Argentina, Thatcher deliberately took the military option and, with that, countless lives, rather than engage in reasoned, mutual dialogue. Her arrogance and obduracy blinded her to any other possibility.
As the violence gyrated in Ireland, Thatcher would also embrace the criminal policy of colluding with pro-British death squads. Armed,funded and directed by British intelligence, these death squads would in subsequent years kill hundreds of innocent people – with the knowledge and tacit approval of Lady Thatcher. It was a policy of British state terrorism in action, sanctioned by Thatcher. One of those victims was Belfast lawyer Pat Finucane, who was murdered in February 1989. He was shot 12 times in the head in front of his wife and children by a British death squad, after the killers smashed their way into the Finucane home on a Sunday afternoon.
Thus whether in her dealings with Las Malvinas row with Argentina, the British working people or Irish republicans, Margaret Thatcher was an intolerant militarist who always resorted to demagoguery, violence and starvation to get her political way. She was a criminal fascist who is
now proclaimed to be a national hero.
Reports this week say that Thatcher died with Alzheimer’s, the brain-degenerating disease in which the patient loses their faculty for memory. Western leaders, it seems, would also like to erase public memory of Thatcher’s criminal legacy.
Jewish hasbara bodies aiding and abetting Israeli crimes must face the full force of the law
By Nureddin Sabir
Editor, Redress Information & Analysis
The world of Jewish politics is so back to front and upside down that, when it comes to Israel, bad is good and wrong is right.
That is the sad fact of which we need to remind Israel flag wavers, such as failed US politician Katrina Lantos Swett, who from time to time rear their heads to bleat “anti-Semitism” and decry the “deligitimization of Israel”, which they blame for allegedly rising anti-Jewish sentiment.
On 5 April the Times of Israel reported that a Jewish organization in Melbourne, Australia, could face expulsion from the country’s Jewish umbrella body for launching a campaign that calls for the boycott of products from West Bank settlements.
These settlements – colonies and squatter camps, in fact – are illegal under international law and, with their rapid expansion under successive Israeli governments, both of the left and the right, are terminally undermining any prospect of a two-state solution of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Boycott settlements call
The Australian campaign “Don’t Buy from the Settlements” was launched on 26 March by the Melbourne-based Australian Jewish Democratic Society (AJDS) with the aim of encouraging Australian Jews to avoid buying products made in Jewish colonies and squatter camps located in the Palestinian territories occupied after the 1967 war.
In a media release published on its website, the AJDS said:
Israeli settlements are seen around the world as a major obstacle to creating peace between Israelis and Palestinians. One way to take a stand against the harm they create is not to buy the products they produce. This sends a clear message that we will not be complicit in the settlement programme.
According to Jordy Silverstein, an executive member of the AJDS:
Not buying products from settlements will not work on its own, but it is one small step that we can take. When we add in the possibility of sharing knowledge about what the settlements mean and what they do … we can work alongside Palestinians, Israelis and people throughout the diasporas to create an exciting, liberating future.
However, this principled stance of the AJDS quickly prompted Australia’s Israel hasbara (propaganda) groups to gang up against it. For them, anything short of total, unconditional support for Israel, its illegal occupation and colonization of Arab territories, its war crimes and its crimes against humanity is tantamount to treason.
Orgy of Jewish solidarity with Israel
So, first came the umbrella Jewish organization, the Zionist Federation of Australia, which described the call for boycott as “immoral” and “repugnant”.
Then came the Jewish Community Council of Victoria, which consists of more than 50 Jewish organizations in the state. Its president, Nina Bassat, touted the idea of expelling the AJDS for having the audacity to call for action against Israeli criminality.
Bassat was joined in this orgy of Jewish tribal solidarity with the racist Israeli state by Peter Wertheim, of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, who also called for the AJDS to be expelled from Australia’s Jewish umbrella body.
“The AJDS campaign is repugnant to the strong anti-BDS policies of every Jewish communal roof body in Australia,” he bleated, referring to the boycott, divestment and sanctions movement, “and to the ECAJ [Executive Council of Australian Jewry] platform of support for Israel and its legitimacy as the state of the Jewish people”.
“Anti-Semitism” and support for Israel
If there is indeed a rise in anti-Jewish sentiment anywhere in the world, then to find the cause look no further than the above-mentioned types of frenzied Jewish defence of Israeli crimes.
There is a strong case for nurturing a worldwide culture at grassroots level that promotes international legality and opposes crimes committed or sponsored by states. As a first step towards this, it is necessary to bring to account groups and individuals that support criminal actions committed or sponsored by states.
Just as in most civilized countries there are laws against aiding, abetting and glorifying terrorism, and against crimes such as rape and drugs trafficking, so there should also be laws that proscribe supporting or glorifying state crimes.
If neo-Nazis and Nazi holocaust deniers can be prosecuted in Germany, France and elsewhere in Europe, so should organizations that support Israeli crimes also be prosecuted, whether in Australia or anywhere else, for aiding, abetting and/or glorifying Israeli war crimes and crimes against humanity.
During the presentation by Ivanov data was shared which shows that 820 tons of heroin makes its way into Europe and Russia every year. Most of it is trafficked through the unstable Middle East and Africa as is part of the 994 tons of cocaine that is consumed in the U.S. and Europe.
“… First, there is no impartial intervention. Entering the conflict is to take sides. Ronald Reagan, 241 Marines, and 17 American embassy personnel learned that lesson in Lebanon in 1983. Washington had proclaimed its commitment to peace by aiding one force in a multi-sided civil war. By becoming a de facto combatant the administration turned Americans into targets. Aiding Syria’s opposition means becoming a participant in that conflict.
Paradoxically, aiding the resistance could drive some Syrians who desire a negotiated solution toward the government. The Financial Times recently reported: “As the civil war becomes ever dirtier, rebels’ actions are starting to mirror those of the regime.” In fact, opposition fighters increasingly kill regime soldiers and supporters, and have turned to crime, including kidnapping, to raise funds.
Second, there is no magic elixir that combines riskless intervention with speedy conquest. In Libya the allies provided the rebels with air support, but only enough to drag out the conflict for five months, during which time thousands, and perhaps tens of thousands, of Libyans died. By being prudent and cost-conscious the allies were not humanitarian, their professed objective….”
The 9/11 attacks were criminal acts intended as reprisals for American-sponsored oppression in the Middle East
Anti-war campaigners gathered in Trafalgar Sqaure on April 1, 2009 to protest against the ongoing wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. The protest, organised by the Stop the War Coalition and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, was part of a day of protests in advance of tomorrows G20 summit in London. The protest began outside the US Embassy and then marched through Central London to Trafalgar Square. (Photo: Simon Kimber)
River to Sea Uprooted Palestinian
The views expressed in this article are the sole responsibility of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of this Blog!
The U.S. Global Strangulation of Iran has nothing to do in the short or intermediate terms with any fear Iran will get a nuclear weapon. American intelligence and former heads of Israel’s Mossad agree with the international assessment that there is no evidence Iran is now trying to produce nuclear weapons or that they could do so in less than several to ten years if they tried to do so. There is also nearly universal agreement among serious analysts, including U.S. intelligence sources going back many years, that attacking Iran would likely lead to severe cuts in oil supplies from the Persian Gulf that would produce a severe shock to the global economy, especially in this time of financial crisis. This does not mean Obama or the entire U.S. leadership at the top is going insane or trying to destroy the U.S. Empire. There is a “method to this seeming madness,” a very clear grand strategic goal involved in these constant threats and attacks on Iran. The general goal is to save the U.S. Empire and its domination and exploitation of the world to stop the accelerating decline and disintegration of the Empire and the American financial system and economy. The specific goal of all the attacks on Iran is to stop the rise of the Iranian-Shia superpower in the Middle East and its rapidly growing alliance with Islamist Sunni powers growing across North Africa, the Middle East, South Central and Central Asia. Iran is also the core leader in the growing alliance of Shia and Islamist Sunnis with the vast nations of Russia, India and China against the U.S. Empire’s energy and dollar imperialism. all of this makes Iran and its allies a mortal threat to the U.S. global empire and the present U.S. financial system tied to that empire. this is why the U.S. is taking such desperate risks to try to strangle Iran and to destroy its central position in this anti-American imperialism coalition that is growing rapidly. Iran and its Shia Allies across the whole Middle East are a very real threat to the U.S. Global Empire’s domination and exploitation of this whole vast region. That Iranian superpower Shia bloc’s rapidly growing alliance with Islamist Sunnis makes Iran the core of a very grave threat to the U.S. global empire which I believe has already developed far enough to prevent the U.S. from continuing its imperialist suppression of muslim nations with totalitarian, puppet regimes and the use of those to exploit this vast region. But I think these would be temporary set-backs for Iran and its great alliance of nations lining up against the U.S. Empire. I think the world sees the Giant is crippled severely by its losing wars, by the decline of the U.S. economy relative to the rising nations around the world, the so-called BRICKS, though one must add another I to that for Iran [in addition to India] – BRICKS, and The Great Global Financial Crisis the U.S. produced and is making worse and worse with vast help from its puppets in the EU and elsewhere, as even the “liberal” Brookings Institute just reported on the basis of global indices they analyze.
By attacking Iran and all of the Shia and Islamist Sunni nations allying more and more closely with Iran, most obviously Syria right now, the U.S. is in fact turning the vast Muslim World of nearly one and a half billion mostly young and very fertile people and much of the rest of the world against its brutal Empire.
This desperate grand strategy has, therefore, put the existence of the U.S. empire and of the U.S. financial system dependent on it at grave risk. at the very least, the U.S. is “going for broke” – “playing for all the marbles” – in its blatantly brutal, imperialistic strangulation of Iran and now some of its allies such as Syria.
The U.S. destroyed the Sunni block to the rise of Shia Iran as a Super Power in the Middle East when it destroyed Hussein’s Iraqi military machine, which the U.S. had earlier secretly supported in Iraq’s vast invasion of Iran [which led to the defeat of Iraq and the U.S.] Sunni Iraq was the only major block to the rise of the Shia as a Super Power at the heart of the Middle East. When the U.S. also installed a totalitarian Shia military power in Iraq which from the beginning was quietly allied with their brother Shia in Iran [where many of the new rulers of Iraq had lived for many years to escape Hussein's secret police], the new, rising Shia Super Alliance of Iran and Iraq became a huge military power of 100,000,000 mostly young people who loathe the U.S. and control more oil and gas than the Saudi Arabian and UAE puppets of the U.S. Iran was by then already building its Super Alliance with Syria, Hizbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Palestine, an Alliance at the very heart of the Arab World and the Middle East. That alliance grew very rapidly after Hizbollah defeated Israel and drove them out of Lebanon for the second time.
Beginning over a year ago the U.S. puppet Sunni regimes across North Africa started falling to popular revolutions against the puppets and, above all, against the U.S. Empire which replaced the U.K. and French Empires that had oppressed them earlier. The revolutions are still going on in almost every U.S. Sunni puppet nation, but in almost all of them the people are winning their revolutions and moving steadily into a new age of Islamist governments which are in fact very anti-American and becoming more so as the U.S. allys itself more and more openly with the most hated totalitarian regimes, such as the Egyptian Army. the absurd, monarchical and pseudo-democratic tyrannies in Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Yemen and a few others.
From the beginning of these new Sunni Islamist movements and governments, the Iranians and their Shia allies have allied themselves more and more with the Sunni Islamists, based largely on their common loathing of the Great Satan – the U.S. – and the terrorist threat it poses to all of them. Turkey has not had an Islamist revolution, but the Sunni Islamists are taking over more and more in Turkey and becoming more and more Islamist, more and more anti-American and more and more quietly allied with the Iranians and the rising Sunni Islamists.
At the same time the U.S. was enraging the people of the Middle East against itself, the U.S. was enraging the Afghans and Pakistanis in the same way only more virulently with its terrorist murders and raids everywhere. The hearts and minds of nearly 200,000,000 Afghans and Pakistanis are now virulently anti-American. Though they are not yet allied with the rising Iranian Super Alliance, they are becoming more friend;y and will almost certainly find more and more common causes against the U.S. as the U.S. and its European [Nato] puppets flee the rising power of the Islamist guerilla armies. The U.S. has lost its terrorist war against Afghanistan and Pakistan and pushed them closer and closer to both iran and china, and even to some degree india and russia, to counter-balance the u.s. in its final desperate war against the world.
All of these vast developments are being hidden from the American and European peoples as much as possible by vast propaganda Media Wars against Iran and its grand global alliance against the U.S. But intelligent leaders around the world see the U.S. is desperate and is losing and even in Latin America the few remaining puppet regimes of the U.S. Empire, notably Mexico and Colombia, are turning more and more against the U .S. even in full public view. This happened just this weekend in Cartagena, Colombia, where Obama and his motley crowd of Key Stone Cop “security guards” were publicly humiliated by the still partially puppet regime of Colombia which needs vast U.S. military help in oppressing the peasants of the North for the vastly rich landowning families of the South. All 30 Latin Leaders there opposed even a future meeting of this sort with the U.S. without the U.S. allowing Cuba to attend and almost all insist as well on an end for support of the U.K. puppet regime’s claims to the Falklands off the coast of Argentina. Hugo Chavez, the elected president of Venezuela, was not even there because he is getting more cancer treatment in Cuba [not Miami]. He is more and more an ally of Iran, as is even Brazil on crucial matters like opposition to Dollar Imperialism and Inflation Thievery. Had he and his few very close allies from Latin America, Ecuador and Nicaragua, been there, the anti-American thrust would have been even greater. As it is, the Cartagena police wound up mortally embarrassing the Secret Key Stone Cops, the U.S. Army and Obama by taking U.S. security guards into custody over refusal to pay a prostitution bill for servicing rendered. Obama et al were made a laughing stock in a way that never happened before when these terrorized nations were ruled by oppressed puppet regimes. [Like Congressman Issa, I think these were SOP activities which led to police custody and massive public exposure for the first time. The U.S. Empire is losing its grip even on still dependent puppets.]
The U.S. has gotten very desperate in the Middle East. It is not only risking a cut off of oil by Iran over the U.S. strangulation of Iran, but the U.S. is now more and more openly involved in supporting the Sunni revolt against Syria and the Sunni oppression of Shia revolt against Bahrain by Saudia Arabia, the only major U.S. puppet left in the Middle East and a tyrannical monarchy loathed by the whole vast region and its own population [as far as we can tell in such an extremely closed police state].
It is always possible the U.S. will realize it is risking its entire Empire in this grand strategy, or that Iran will buckle under the strangulation pressures and retreat, or an Iranian ally like Syria will start a war inadvertently with another, more important ally, Sunni Turkey, that might reverse the growing great alliance. Maybe the U.S. will become more wise in its mix of sticks and carrots in dealing with Iran.
I think the U.S. is desperately fighting its last great imperial war against the world. I think the U.S. will lose this WAR and destroy its Empire and its global financial system. Obama has become the Undertaker of the U.S. Global Empire and, if he and his desperate strategists keep attacking the world, he will be the Undertaker of the U.S. as it now exists. By all indications, they will continue to destroy the U.S. unless some greater power, perhaps a Great Awakening of the American people who would prefer not to be impoverished or torn apart by the Obama Undertaker Strategy.
River to Sea Uprooted Palestinian
The views expressed in this article are the sole responsibility of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of this Blog!
The U.S. Global Strangulation of Iran has nothing to do in the short or intermediate terms with any fear Iran will get a nuclear weapon. American intelligence and former heads of Israel’s Mossad agree with the international assessment that there is no evidence Iran is now trying to produce nuclear weapons or that they could do so in less than several to ten years if they tried to do so. There is also nearly universal agreement among serious analysts, including U.S. intelligence sources going back many years, that attacking Iran would likely lead to severe cuts in oil supplies from the Persian Gulf that would produce a severe shock to the global economy, especially in this time of financial crisis.
This does not mean Obama or the entire U.S. leadership at the top is going insane or trying to destroy the U.S. Empire. There is a “method to this seeming madness,” a very clear grand strategic goal involved in these constant threats and attacks on Iran. The general goal is to save the U.S. Empire and its domination and exploitation of the world to stop the accelerating decline and disintegration of the Empire and the American financial system and economy. The specific goal of all the attacks on Iran is to stop the rise of the Iranian-Shia superpower in the Middle East and its rapidly growing alliance with Islamist Sunni powers growing across North Africa, the Middle East, South Central and Central Asia.
Iran is also the core leader in the growing alliance of Shia and Islamist Sunnis with the vast nations of Russia, India and China against the U.S. Empire’s energy and dollar imperialism.
all of this makes Iran and its allies a mortal threat to the U.S. global empire and the present U.S. financial system tied to that empire. this is why the U.S. is taking such desperate risks to try to strangle Iran and to destroy its central position in this anti-American imperialism coalition that is growing rapidly.
Iran and its Shia Allies across the whole Middle East are a very real threat to the U.S. Global Empire’s domination and exploitation of this whole vast region. That Iranian superpower Shia bloc’s rapidly growing alliance with Islamist Sunnis makes Iran the core of a very grave threat to the U.S. global empire which I believe has already developed far enough to prevent the U.S. from continuing its imperialist suppression of muslim nations with totalitarian, puppet regimes and the use of those to exploit this vast region.
But I think these would be temporary set-backs for Iran and its great alliance of nations lining up against the U.S. Empire. I think the world sees the Giant is crippled severely by its losing wars, by the decline of the U.S. economy relative to the rising nations around the world, the so-called BRICKS, though one must add another I to that for Iran [in addition to India] – BRICKS, and The Great Global Financial Crisis the U.S. produced and is making worse and worse with vast help from its puppets in the EU and elsewhere, as even the “liberal” Brookings Institute just reported on the basis of global indices they analyze.
by Rania Khalek on March 20, 2013
The United States may be finished dropping bombs on Iraq, but Iraqi bodies will be dealing with the consequences for generations to come in the form of birth defects, mysterious illnesses and skyrocketing cancer rates.
Al Jazeera’s Dahr Jamail reports that contamination from U.S. weapons, particularly Depleted Uranium (DU) munitions, has led to an Iraqi health crisis of epic proportions. “[C]hildren being born with two heads, children born with only one eye, multiple tumours, disfiguring facial and body deformities, and complex nervous system problems,” are just some of the congenital birth defects being linked to military-related pollution.
In certain Iraqi cities, the health consequences are significantly worse than those seen in the aftermath of the atomic bombing of Japan at the end of WWII.
The highest rates are in the city of Fallujah, which underwent two massive US bombing campaigns in 2004. Though the U.S. initially denied it, officials later admitted using white phosphorous. In addition, U.S. and British forces unleashed an estimated 2,000 tons of depleted uranium ammunitions in populated Iraqi cities in 2003.
DU, a chemically toxic heavy metal produced in nuclear waste, is used in weapons due to its ability to pierce through armor. That’s why the US and UK were among a handful of nations (France and Israel) who in December refused to sign an international agreement to limit its use, insisting DU is not harmful, science be damned. Meanwhile, the Pentagon’s refusal to release details about where DU munitions were fired has made it difficult to clean up.
Today, 14.7 percent of Fallujah’s babies are born with a birth defect, 14 times the documented rate in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Fallujah’s babies have also experienced heart defects 13 times the European rate and nervous system defects 33 times that of Europe. That comes on top of a 12-fold rise in childhood cancer rates since 2004. Furthermore, the male-to-female birth ratio is now 86 boys for every 100 girls, indicating genetic damage that affects males more than females.
(On a side note, these pictures are rather sanitized compared to other even more difficult to look at images. See here if you can bear it.)
If Fallujah is the Iraqi Hiroshima, then Basra is its Nagasaki.
According to a study published in the Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, a professional journal based in the southwestern German city of Heidelberg, there was a sevenfold increase in the number of birth defects in Basra between 1994 and 2003.
According to the Heidelberg study, the concentration of lead in the milk teeth of sick children from Basra was almost three times as high as comparable values in areas where there was no fighting.
In addition, never before has such a high rate of neural tube defects (“open back”) been recorded in babies as in Basra, and the rate continues to rise. According to the study, the number of hydrocephalus (“water on the brain”) cases among new-borns is six times as high in Basra as it is in the United States.
This isn’t isolated to Fallujah and Basra. The overall Iraqi cancer rate has also skyrocketed:
Official Iraqi government statistics show that, prior to the outbreak of the First Gulf War in 1991, the rate of cancer cases in Iraq was 40 out of 100,000 people. By 1995, it had increased to 800 out of 100,000 people, and, by 2005, it had doubled to at least 1,600 out of 100,000 people. Current estimates show the increasing trend continuing.
As Grist’s Susie Cagle points out, “That’s potentially a more than 4,000 percent increase in the cancer rate, making it more than 500 percent higher than the cancer rate in the U.S.“
Dr. Mozghan Savabieasfahani, an environmental toxicologist based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, told Jamail that “These observations collectively suggest an extraordinary public health emergency in Iraq. Such a crisis requires urgent multifaceted international action to prevent further damage to public health.”
Instead, the international community, including the nation most responsible for the health crisis (hint: it starts with a “U” and ends with an “S”), is mostly ignoring the problem.
To make matters worse, Iraq’s healthcare system, which was once the envy of the region, is virtually nonexistent due to the mass exodus of Iraq’s medical doctors since 2003. According to recent estimates, there are currently fewer than 100 psychiatrists and 20,0000 physicians serving a population of 31 million Iraqis.
Dahr Jamail was on Democracy Now this morning discussing the horrific effects of military-related pollution in Iraq:
Yanar Mohammad, President of the Organization for Women’s Freedom in Iraq was also on Democracy Now and addressed the toxic legacy of birth defects in Iraq. (I interviewed Mohammed for a piece I wrote for Muftah about the deterioration of Iraqi women’s rights since the invasion, which you can read here.)
If they had a scintilla of decency, Tony Blair, Alastair Campbell and John Scarlett would not show their faces in public again
Ten years ago today, American and British tanks stormed across the border of Kuwait into Iraq, precipitating a torrent of violence which has since cost more than 100,000 Iraqi and Allied lives.
We, the British people, were told by our leader Tony Blair that the invasion was indispensable to Britain’s national security because Saddam Hussein was developing weapons of mass destruction which could be used against us.
Soon after Western forces reached Baghdad, it became plain that no such weapons existed.
Moreover, it also emerged that the Prime Minister had assured President George Bush of Britain’s armed support in deposing Saddam Hussein, well ahead of the WMD claims, because he wished to assist the Americans in doing what he considered a good deed in the world.
Blair’s trusted henchman, Alastair Campbell, colluded with John Scarlett, chairman of Britain’s Joint Intelligence Committee, to produce a document which afterwards proved to be a mass of falsehoods, offering ‘evidence’ of the case for war.
|Alastair Campbell (left), colluded with John Scarlett,
chairman of Britain’s Joint Intelligence Committee, to produce a
document which has proved to be a mass of falsehoods,
offering ‘evidence’ of the case for war
All three men thus committed what seems to some of us a heinous political crime. They concocted a false manifesto to justify taking Britain to war, with the loss of 179 British servicemen’s lives.
Yet a decade on, not only are those responsible walking the streets of London as free men, but they are without shame.
Blair said this week on BBC’s Newsnight that he does not regret the war. ‘If we hadn’t removed Saddam from power, just think, for example, what would be happening if these Arab revolutions were continuing and Saddam, who’s probably 20 times as bad as Assad in Syria, was trying to suppress an uprising in Iraq.’
|Blair, Campbell and Scarlett thus committed what seems to some of us a heinous political crime. They concocted a false manifesto to justify taking Britain to war, with the loss of 179 British servicemen’s lives|
I feel passionate because I was among those duped by the WMD claims.
Before 2003 I wrote many times in these pages that Britain should have nothing to do with a recklessly irresponsible American Republican adventure in Iraq. But then I read the government’s report on Saddam’s weapons. I felt that this had to be believed, and an invasion reluctantly supported.
My wife Penny, who never swallowed Blair and Campbell’s claims, argued bitterly with me. I said pompously: ‘It’s impossible that the Government and the Secret Intelligence Service would lie to us about something this big.’
I was as wrong as I could be. Blair, Campbell and Scarlett made fools of many of us.
What seems to make it all much worse is that they got away with it.
Scarlett, whom Campbell described to the Chilcot Inquiry into the Iraq War as ‘a mate’, was discredited as an intelligence officer by his role in the scandal. He was the professional spook who processed the material he and Downing Street then served up to the nation. He formed an unholy partnership with his political masters.
When it was all over, however, instead of posting him to Ulan Bator as he deserved, Blair rewarded Scarlett’s misconduct by making him director of the Secret Intelligence Service.
Much of the secret service was thoroughly unhappy about the appointment. But the Prime Minister used his power, and Scarlett served his term. Not only that, but having retired from the SIS, he now serves as an ‘independent director’ of The Times newspaper, a role in which Vladimir Putin would be more credible.
Campbell, meanwhile, has become the darling of the BBC, forever a guest on its chat shows and invited to air his views on news programmes as if he was an elder statesman rather than spinmaster of the most mendacious government of modern times.
Campbell’s off-camera behaviour, as a foul-mouthed bully, was brilliantly captured in the political satire The Thick Of It. But the man himself is nowadays welcomed into studios as if he was a national treasure.
Why have we lost our capacity for anger? I suspect that much of the public is content to forgive these people not from Christian charity, but because it does not care much about anything any more.
I spoke at a dinner last week at which a guest asked me how I would behave if Tony Blair walked in. There was obvious surprise and even disbelief when I said that I would decline to shake his hand.
But I meant what I said. It seems outrageous the former Prime Minister is travelling the world, collecting tens of millions of pounds in consultancy and speaking fees, masquerading black-comically as a Middle East ‘peace envoy’, while in Iraq the killing goes on and on. Yet Blair still insists the invasion was a splendid idea.
Amazingly, David Cameron has invited him into Downing Street to give advice — no doubt about how to persuade the British people that we should get stuck into Syria.
Most of Blair’s former Cabinet colleagues, by contrast, have distanced themselves to some degree from the war. John Prescott, Deputy Prime Minister in 2003, said this month that the Iraq invasion ‘cannot be justified’ and offered a bizarre excuse for his support at the time — that he thought George Bush had a plan to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Prescott was, of course, the Blair government’s resident buffoon rather than a serious politician, but at least he has brains enough now to see that he was complicit in a disaster.
Some people think that public and political attitudes to Blair and Campbell (nobody outside Whitehall remembers Scarlett’s name, luckily for him) will change when the interminable Chilcot Inquiry’s report is published later this year.
I will believe that only when it happens. Official inquiries have a long history of making their conclusions so equivocal that, somehow, nobody ends up getting blamed.
A dispute is continuing between Chilcot and the Cabinet Secretary, who has refused to release pre-war correspondence between Blair and President Bush deemed likely to prove that the Prime Minister signed up for the Republicans’ war long before the issue of WMDs was even raised.
Whatever the outcome of this argument, I shall be amazed if Chilcot’s report displays the courage and clarity of thought to say what most of the British people know already — that Blair and his associates are guilty as hell.
Some people say: ‘Oh, but it’s all a long time ago and, anyway, we are out of Iraq now.’
True, but the nightmare Bush and Blair created continues, with scores dead in a bomb blast in Baghdad only yesterday.
The two Western ‘crusaders for freedom’ achieved the remarkable feat of precipitating the killing of almost as many Iraqis as Saddam Hussein accounted for during his murderous rule.
Yet Tony Blair now lives in a splendour that seems to satisfy even his wife’s sybaritic tastes. Alastair Campbell is said to be advising Ed Miliband on how to get into Downing Street and will probably end up with a peerage for his pains.
The former prime minister and his spin doctor have wrought such tragedy and grief in the world that they should be regarded as pariahs. But people choose to forget.
Political rage focuses instead on phone-message hackers from the Press. Yet at least their crimes, repulsive as they were, never killed anyone. That is more than can be said for those of the former tenant of Downing Street.
"Now, in 2013 another band of manipulators is seeking to take the US to war in Syria. Americans – Beware!"

Do you like spiders? On the first part of this tutorial we'll go through the process of creation of a spider web. In part one, we're going to model the web using bèzier curves. It's a pretty manual process, so take breath and prepare for it!
Made by SchematicWorks

What Is It?
The middle ear is the space behind the eardrum, which is connected to the back of the throat by a passageway called the Eustachian tube. Middle ear infections, also called otitis media, can occur when congestion from an allergy or cold blocks the Eustachian tube. Fluid and pressure build up, so bacteria or viruses that have traveled up the Eustachian tube into the middle ear can multiply and cause an ear infection.
Middle ear infections are the most common illness that brings children to a pediatrician and the most common cause of hearing loss in children. Middle ear infections can also cause a hole (perforation) in the eardrum or spread to nearby areas, such as the mastoid bone. Adults also can get middle ear infections.
Children in day care have an increased risk of middle ear infections. The increased exposure to other infected children increases your child's chances of getting infected.
The most common symptoms of a middle ear infection are pain and decreased hearing. Inside the middle ear, three tiny bones (ossicles) normally transfer sound vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear, where they are turned into nerve impulses that your brain understands as sound. In people with otitis media, however, inflammation and infection may change this normal process. Other symptoms can include fever, general body discomfort, rubbing or pulling of the ears in children, vomiting and diarrhea in infants, dizziness, loss of balance and fluid draining from the ear.
Your doctor will ask about ear pain, any discharge from the ear and fever. He or she will examine the ears with an otoscope -- an instrument with a lighted, cone-shaped end piece for looking in the ear canal at the eardrum. The doctor will look for redness and bulging of the eardrum and will check to see if it moves normally by blowing a puff of air through the otoscope. (Eardrums do not move if they are too stiff or if there is fluid behind them.) Your doctor may also do a hearing test called an audiogram to check for hearing problems or a test called a tympanogram that measures how the eardrum moves.
Symptoms of otitis media usually improve within 48 to 72 hours, but the fluid that has built up in the middle ear may last for up to 3 months.
You may be able to lower your child's risk of otitis media by doing the following:
The treatment of a middle ear infection depends on how bad the symptoms are and what's causing the infection. Many infections will go away on their own and the only treatment necessary is medication for pain. Up to 80% of ear infections may go away without antibiotics. Antibiotics are prescribed for any child younger than 6 months and for any person with severe symptoms. Sometimes a doctor will write a prescription for antibiotics but will ask the patient or family to wait 48 to 72 hours before filling it, to see if symptoms improve.
In cases of particularly severe infections or those that do not respond to treatment, a tube may need to be inserted through the eardrum. This is done by a specialist in illnesses of the ears, nose and throat (an otolaryngologist), usually under anesthesia. If enlarged adenoids or tonsils cause recurrent or persistent infections, the specialist may recommend surgery to remove them.
When to Call a Professional
Call your doctor if you or your older child complains of an earache or has trouble hearing. If your baby child has a fever, is unusually irritable or can't sleep, frequently rubs or pulls his or her ears, has vomiting or diarrhea or does not respond normally to sounds (doesn't startle when a door slams or pots clang), call your doctor promptly.
The outlook in most people with a middle ear infection is very good. The infection and its symptoms usually go away completely. In severe cases that go untreated, the infection can spread, causing an infection in the mastoid bone (called mastoiditis) or even meningitis, but this is rare. Hearing difficulties can occur. While they are not necessarily permanent, they can affect the speech and language development of younger children.
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
National Institutes of Health
31 Center Drive, MSC 2320
Bethesda, MD 20892-2320
American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery
One Prince St.
Alexandria, VA 22314-3357

View your list of saved words. (You can log in using Facebook.)
In mathematics, the useful concept of a process with no end. As represented by the symbol , it is often mistakenly thought to be the largest number or a place on the real number line. Instead, it is the idea of a limit, as in the expression x , which suggests that the variable x increases without bound. For example, the function f(x) = 1/x, or the reciprocal of x, tends toward 0 as x approaches infinity as a limit. This process of approaching is crucial to the definition of the derivative and the integral in calculus, as well as to many other concepts of mathematical analysis.
This entry comes from Encyclopædia Britannica Concise. For the full entry on infinity, visit Britannica.com.

See what questions
a doctor would ask.
Antibiotics often causes diarrhea: The use of antibiotics are very likely to cause some level of diarrhea in patients. The reason is that antibiotics kill off not only "bad" bacteria, but can also kill the "good" bacteria in the gut. This leads to "digestive imbalance" where there are too few remaining "good" bacteria in the digestive system. The treatment is typically to use "probiotics", such as by eating yoghurt cultures containing more of the good bacteria. See digestive imbalance and probiotics.
Some of the causes, which may potentially be dangerous or fatal if left undiagnosed, may include:
The following list of conditions have 'Scrotum infection' or similar listed as a symptom in our database. This computer-generated list may be inaccurate or incomplete. Always seek prompt professional medical advice about the cause of any symptom.
Select from the following alphabetical view of conditions which include a symptom of Scrotum infection or choose View All.
Search Specialists by State and City

The Tachi Yokut Indians have inhabited the San Joaquin valley for centuries.
Our forefathers made their living peacefully through farming, hunting, fishing, and gathering grains, nuts and fruits. Our lands consisted of fertile valleys, marshlands and rolling foothills. With the arrival of the American settlers, we gradually lost the land where we once lived. Our land was given away by the government or sold to farmers and ranchers, sometimes as bounty for killing our people. By the end of the 19th century, the Tachi Yokut Tribe was split across the central and southern parts of California.
Here in the San Joaquin Valley, our people were marched on foot from the valley to the foothills to make way for farmers and ranchers. When oil was discovered near Coalinga, we then were marched back to a desolate spot in the central valley near the present location of our reservation.
The Citizenship Act of 1924 gave all Indians American citizenship rights while allowing them to retain their tribal citizenship but it made little difference in the way we were treated by the government. As part of our integration into white society, the federal government sent our children to government schools, our religion was banned, and the teaching of our language and culture was all but forbidden.
Even after the land grabs and removal efforts had ceased, the damage had been done. The division of our people, the suppression of the Indian culture, and the influence of white society left our people with few ties to the past.
Aspirations for the future were being destroyed by the resulting economic hardships and prejudice.
For generations our people have tried to support themselves as seasonal field laborers. Government regulations produced long term economic stagnation on the reservation, resulting in 85% unemployment, a crumbling infrastructure, and a cycle of poverty which ground away at the hope for a better future for our children.
Also see: THE SANTA ROSA RANCHERIA

errno - error return value
The lvalue errno is used by many functions to return error values.
Many functions provide an error number in errno, which has type int and is defined in <errno.h>. The value of errno shall be defined only after a call to a function for which it is explicitly stated to be set and until it is changed by the next function call or if the application assigns it a value. The value of errno should only be examined when it is indicated to be valid by a function's return value. Applications shall obtain the definition of errno by the inclusion of <errno.h>. No function in this volume of IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 shall set errno to 0. The setting of errno after a successful call to a function is unspecified unless the description of that function specifies that errno shall not be modified.
It is unspecified whether errno is a macro or an identifier declared with external linkage. If a macro definition is suppressed in order to access an actual object, or a program defines an identifier with the name errno, the behavior is undefined.
The symbolic values stored in errno are documented in the ERRORS sections on all relevant pages.
Previously both POSIX and X/Open documents were more restrictive than the ISO C standard in that they required errno to be defined as an external variable, whereas the ISO C standard required only that errno be defined as a modifiable lvalue with type int.
An application that needs to examine the value of errno to determine the error should set it to 0 before a function call, then inspect it before a subsequent function call.
Error Numbers, the Base Definitions volume of IEEE Std 1003.1-2001, <errno.h>
First released in Issue 1. Derived from Issue 1 of the SVID.
The following sentence is deleted from the DESCRIPTION: "The value of errno is 0 at program start-up, but is never set to 0 by any XSI function". The DESCRIPTION also no longer states that conforming implementations may support the declaration:extern int errno;
Obsolescent text regarding defining errno as:extern int errno
Text regarding no function setting errno to zero to indicate an error is changed to no function shall set errno to zero. This is for alignment with the ISO/IEC 9899:1999 standard.
IEEE Std 1003.1-2001/Cor 2-2004, item XSH/TC2/D6/23 is applied, adding text to the DESCRIPTION stating that the setting of errno after a successful call to a function is unspecified unless the description of the function requires that it will not be modified.

The business of HIV
Battling the virus
A huge, strange drug market
THE coming weeks may bring a victory in the long war against the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS. A drug called Truvada already treats the disease. By June 15th American regulators are expected to approve its use to prevent the transmission of HIV, too.
The past 30 years have produced several triumphs. A flood of money has helped scientists to invent new drugs and health workers to deliver them to those in need (see chart 1). These drugs have transformed a fatal disease into a chronic one. They have also made HIV a big business.
Sales of antiretroviral drugs in America and the five biggest European markets reached $13.3 billion in 2011, according to Datamonitor, a research outfit (see chart 2). The market is as unusual as it is large, both buoyed by government support and worryingly dependent on it. The past decade has brought fancier medicine in rich countries and copious aid for poor ones. But the war is far from won.
Publicly funded research has played a larger role in developing drugs for HIV than for other diseases. A study published last year in Health Affairs found that HIV drugs were three times as likely to involve a patent from the public sector. HIV also has special status among regulators. America's Food and Drug Administration (FDA) created a faster way to review HIV drugs, allowing them on the market before the most expensive stage of clinical trials.
In total, public and private investment has yielded more than two dozen HIV drugs. In 1987 Burroughs-Wellcome (now part of GlaxoSmithKline) introduced the first one, tackling an enzyme that helps the virus progress inside human cells. In 1995 Hoffmann-La Roche, a Swiss drug firm, launched the first protease inhibitor, which interrupts the virus at a later stage of replication. Today different medicines are combined to suppress resistance or reduce side-effects. The rise of combination therapy has brought a flurry of cross-licensing: companies strike deals to sell each other's drugs in carefully calibrated cocktails.
One company stands out: Gilead, of California. A late entrant to the HIV race, Gilead quickly took the lead. Its strategy was simple: the more convenient the treatment, the better. In 2004 Gilead launched Truvada, a once-a-day, one-pill combination of two drugs. In 2006 it introduced Atripla, a once-a-day, one-pill combination of Truvada and another treatment. Atripla's average wholesale price in America is nearly $25,000 per patient, per year. In 2011 its global sales reached $3.2 billion.
More good news for Gilead has come in recent weeks. An FDA panel recommended Truvada for preventive use: ie, to protect healthy people from contracting the virus. Another FDA panel endorsed Gilead's new Quad pill, which is the simplest, most effective combination drug to date.
If the process for developing HIV drugs has been unusual, selling them has been even more so. America is the rich world's biggest market, with 841,000 patients diagnosed—ten times as many as in Britain. More than 60% of HIV drugs in America are bought with public money. Insurers give HIV special treatment: patients are rarely pressed to buy the cheapest pills, as they might be if they had another disease.
Distributing drugs in poor countries is harder. A decade ago, hardly any poor people could afford them. At first, drugs firms handled this badly. In 1998, 39 big Western firms sued South Africa to protect their HIV patents. Global uproar ensued; the firms backed down in 2001.
Then two things changed. First, rich countries started donating vast sums to fight AIDS in poor ones. In 2000 there was less than $2 billion for HIV programmes each year; by 2010 there was $15 billion, thanks to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and George Bush junior's President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR).
Second, the price of AIDS drugs plunged. In May 2000 a year's “triple cocktail” therapy cost $10,000 or so. By 2011 the same pills sold for $62 in poor countries. PEPFAR cash buys generic versions of patented drugs, which may be supplied only to poor countries. Last year two drugmakers won most of PEPFAR's contracts: Aurobindo, an Indian firm, and Matrix, an Indian firm acquired in 2007 by Mylan, an American one. PEPFAR's bidding system keeps margins slim even by the standards of the generics industry, says Rajiv Malik, the president of Mylan. But volumes are huge.
Can treatment expand further? Despite the subsidies and the plunge in prices, less than half of those infected with HIV take HIV drugs. Those who do, however, live a long time, and they have to keep taking the pills. What's more, new studies show that it helps to start treating patients early, so demand is sure to rise.
Alas, aid dipped in 2009 and 2010, thanks to the financial crisis. To make matters more complicated, there is a trade-off between more drugs and better ones. Most patients in poor countries get outdated pills, according to Médecins Sans Frontières. Allowing generics firms to copy yet more patented drugs might help. Since 2006 Gilead has licensed drugs to generics firms for 5% royalties. Last year it went further, agreeing to license drugs to a “patent pool” to centralise royalty deals for a range of firms. So far, however, Gilead is the only Western company to join.
Even in rich countries, public willingness to pay for the best drugs may be waning. Express Scripts manages drug costs for American employers. With Gilead's expensive Quad poised to enter the market, employers have started asking Steve Miller, the chief medical officer, to contain HIV costs, possibly by nudging patients towards cheaper drugs.
There are two distinct HIV markets. In rich countries, many good treatments jostle for market share. The best will generate fat profits, since patients have to take their pills every day. But Datamonitor predicts that growth will slow after 2017, as many drugs lose patent protection and prices crash. In poor countries, by contrast, Big Pharma makes very little money but the most efficient copycats thrive. Meanwhile, the world still waits for a cure.
From the print edition: Business

Carbon Monoxide (Blood)
Does this test have other names?
CO blood test, CO blood gas, arterial blood gas
What is this test?
This test measures the level of carbon monoxide (CO) in your blood.
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, tasteless, and odorless gas made by combustion. Breathing in CO can be fatal because it doesn't allow oxygen to get to your heart and other organs.
This test looks for carboxyhemoglobin. This substance is created in your blood when hemoglobin combines with carbon monoxide instead of oxygen.
Most deaths from CO result from smoke inhalation. Other sources include malfunctioning heaters, improperly ventilated kitchen stoves, improperly vented tools, camping stoves, charcoal grills, water heaters, and cars with their engines running in an enclosed space like a garage. All of these can cause CO to spread throughout a building.
Why do I need this test?
You may need this test if your doctor suspects that you have CO poisoning. Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning include:
Severe poisoning can produce nerve system symptoms, such as:
Carbon monoxide poisoning can be more difficult to identify in very young children than in adults. For example, a child may merely appear fussy and not want to eat.
You may also have this test if you have been exposed to CO, especially if you inhaled smoke during a fire. You may also have this test if you've been near a car that's had its engine running in an enclosed space for an extended amount of time.
What other tests might I have along with this test?
Your doctor may also order these tests:
Your doctor may also order an MRI scan if you also have symptoms of nervous system problems.
What do my test results mean?
Many things may affect your lab test results. These include the method each lab uses to do the test. Even if your test results are different from the normal value, you may not have a problem. To learn what the results mean for you, talk with your health care provider.
Results are given as a percentage or as a decimal. These are the normal ranges for CO levels in the blood:
Adults: less than 2.3 percent, or 0.023
Adult smokers: 2.1 to 4.2 percent, or 0.021 to 0.042
Adult heavy smokers (more than two packs a day): 8 to 9 percent
Hemolytic anemia: Up to 4 percent
Newborn: greater than 12 percent
If your levels are higher, you may have CO intoxication or poisoning.
How is this test done?
The test requires a blood sample, which is drawn through a needle from a vein in your arm.
Does this test pose any risks?
Taking a blood sample with a needle carries risks that include bleeding, infection, bruising, or feeling dizzy. When the needle pricks your arm, you may feel a slight stinging sensation or pain. Afterward, the site may be slightly sore.
What might affect my test results?
Other factors aren't likely to affect your results.
How do I get ready for this test?
You don't need to prepare for this test. But be sure your doctor knows about all medicines, herbs, vitamins, and supplements you are taking. This includes medicines that don't need a prescription and any illicit drugs you may use.

The monument in Neckarzimmern recalls into memory the fate of the Jews of Baden. On October 22, 1940, the SS deported the Jewish residents of 137 Baden communities to France. They were interned in the Gurs camp by order of the French Vichy Government. Many of the Jews from Baden perished in the Auschwitz death camp after being deported from Gurs by orders of the SS in 1942.
In 1940, all of the Jews residing in Alsace and Lorraine were deported to the southern part of France controlled by the collaborating government in Vichy. At the time, the two provinces were administered by Robert Wagner and Josef Bürckel, in charge of the neighbouring districts of Baden and Saar-Palatinate respectively. These deportations prompted Wagner and Bürckel to also expel the Jews from Baden and Saar-Palatinate to France. The orders had not come from the Reich government in Berlin; the operation was kept a secret and had been initiated by the two »Gauleiter«. The so-called »Wagner-Bürckel-Aktion« was put into effect on October 22 and 23, 1940 - it was among the first deportations of Jews from the German Reich. Members of the Gestapo rounded up the Jews from the regions of Baden and Saar-Palatinate, giving them one hour to pack only few belongings before gathering at public squares. From there they were chased onto trucks and buses and transported to larger train stations. A total of nine trains had been prepared to take them to France. The French authorities had not been informed about the plan. Disguised as transports of the Wehrmacht the trains could pass the border to France undetected. When the Vichy Government found out who had been on the train, it decided that the Jews were to be interned at the Gurs camp near the Spanish border. The camp was completely unprepared to take 7,000 new inmates. The men and women were separated at Gurs and allocated to barracks. Within a few months, many of those interned at Gurs fell ill and died due to the insufficient food and medical supplies as well as a lack of hygienic facilities at the camp.
About 6,000 Jewish children, women and men from the district of Baden were deported to the Gurs internment camp. Over 1,000 Jews from the district of Saar-Palatinate were deported. How many of them died due to the conditions they were subjected to at Gurs is not known. When then National Socialists decided on the »final solution of the Jewish question«, Theodor Dannecker, responsible for implementing the new policy in France, ordered the deportation of all Jews held at Gurs to Auschwitz in August 1942. Many Jews from Baden were among those deported.
The memorial project was brought about by a cooperation of the catholic youth section of the Freiburg archdiocese and the protestant office for youth work at the state church of Baden. It was dedicated on October 23, 2005, on the grounds of the protestant youth conference centre in Neckarzimmern. The cement foundation of the memorial in the form of a Star of David measures about 25 metres on each side. It is currently the only monument in Baden in honour of all the Jews deported from Baden. The memorial follows a dynamic concept: there are plans to set up a total of 137 individually designed stones around the memorial, one for each of the 137 towns in Baden from which Jews were deported.
- Mahnmal zur Erinnerung an die deportierten badischen Juden
- +49 (0)761 514 424 7
- +49 (0)761 514 476 244
- Accessible at all times
- Newsletter of the Peace Workgroup

This is a MLDesigner/SatLab model of an Earth Orbiting Satellite. The satellite carries a payload of instruments that collect and store data, then download it on command to ground stations. The satellite is power by batteries that are recharged by a solar array.
One set of parameters define the operational environment--satellite orbital details, date and time, ground station positions etc. A second set of parameters define the satellite environment—power consumption settings (on, off, standby, operational), Low and high transmit energy consumption, memory power requirements, charge and discharge values, solar panel angles and solar flux, data fame size, memory size, etc.
The model simulates the operation of the satellite (collecting data when over land , storing it in memory, and transmitting it on request.) It also simulates the operation of the power system as it provides power for data collection, storage and transmission and is recharged when the solar panels face the sun. The model links to SatLab which generates the orbit and provides positional information to MLDesigner.
The top level model consists of an environmental model and a satellite model.
The environmental model defines the operational environment for the system.
The top-level satellite model consists of an instrument system, a control system, a transmission system, and a power system.
The instruments are connected to memory through a data bus. Data from the instruments is transferred through the data bus to memory until it can be transmitted to ground stations.
The power system consists of solar panels that feed a power controller.
When ground stations are in view, the satellite transmits data stored in memory to the ground station.

Complete Steps 1 – 5.
Step One: Watch the power point
presentation on shapes.
(See below: Attachment File 1)
Step Two: Complete the Shape Activities at
the end of the presentation.
Step Three: Click on
http://www.lil-fingers.com/shapes/ to watch
Draw Me Shapes, by David Lumerman.
Step Four: Color, cut, and paste the school
bus worksheets. (Teacher should have
the worksheets printed before the
student completes this activity, It
may be found at (cut & paste address)
Step Five: In your journal, draw and name
each shape. Then make up a story
using each one.
Take your activity sheets home to
review the shapes that you have

mysqld, also known as MySQL Server, is the main program that does most of the work in a MySQL installation. MySQL Server manages access to the MySQL data directory that contains databases and tables. The data directory is also the default location for other information such as log files and status files.
The mysqld program has many options that can be specified at startup. For a complete list of options, run this command:
MySQL Server also has a set of system variables that affect its operation as it runs. System variables can be set at server startup, and many of them can be changed at runtime to effect dynamic server reconfiguration. MySQL Server also has a set of status variables that provide information about its operation. You can monitor these status variables to access runtime performance characteristics.
For a full description of MySQL Server command options, system variables, and status variables, see Section 5.1, "The MySQL Server". For information about installing MySQL and setting up the initial configuration, see Chapter 2, Installing and Upgrading MySQL.
Copyright © 1997, 2010, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
This documentation is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it only under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; version 2 of the License.
This documentation is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with the program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA or see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

The English Castle|
by David Dawson
This article is the first in a series which attempts to outline the development of the English Medieval castle and to describe its major features. Where possible, reference is made to existing castles within a comfortable day's journey of London so that the visitor who wishes to view a selection of English castles, but has limited time at his or her disposal, need not travel far from the capital
Perhaps the first issue to be dealt with is an answer to the question, "what is a castle?" The English Medieval castle, like its counterparts in Europe, is a unique phenomenon. Most buildings are created to fulfil a single, specific purpose: a church, a house, a factory, a school, a bank, a hotel etc. A castle, depending upon the status of the man who occupied it, could be variously, a military base, a seat of government, a court and a stronghold for the surrounding region. It could be any or all of the above but it was principally the private residence of its owner, his family and his dependents.
England had known fortifications before the advent of the castle. The Iron Age peoples of Ancient Britain fortified hilltops with massive earthworks, such as Maiden Castle in Dorset, for tribal defense. The Romans dotted the countryside with innumerable military encampments and built the impressive chain of fortresses, known as the Saxon Shore forts (e.g. Portchester Castle, below), to guard South-East England from Saxon raiders in the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD. The Normans later built castles within the walls of two of these Roman Saxon Shore forts, at Pevensey in Sussex and Portchester in Hampshire. The Anglo-Saxons and the Danes entrenched their towns behind earthen banks and timber palisades to create fortified towns, burhs, from which is derived the modern word "borough." Yet, all these structures were for, essentially, communal purposes. What distinguishes the castle from these and other, later fortifications is its function as a private residence.
Castles were the product of that period of Medieval history termed the Age of Feudalism. Feudalism is a much misused word. It is strictly applied to the military society which was created in Europe during the 9th and 10th centuries AD and which reached its most developed form in Normandy in the 11th century. Very simply put, feudal society resembled a pyramid. At its apex was the king who, in theory at least, owned all the land in his kingdom. Immediately below the king was a group of major landholders who held their land directly from him, his tenants-in-chief. These were the great lords and magnates of the kingdom. In return for their land, they swore to give the king military service; that is, they and their retainers would fight for the king whenever and whereever he chose.
The tenants-in-chief let out land to their tenants, the lesser barons and lords, on the same terms. This process was repeated all the way down the pyramid to the knight who was the local lord of the manor. The amount of land a man held was directly proportional to the amount of military service he could render. A knight might only be liable to appear at the muster with a horse, his weapons, a suit of chain mail and one or two servants as men-at-arms. A tenant-in-chief would be expected to provide scores of knights and several hundred men-at-arms.
This decentralisation of land-holding and power required that each landholder provide himself with a base from which to operate. This base should also be designed to afford protection to himself, his family and all those who lived on and worked his lands. The great magnates and many of the lesser barons would hold lands in different parts of the kingdom and require several bases.The landholdings of a knight, being much smaller, would usually be concentrated within a single locality and would require only one base. As Mediaeval government was frequently incapable of guaranteeing peace and order, such bases needed to be defensible. Thus the castle was born.
Although these articles deal with the development of the English Medieval castle by ascribing successive types and forms of castles to various periods in history, only a small number of castles assumed the form we see today in the course of one period of building. Most were the product of several centuries of modification and rebuilding, as new forms of defense were raised to counter new means of attack.
It should also be realized that life in a castle was predominantly a quiet, peaceful process. Castles were primarily the residences of the nobility and the gentry and the life lived in them was very much akin to that of the later country house. Indeed, we shall see that towards the close of the Medieval period, as society became more peaceful, castle design began to lay more stress on the comforts of life and less on the needs of defense. Contrary to the image portrayed by Hollywood, castles were not continuously in a state of siege, crowded with armed men and ringing with the clash of arms! In times of peace, the castle would contain the owner's family and servants. The owner might frequently be absent, in which case, the castle would be occupied by only the caretaker and a few servants. In time of war, the castle would be garrisoned by the lord's tenantry, fulfilling one of their feudal obligations; castle-guard. Once the crisis was past, the garrison would revert to being farmers and farm workers.
The Norman Conquest and the First Castles
The Norman conquest of England in 1066 introduced feudalism to England. We have already seen that castles were a feature of feudalism so it follows that the Normans introduced castles to England. In fact, castles were the means by which William the Conqueror and his followers secured their hold on England following their victory over the English army at the battle of Hastings. The chroniclers of the period frequently refer to the castle building activities of the Normans. Immediately after Hastings, according to Ordericus Vitalis, William ordered castles to be raised at Warwick, Nottingham, York , Lincoln, Cambridge and Huntingdon. The "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" tells us that in the following year, 1067, while William himself was away dealing with affairs in Normandy, his two co-regents in England, Bishop Odo of Bayeux and Earl William fitz Osborn wrought castles widely thoughout the kingdom and oppressed the poor people.
The practice of castle buiding was not confined to William and his chief ministers. Virtually every Norman baron must have felt the need to raise some sort of defensive structure (e.g. castle) to secure his newly acquired lands and to protect himself and his family from a sullen, resentful and potentially hostile Saxon populace.
"My son" said the Norman Baron, "I am dying and you will be heir
The Domesday Book, the great national land register which William commanded to be compiled and which was completed in 1087, records innumerable castles and "defensible houses" raised by every class of Norman overlord. What were these first castles like? They were most definitely not what we usually think of when visualizing a castle; a massive edifice of stone with towers and battlements. The first Norman castles were hurriedly constructed of earth and timber, in many cases using forced labour and most conformed to a basic plan; that of the motte and bailey.
To all the broad acres in England that William gave me for my share;
When we conquered the Saxon at Hastings, and a nice little handful it is.
But before you go over to rule it I want you to understand this;
"The Saxon is not like us Normans. His manners are not so polite.
But he never means anything serious till he talks about justice and right.
When he stands like an ox in the furrow with his sullen set eyes on your own, And grumbles, 'This isn't fair dealing', my son, leave the Saxon alone."
Norman and Saxon
The motte was a large conical mound with a flat top (at right, Launceston Castle in Cornwall, showing the motte). Where possible use was made of natural hillocks or outcrops of rock, but most mottes were raised by digging a deep ditch around its site and heaping up the result soil. Frequently more material was needed to produce the required size and height of mound and this was obtained elsewhere. Archeological evidence has revealed that on occasion, the Normans even made use of material from demolished Saxon houses in raising a motte.
The bailey was a simple enclosure with its own ditch. Motte and bailey castles came in a variety of configurations but the most common was a single mound and enclosure, with the motte at one end of the bailey and separated from it by its ditch. Both mound and enclosure were defended by the ditch and an earthen bank behind the ditch, topped with a timber stockade. Where practicable, the ditches were filled with water and in some instances had a raised bank in front as well as behind, known as a counterscarp which may have had a hedge of thorns or briars planted on it. A splendid example of this type of motte and bailey castle can be seen at Berkhamstead in Hertfordshire. Here, the later stonework has all but vanished revealing the original Norman earthworks (shown at left, outlined in red).
Within the stockade of the mound, there would have been a timber tower. Tower and motte formed the strongpoint of the castle; the last defense if attackers overran the bailey. The tower was also the residence of the castle's owner and had to be large enough to contain his family and their servants. Within the bailey were the buildings, also of timber, necessary for the running of the castle; the hall where everyone in the castle usually gathered for meals and other social events, the kitchens, barns, workshops, stables and the chapel. The entrance to the bailey was by means of a strongly defended gate, fronting a bridge over the ditch.
The primary advantage of motte and bailey castles was that they were quick and cheap to erect, particularly if you had forced labour at your disposal. Yet, in spite of its primitiveness, such a castle would have presented a formidable obstacle to attackers equipped with the weapons of the period. Mottes ranged from 25-30 feet to over 80 feet in height, with the timber tower giving the defenders a further advatange. The bailey could cover anywhere from one to three acres. It was usually laid out so that any point on its circumference would be within bowshot of the tower.
Many of England's existing castles began as motte and bailey castles. Windsor Castle, Berkshire, perhaps England's most famous castle and the favorite home of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, is in origin a motte and bailey castle. In fact, it has two baileys (see illus. at right), one on each side of its motte, as does Arundel Castle in Sussex, home of the Dukes of Norfolk, hereditary Earl Marshals of England. Today, the mottes in both of these castles are crowned with stone towers, known as shell keeps. The conversion of the timber defences of motte and bailey castles to walls and towers of stone forms the next article in this series.
The English Castle, Part #2
The English Castle, Part #3
©2007 Britannia.com Design and Development by SightLines, Inc.

I. E. Coop
In such a wide field as pastures and crops it is impossible in the time and space available, to do more than summarise the main lines of research and development of recent years having special reference to underdeveloped countries. In the long-term the greatest advances have been made in fundamental knowledge, such as - the basic physiology and biochemistry of plant growth, the significance of the C4 pathway in tropical plants, genetic engineering, embryo transfer in animals, remote sensing photography, the ecology of the world's grasslands. The pressing problems of rangeland degeneration, and social and economic change in human societies, are also better understood.
The immediate problem and the task of this paper is to descend to a lower practical level of what has been learned about the possibilities of increasing pasture and forage production, and of utilising feed grown in the most efficient manner.
Approximately one half of the sheep and three quarters of the goats in developing countries are within the tropics, the remainder being in a band from North Africa through the Near East to China. It is useful to have some classification of climatic zones governing plant growth, and for the tropics it is given below:
|Zone||Rainfall1 (mm)||Rainfall2 (mm)||Growing Period (days)||Dry Season (months)|
|Arid||< 400||< 500||< 90||> 8|
|Semi-arid||400 – 750||500 – 1000||90 – 180||6 – 8|
|Sub humid||750 – 1200||1000 – 1500||180 – 270||4–6|
|Humid||> 1200||> 1500||> 270||< 4|
1 From Unesco (1979)
2 From Jahnke (1982) for Africa
A feature of research and development work in the tropics, with the exception of the arid zone, is that cattle rather than sheep and goats have been used, so that in the absence of good data on small ruminants one has unfortunately to interpret from cattle data. It is proposed to discuss briefly the recent pasture utilisation studies with sheep in the temperate zone and then move to the arid and semi-arid pastoral zones, followed by the cropping/livestock situation in the semi-arid and subhumid zones and finally to the subhumid and humid zones.
4 RD, Christchurch, New Zealand.
PASTURE UTILISATION IN THE TEMPERATE ZONE
Research activities, and the methods derived therefrom, for increasing ruminant production in developed countries follow fairly standarised lines - breeding and selection for improved cultivars, determination of plant nutrient (fertiliser) requirements, determination of animal feed requirements, grazing management studies aimed at integrating pasture growth and animal requirements with maximum efficiency on a year round basis. In the temperate zone under favourable conditions grass-legume pastures are capable of yielding 10–20t DM/ha/ annum on cultivatable land and 5–10t DM/ha/annum on hill land oversown with clovers especially (Trifolium repens).
While these studies have progressed on a broad front, in recent years special attention has been devoted to the most difficult and complex area - the efficient use of pasture under-grazing (Morley, 1981; Parsons et al., 1983). Techniques have been developed for measuring herbage mass, ratio of green to dead leaf, net DM growth of green material under various grazing pressures, the intake of the grazing sheep (or goat) at various levels of pasture availability, the pasture availability needed to promote given levels of production, and the residual pasture (DM/ha) at which production falls below critical levels. Concurrently research has determined the critical and non-critical nutritional periods in the annual cycle of the ewe, and the extent to which the resilience of the ewe to gain and lose body fat may be used to buffer seasonal peaks and troughs of pasture growth (Coop, 1982; Milligan, 1983).
Finally to put this into practice requires control of pasture growth and control or rationing of intake of the grazing sheep. This can only be achieved by adequate subdivision with fencing. This has been greatly facilitated by the development of electric fencing and in really intensive systems by the additional use of cheap portable electric fencing. Such fencing is also used for strip grazing of forage crops, in order to get maximum utilization of the forage.
The efficient conversion of pasture to animal production is a highly complex matter because of the interactions between the grazing animal and the pasture, interactions which vary with season. At low stocking rates percentage utilisation is low and continuous grazing is as good as, or better than, rotational grazing. However to obtain high animal production per hectare intensive grazing at high stocking rates is required in order to give a high percentage utilisation. In this case rotational grazing is superior. In practice compromises become necessary because pasture growth is seasonal, there are periods when utilisation is sacrificed in the interests of achieving high individual animal growth rates and others, such as in winter, when utilisation is much more important than liveweight gain.
The efficiency of utilisation of native pasture in extensive grazing systems running less than 2 sheep/ha is estimated in recent research to be below 30%. When such pasture is improved by oversowing, fertilisation and fencing, utilisation can be increased to 60–70%. On really intensively grazed cultivated pastures efficiencies of 70–85% are possible on a year-round basis. Some appreciation of intensive grazing and utilisation may be gauged from the current practice of wintering pregnant ewes in New Zealand, where the ewes are rotated, at a density of 1000 ewes per hectare, on a daily shift behind electric fences.
In the Northern Hemisphere where winters are colder, greater reliance on hay and silage is made for winter feed. It is estimated that the percentage utilisation of metabolisable energy (ME) of the original pasture, when consumed as hay, is below 50%. For this, and for reasons of cost, the Southern Hemisphere grazing countries place emphasis on utilisation of pasture by the grazing animal with minimal use of conserved fodder.
Advances in grazing management and utilisation have nevertheless been made in northern countries. One example of this is the “two pasture” system developed for the wet cold hill country of Britain, whereby a smaller area of improved pasture is integrated with the larger area of unimproved hill land and utilised at strategic points in the annual cycle of the ewes. Another is the “three pasture” system aimed at minimising worm parasite problems. Finally in all the major grazing countries there is increasing evidence that cattle, sheep and goats can all be beneficial to one another, the special grazing characteristics of each being complimentary to the other. With coats this is seen especially in their preferences for weeds and pasture species not relished by sheep.
If proof is needed that modern pasture/sheep technology can lead to increased animal production the case of New Zealand may be quoted, where from approximately the same area of grazing land, sheep numbers have increased from 33 millions in 1950 to 53 millions in 1965, to 70 millions in 1982 with proportionate increases in meat and wool output. While only some of this temperate zone technology is immediately transferrable to developing countries, the objectives and the principles certainly are.
ARID AND SEMI-ARID ZONE RANGELANDS
The extensive rangelands of the arid and semi-arid zones of developing countries and the peoples they support are in varying degrees of crisis as a result of rangeland degradation, brought about by overstocking. The area is traditionally used solely by pastoralists under nomadic and transhumant systems, but the pressure of human population has led to the incursion of agriculturalists with their livestock into marginal areas, so putting an unbearable pressure on the rangeland vegetation.
Much has been written about the current state of rangeland vegetation, the social and economic impediments as well as the technical difficulties in reversing the deterioration (e.g. Unesco, 1979; Jahnke, 1982; Harrington, 1982 and Malechek, 1982). While there are cases or instances of potential improvements or improvements actually made, the concensus of opinion of authors is that the only solution short and midterm is to reduce grazing pressure. It is recommended that this be achieved by destocking, or by deferred grazing or some other form of grazing management which would permit a more even grazing and reduce severe overgrazing on critical areas. A recent FAO review (FAO 1984) commented that there is need for rehabilitation by the introduction of good management, that forage cultivation is not yet generally accepted and conservation of hay and silage rarely practised. There is a need to introduce forage trees and browze shrubs, but there was little likelihood of increasing forage availability in the near future due to pressure of livestock combined with the persistence of drought.
The productivity of the arid and semi-arid zone rangelands is low. Jahnke (1982), quoting other authorities, gives a figure of 2.5kg DM/ha/annum per mm rainfall, or It DM/ha/annum at 400 mm which is likely to be inefficiently utilised. Such yields cannot hope to generate enough income to provide incentive to introduce improved species even if this were technologically feasible.
While acceptance by the inhabitants and by Governments that reduction in grazing pressure is the only short term solution, one must not be entirely negative. Observation and development project results indicate that there are avenues for improvement and some specific examples of these are listed below.
Grain yields and sheep production were twice as great in South Australia through replacing fallow with subterranean clover and medic pasture, compared with Algeria having a similar Mediterranean climate but not integrating crop and sheep grazing (Allden, 1982, quoting Carter).
In the Drought Prone Areas Programme in Western India the introduction of Cenchrus ciliaris and Lasiurus sindicus increased DM yield from 0.4 t to 3t/ha/annum (Jain, 1983).
Depleted rangeland in China has been shown to be capable of yielding 3t DM/ha/annum by oversowing with milk vetch and fertiliser (Chinzagco project, pers. comm). In another site having 300 mm rainfall, all in summer, the yields of native grassland have been doubled with fertiliser alone, while in cultivated areas the use of newer cultivars of sorghums, maize, and annual grasses for silage, and native grass for hay has also doubled the number of stock carried as well as improving them greatly (FAO 1983).
The Syrian Arab Republic Rangeland Conservation and Development Project is one of the best known, reviving the ancient “Hema” system of grazing control, introducing Atriplex spp. planting fodder trees and creating lamb fattening cooperatives (Draz 1978).
The wide ranging development project in Morocco where Agropyron elongatum has been introduced into a Stipa-Artemisia ecosystem in a 300 mm rainfall area (El Gharbaoui, 1984).
The introduction of Atriplex and Kochia spp. in Saudia Arabia (Hassan 1984),
The legumes Stylosanthes humilis and to a lesser degree S. guyanensis have been shown to be capable of being oversown or direct drilled on sites in the semi-arid zone.
There are also arid or semi-arid rangelands in the temperate zone (U.S.A., South America, South Africa, Australia) which have also degenerated under overstocking during the last 100 years and it is significant that in all of these stock numbers have declined. The most intensively studied are those in the U.S.A. and in a recent review of rangeland management and reseeding results, it is commented that “a considerable portion of western rangelands currently support vegetation assemblages greatly below their potential” (Herbel, 1984; Young et. a!., 1984). Wilson, A.D. (1982) in another review concludes that “there are no technological improvements in the pipeline that will lead to major productivity gains. The basic restrictions of sparse vegetation, low rainfall and a harsh climate are not subject to technological innovation”. Nevertheless there are instances that in all of these countries improvements are technically possible. To take but one example, Stevens and Villalta (1983) at high altitudes in Peru were able to establish ryegrass-clover pastures and to direct-seed lucerne into rangeland with large increases in sheep numbers carried.
The problem is that research and development projects in both developed and developing countries on which the possibilities if improvement have been shown, have high inputs of technical and economic aid. Whether they can survive in a straight commercial sense and whether it is economic to attempt to increase production is highly dubious. In the more favourable sites it may be so, but for most of it, the problem is to halt further deterioration. The poor income-generating power of the extensive rangelands dictates that any improvements must be ecologically sound and low cost, and should act in a catalytic role to permit better utilisation of the much larger area of unimproved land.
Research priorities suggested should include grazing management studies to provide more even grazing pressure, forage conservation, selection of species and cultivars extending growth into the dry period, integration with cropping systems. (Unesco, 1979; Malechek, 1982; Butterworth et.al,1984).
CROP - LIVESTOCK INTEGRATION
Crop production is an occupation of agriculturalists living in villages mostly in the semi-arid and subhumid zones. Traditionally some nomads have included the grazing of crop stubbles in their annual movement, while transhumant pastoralists have also made use of stubbles and crop residues during the dry period. The increasing sedentarisation or semi-sedentarisation of nomads and transhumants, together with movement of agriculturalists with their own livestock in the opposite direction into drier areas, is reducing the areas available for grazing and also increasing the risks of crop failure. The integration of cropping with sheep and goats is primarily in the semi-arid zone but extends into the subhumid zone. Although the cropping regime yields more DM/ha in the form of stubbles, straws and byproducts available for stock the increases in stock numbers more than offsets this. Nevertheless cropping systems and the more intensive and settled human existence in villages or permanent abodes, offers an environment much more amenable to technological change and improvement than does the rangeland. The following research developments in recent years are some of the more promising.
The breeding of improved cultivars of human feed crops - wheat, maize, sorghum, groundnuts etc. and research on fertiliser responses, together with an appreciation that in subsistence agriculture, fertilizer put on crops increases yield sufficiently to release land for planting in animal forage crops.
Research and demonstration has shown that forage production can be expanded considerably by inter-row sowing of legumes with the cereal, using improved cultivars of forage species, and especially replacing the traditional fallow with sown perennial or annual forage crops. Legumes such as Stylosanthes and vetches, and other tropical legumes in higher rainfall areas, are much preferred since their nitrogen level and nutritive value are high and they increase soil nitrogen for the next cereal crop. High yields have been obtained in Cyprus from barley and barley/vetch forage made into hay (Osman and Nersoyan, 1984; Unesco, 1979; FAO, 1983). If a move to greater use of forage crops and more efficient use of grazing stubbles is to be made then control of the sheep and goats becomes important. Attempts should therefore be made to gain acceptance of the electric fence by herders and cultivators.
Intensive fattening of lambs and kids, on locally grown roughage plus concentrates and byproducts, has a double advantage of controlled marketing with a superior product and more importantly of removing young animals to be fattened from the overgrazed rangeland, thereby reducing the grazing pressure. Lamb fattening trials have been reported from several countries showing typically that weaned lambs make gains of 100 – 250 g/day with feed conversion ratios of 6 to 10 according to the energy content of the diet. There is a need to examine what effect this has on the total system.
Some arid and semi-arid areas have water available for irrigation, which is used mainly for cereal or cash crops (cotton) but some is available for forage. Water from the Nile is used in Egypt and Sudan, underground water in Libya and Saudi Arabia. Extremely high yields of lucerne (Medicago sativa ) and Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrinum) are obtained and provide a high protein source for cattle, sheep and goats.
Improving the utilisation of low quality roughages is also possible. Low protein levels characteristic of tropical forages during the long dry period are a limiting factor in animal intake and performance. (Minson, 1982). A considerable amount of research work has been done over the last 20 – 25 years on the use of urea to improve the voluntary intake of straws and other low quality roughages by cattle, sheep and goats. Trials conducted in pens have almost universally given good results but selective grazing by animals in the field has caused some doubts about its application in a grazing context (Coombe 1981). A more recent discovery is that alkali or ammonia treatment of straw can increase digestibility by 10–15units, e.g. from 45% to 55–60%. Encouraging results are being obtained from the technique at both the village level (Dolberg et.al., 1981), and the factory level (Creek et.al., 1984).
A much better understanding of protein requirements of sheep and goats has been developed during the last decade, with recognition of the significance of rumen nondegradable protein. This is of special importance in the tropics (Lindsay, 1984).
The outlook then for improvements in pasture and crop production, and of utilisation by sheep and goats in the cropping areas is reasonably encouraging. Whether it can keep pace with the increases in human population is another matter. Fortunately much of the research done in developed countries is less sensitive to environment in a cropping activity than in a grazing activity, and is therefore more likely to find application in the cropping scene. The most important fields of research in the cropping areas as far as sheep and goats are concerned are likely to be further integration of pastoral ism with cropping, conservation and forage production for the dry period, and improvements in the utilisation of straws.
Somewhat similar problems exist in the semi-arid/cold regions of the world such as in the arc from Turkey to China. Here the winter replaces the dry period of the tropics. In the USSR and Northern China for example, many pastoralists have been semi-or wholly sedenterised, and winter bases exist in villages or have been especially constructed. The growing of forage, partly for grazing but mostly for conservation as hay and silage, is a dominant feature of the system (Demiruren, 1982).
SUBHUMID AND HUMID ZONES
Though the line of demarkation between the semi-arid and subhumid zones is diffuse, there is a distinct trend towards tree crop agriculture as well as cropping, towards tall-grass pasture species and a greater density of villages, especially where associated with rice culture. This is accompanied by a shift in the relative importance of large and small ruminants. Whereas in developing countries sheep and goats outnumber cattle by nearly 2 : 1 in the arid and semi-arid zones, cattle outnumber sheep and goats in the subhumid and humid zones. As far as sheep and goats are concerned there are no longer any pastoralists and nearly all the animals are associated with village and cropping agriculture.
Tropical Pasture Development
Present native pastures consisting of Hyperrhenia, Andropogon, Themeda and many other species exist in a savanna landscape derived from forest or woodland. Soils are heavily leached, grazing is primarily with cattle and fire plays an important part in the grass, scrub, tree balance. The most important development in this area in the last few decades has undoubtedly been the selection, breeding and cultivation of improved cultivars of tropical grasses and legumes. The legume is particularly important because of the low nitrogen status of tropical soils. Though this work has been carried out in several tropical environments the driving force has been the CSIRO Division of Tropical Pastures in Queensland, Australia (Mannetje, 1982; Minson, 1982). Now there are established cattle ranches and cattle projects in most tropical countries with rainfall in excess of 800–1000 mm.
Unfortunately, in relation to sheep and goats, the basic grazing experiments and present projects are almost wholly involved with cattle. There are good reasons for this cattle dominance, but not for the exclusion of small ruminants. Very high yields of pasture DM are attainable - up to 30 – 40t/ha/annum but control of pasture growth, maintenance of the grass-legume balance, and ingress of weeds do present greater problems than with temperate pastures (Mannetje, 1982). Nevertheless the potential of these tropical pasture species for small ruminants with or without cattle should be explored. Some trials using sheep and goats have been recorded (Boulton and Norton, 1982; Potts and Humphreys, 1983; Susetyo et.al. 1983) but not yet on a farm scale. Some of the improved species, especially legumes such as Stylosanthes humilis and S. guyanensis, Macroptilium, Desmodium spp are also finding use as forages for establishment on fallows which are grazed by sheep and goats in both semi- and subhumid zones.
Sheep and Goats in the Village
The place of sheep and goats in the village is much the same as described for the arid and semi-arid zones. The scope for increases in numbers and production especially of goats has been emphasised (Devendra, 1980; Roy-Smith, 1982; Zulkifli et.al., 1980; Wilson, R. T. 1982), involving greater utilisation of the considerable byproducts available from cereal and tree crop production, the introduction of improved grass and legume species in available land and recognition of the part which the milking goat rather than the cow could play. The opportunity to exploit the production of tropical grasses and legumes is facilitated by the fact that many sheep and goats, especially in the humid zone, are fed under a cut and carry system, or are let out during the day time on a controlled grazing system. There is no doubt that small ruminant production in this zone could be increased and there are good reasons why it should. Most of the arguments about the relative merits of cattle, sheep and goats are based on personal factors, and on calculations of what ought to be, and there is a need for comparisons to be made on a strictly scientific basis. It is encouraging that recognition of animal production potential in the humid tropics is evidenced by the creation of the joint Australian/Indonesian Centre for animal research and development in Ciawi, Indonesia in 1975.
Utilisation of Pasture in Plantations
In the humid tropics there are large areas of tree crops such as coconut, rubber and oil palm. They are established in association with a tropical legume cover crop which in time regresses to grasses and weeds. Except in coconut plantations often grazed by cattle the herbage available is generally not used at all. Attention has been given by the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia (Tan and Abraham, 1980) to using sheep to consume this herbage and to reduce the high cost of weed control. Promising results are being achieved, confirming that a considerable potential exists for the utilisation of this large feed resource.
Forage Trees and Tree Byproducts
The utilisation of edible trees and shrubs, and of tree byproducts such as leaves, pods and seeds has received considerable attention in recent years. The characteristics and feed values of tree crops have been reviewed recently by Hutagalung (1981). Particular attention has been given to leguminous trees-such as Leucaena, Gliricidia, Tagasaste spp. since the leaves of leguminous trees, and especially L. Leucocephala, have protein levels in excess of 20%. Recent evidence (Bamualim et.al., 1984) shows that the protein is a good by-pass protein, capable of enhancing intake of low quality roughages where these form the main diet. Acacia spp prevalent in many parts of the tropics can also be valuable in droughts (Snook, 1984).
Leguminous trees and edible shrubs are not confined to the subhumid and humid zones, but can contribute also in the semi-arid zone, and are likely to be utilised much more than in the past.
There is considerable scientific evidence that both pasture and animal production can be increased substantially in all except the arid zone. The major problems are lack of capital to implement improvement and uncertainty about its viability, economically. The greatest and quickest responses in pasture and forage production are likely to be in the subhumid zone, and also in cropping systems.
To maintain impetus in research it is suggested that priority be given to:
breeding and selection of pasture species for the semi-arid zone aimed at increasing the length of the growing period. Selection of low phosphate demanding legumes for this zone.
studies of the utilisation of tropical pastures by sheep and goats.
pasture conservation for the dry period, forage production on cropping land.
studies to increase the complementarity (or integration) of rangeland and cropping land.
continuation of studies aimed at improving the utilisation of low quality roughages by sheep and goats.
Allden, W. G. 1982. In Nutritional Limits to Animal Production from Pastures. (Ed. J. 0. Hacker), pp. 45–65. Comm. Agr. Bur.
Bamualim, A., Weston, R. H., Hogan, J. P. and Murray, R. M., 1984. Anim. Prod. in Australia, 15: 255–258.
Boulton, P. and Norton, B. W.,1982. Anim., Prod, in Australia, 14:641.
Butterworth, M. H., Lambourne, L. J. and Anderson, K., 1984. Proc. 2nd Int. Rangeland Congr., Adelaide. (In Press).
Coombe, J. B.,1981. In Grazing Animals (Ed. F. W. H. Morley), pp. 319–332, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Coop, I. E., 1982. In Sheep and Goat Production (Ed. T. E. Coop), pp. 351–375, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Creek, M. J., Barker, J. J. and Hargus, W. A., 1984. World Anim. Rev., 15: 12.
Demiruren, A.,1982. In Sheep and Goat Production (Ed. I. E. Coop), pp. 425–440, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Devendra, C, 1980. J. Anim. Sci., 51:461–473.
Dolberg, F., Saadullah, M., Haque, M. and Ahmed, R., 1981. World Anim. Rev., 38: 37–41.
Draz, 0., 1978. Proc. 1st Int. Rangeland Congr., Denver, Colorado, U.S.A.
El Gharbaoui, 1984. Proc. 2nd Int. Rangeland Congr., Adelaide. (In Press).
FAO, 1983. Pilot Demonstration Centre for Intensive Pasture, Fodder and Livestock Production. Peoples Republic of China. FAO - CPR/79/001.
FAO, 1984. World Anim. Rev. 51: 2–11.
Harrington, G. N., 1982. In Grazing Animals (Ed. F. W. H. Morley), pp. 181–202, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Hassan, A. A.,1984. Proc. 2nd Int. Rangeland Congr., Adelaide.(In Press).
Herbel, C. A., 1984. In Developing Strategies for Rangeland Management. pp. 1167–1178, NRC/Nat. Acad. Sci., Westview Press.
Hutagalung, R. I., 1981. In Intensive Animal Production in Developing Countries ( Ed. A. J. Smith and R. G. Gunn) pp. 151–184.
Jahnke, H. E., 1982. Livestock Production Systems and Livestock Development in Tropical Africa Kieler W. b. V. Vauk. 253 pp.
Jain, H. K., 1983. Proc. XIV Int. Grassl. Congr., p. 440.
Lindsay, J. A.,1984. Anim. Prod, in Australia, 15:114–117.
Malechek, J. C, 1982. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on Goat Prod. and Disease, pp. 404–408.
Mannetje, L. 't., 1982. Nutritioanl Limits to Animal Production from Pastures. (Ed. J. B. Hacker), pp. 67–85. Comm. Agr. Bur.
Milligan, K. G., 1983. Controlled Grazing Systems. Aglink FPP 681, N.Z. Min. Agr., Fish., Wellington.
Minson, D. J., 1982. In Grazing Animals (Ed. F. W. H. Morley), pp. 143–158, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Morley, F. H. W.,1981. In Grazing Animals (Ed. F. W. H. Morley), pp. 379–400. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Osman, A. E. and Nersoyan, N., 1984. Proc. 2nd Int Grassl. Congr., Adelaide. (In Press).
Parsons, A. J., Leafe, E. L., Collett, B., Penning, P. D. and Lewis, J., 1983. J. Appl. Ecology, 20: 127–139.
Potts, A. and Hymphreys, L. R., 1983. J. Agr. Sci, 101: 1–7.
Roy-Smith, F., 1982. In Intensive Animal Production in Developing Countries (Ed. A. J. Smith and R. G. Gunn), pp. 387–394. Brit. Soc. Anim. Prod. Pub. No. 4.
Snook, L. C, 1984. Anim. Prod, in Australia, 15:589–592.
Stevens, E. J. and Villalta, P., 1983. Proc. 14th Int. Grassl. Congr., p. 176.
Susetyo, S., Whiteman, P. C. and Humphreys, L. R., 1983. Proc. XIV Int. Grassl. Cong r., p. 412.
Tan, K. H. and Abraham, P. D., 1980. Proc. 1st Asian Australasian Anim. Sci. Congr., Malaysian Soc. Anim. Prod.
Unesco/UNEP/FAO, 1979. Tropical Grazing Land Ecosystems - a State of Knowledge Report. Unesco, Paris. 655 pp.
Wilson, A. D., 1982. In Sheep and Goat Production (Ed. I. E. Coop), pp. 309–330. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Wilson, R. T., 1982. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on Goat Prod, and Disease, pp. 186–195.
Young, J. A., Evans, R. A. and Eckert, Jnr. R. E., 1984. In Developing Strategies for Rangeland Management, pp. 1259–1300. NRC/Nat. Acad. Sci., Westview Press.
Zuikifli, S. D., Zulficar and Rachmat Setiadi, 1980. Proc. 2nd Ruminant Seminar, Ciawi, Indonesia. pp. 42–54.

A safety demonstration of the latest automobile technology let reporters take a peek at what could possibly be the future of our nation’s highways.
The technology being shown off is known as Vehicle to Vehicle Communication, also known as V2V. It’s something that you may have heard of, especially if you follow this blog regularly. It basically works like this: vehicles equipped with the safety technology will essentially be able to communicate directly with one another, exchanging data on speed, direction, and more. This data can then be computed to determine if a crash is imminent.
At a demonstration recently, reporters were able to view a Ford Taurus driving toward an intersection. Before the vehicle was able to get there, though, red lights blinked in the driver’s field of view and a warning of imminent danger was issued. The driver stopped at the intersection just before a vehicle hidden behind a truck blasted through the intersection on a perpendicular path.
In that instance, and in many more potentialities, the technology might save a life in a real-world situation. Current technologies often relies on lasers, and thus a line of sight must be achieved in order to maintain optimum working ability, but the newest form of the tech won’t require that kind of vision. Drivers will be alerted without even having to see the danger looming.
This year will see 3,000 vehicles implementing the technology in Ann Arbor, Michigan as part of a test to see how the automobiles will handle V2V in the real world.

Short Watershed Courses
University of British Columbia
Integrated Watershed Management
"Integrated Watershed Management: A Hyper-Media CD-ROM" was developed for use with the University of British Columbia graduate level Internet course, the core course mentioned in the UBC Watershed Certificate Program above. Issues relating to urban, rural, agricultural, forestry, groundwater, and stream water are treated in an interdisciplinary manner. Basic theory is presented, specific land use and watershed issues are integrated, and numerous case studies are described. The CD is reportedly ideal for practicing professionals, graduate students, resource managers and planners and as a source book for watershed partnerships. Containing more than 700 computer frames, 400 images, numerous graphics, text and over 400 searchable references, the CD costs $100 (Canadian).
Contact: Institute for Resources and Environment, 2206 E. Mall, Univ. of British Columbia, 5997 Inonia Dr., Vancouver BC V6T1Z1. Phone (604) 822-1450; fax (604) 822-1499. Web: http://www.ire.ubc.ca
The California Watershed Academy
Teaching Resource Professionals
About Watershed Processes
Pete Cafferata, Forest Hydrologist
Calif. Dept. of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF)
Jim Steele, Biologist
Calif. Dept. of Fish and Game (CDFG)
The increase in the number and complexity of the California's state forest practices rules in the last ten years has been dramatic. Hundreds of changes, additions and many new concepts have added to the complexity of designing, approving and conducting a timber harvest operation. Pushing this increase is the Endangered Species Act (ESA) protection extended to the northern spotted owl, marbled murrelet, red legged frog, coho salmon and steelhead trout, and controversy over old growth forest logging. A forester today is expected to know more and have a technical background far greater than expected a few years ago. Often, natural resource protection concepts embedded in a rule are not understood by either the forester, decision maker or the public. A way of advancing new concepts and pragmatic methods was needed.
Five versions of the "Watershed Academy" have been presented to about 200 resource professionals over the past four years. Primary goals have been to provide up-to-date information on key processes affecting aquatic habitats, and to improve students' hydrologic IQ and their analysis and risk assessment skills. Resource professionals completing the academy are trained to understand the basics of natural resource protection law theory, fluvial-geomorphological processes, determine current watershed condition, evaluate whether proposed practices will adversely impact aquatic resources, and develop appropriate mitigation measures to both avoid or minimize additional impacts and accelerate recovery from past practices.
The first three watershed academy sessions were State interagency efforts while the last two were presented by University of California Cooperative Extension (UCCE). Mr. Gary Stacey, CDFG, was the lead person for the interagency efforts managed by Jim Steele and Dr. Richard Harris, UCCE, led the more recent academies. The first sessions using some paid instructors were funded jointly by CDFG and CDF augmented by voluntary instructors from several agencies. The latter sessions with mostly paid instructors were funded by a grant from the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation to the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and some staff support from CDFG.
The curriculum for the Watershed Academy has been modified for each session based on participant feedback and decisions made by lead persons for each academy session. The lecture portion of the first academy covered the broadest range of topics: fish biology/life history, aquatic amphibian biology/life history, benthic macro-invertebrates, hydrology, fluvial geomorphology, geology, soils, watershed processes, risk assessment for biological and physical parameters, problem synthesis, monitoring, data management and natural resource law. The field portion covered road problem recognition, field assessment techniques for hillslope and instream issues, and stream parameter measurements. Topics covered in the second academy included: natural resource law, fish biology, hydrology, geology, fluvial geomorphology, and watershed assessment procedures. Field topics included road inventory techniques, field examples of differing fish habitat and streamside quality, and demonstrations of instream monitoring techniquesóincluding rapid bio-assessment procedures.
The more recent academies held in the fall of 1998 differed somewhat in philosophy. Rather than emphasizing background information on various watershed related topics, students were asked to study a comprehensive binder of readings to provide a basic level of understanding prior to attending the course. Presenters were primarily from universities, consulting firms and the US Forest Service, with less emphasis on lecturers from state agencies. Lecture topics included: fluvial geomorphology, hydrology, hillslope stability, fish habitat requirements, monitoring, and management issues related to roads and crossings, water quality, and riparian zones. Field exercises stressed hillslope stability assessments, road inventory techniques, and assessing off-site impacts of timber operations.
General impressions from the various academy sessions include the following points: 1) readers and/or binders with large numbers of watershed related papers are taken home for reference, but usually not studied before or during the session itself (however this information was valuable as reference for future timber harvesting plans), 2) the most successful learning experiences take place in the field where practical discussions occur, 3) it is difficult for all the students in a given class to be brought up to a minimum level of understanding for all the background disciplines related to watershed processes (both physical and biological), 4) lecture material should cover half day segments, with the remainder of the day spent in the field illustrating points covered in lecture, 5) no more than one-week should be spent on the academy because of other time commitments for students, and 6) all material presented should be as practically oriented as possible, with specific examples provided to illustrate points covered in lectures. Material presented by Dr. Bill Weaver of Pacific Watershed Associates on issues related to roads, landings, and watercourse crossings has often been cited as the most important information received by the students in each session.
The important concept to be advanced, through understanding watershed function, is how to conduct land management activities compatible with natural resources. Since all natural resource laws are similar in their intent but differ in decision process, having the ability to focus on desired outcomes can streamline a knowledge based permit process, and lower government and private sector costs. Water codes, endangered species protection, and public process can all be included in the same permitting effort if there is confidence in the project's outcome. The Watershed Academy is part of a larger package which attempts to achieve this confidence, including the watershed process courses for professionals and baseline watershed analysis, database consolidation, field studies of watershed principles, and effectiveness monitoring programs.
It is unclear at this time how future offerings of the watershed academy will be presented. Clearly, there is a need for this type of information as most of the North Coast watersheds are listed as impaired water bodies by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and require development of Total Maximum Daily Load allocations (TMDLs). Additionally, state and federal listings of threatened and endangered species that depend on properly functioning aquatic habitats make this type of training very important. Eventually, CDF would like to have all of its Forest Practice staff participate in the academy. Many private RPFs have also expressed an interest in future sessions. Options will be discussed by state and federal agency managers in 1999.
Contact: Pete Cafferata at (916) 653-9455 or Jim Steele at (916) 653-6194.
The Council of State Governments
Working at a Watershed Level (Interagency Course)
Summary: Oneweek course covering all facets of watershed work, including stream ecology, system dynamics, assessment and analysis, planning methodologies, restoration/management techniques, public involvement strategies and outreach program development.
The Council of State Governments Center for Environment and Safety and other regional organizations are now offering a new watershed training curriculum. Working at a Watershed Level was developed by a consortium of federal agencies, state/local groups and private organizations to improve crossagency watershed training. The course is designed as an introductory level basic training program for agency personnel newly assigned to watershed teams, veteran watershed managers in need of a refresher course and members of citizens groups interested in a cooperative approach to watershed issues.
The Interagency Watershed Training Cooperative, composed of representatives from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Forest Service, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, provided leadership for developing the course outline. The Council of State Governments, International City/ County Management Association, Ecological Society of America and other partners assisted with final curriculum design and content.
Working at a Watershed Level covers the principles of watershed ecology, system dynamics, assessment and analysis, planning methodologies, restoration/management techniques, public involvement strategies and outreach program development. The course provides a basic but very broad foundation for considering both ecological and socioeconomic issues in watershed work across a wide range of public and private organizations. One of the motivating forces for developing the course was the need for a more cooperative, coordinated approach to watershed management and a common orientation to the science and societal issues involved.
While it is recognized that state and federal agencies will continue to have unique needs and somewhat discrete processes for watershed planning, management and restoration, it is hoped that Working at a Watershed Level will help to develop a broad, common framework capable of accommodating the disparate interests that may be involved. Public agencies and private interests can only benefit by working together within a watershed, though each may have slightly different approaches and requirements. Ideally, agencies and other stakeholders will be able to use Working at a Watershed Level to identify areas where multiagency interdisciplinary teams can work together on management issues while retaining the ability to satisfy organizational, statutory or regulatory needs.
An outline of the course can be found at the U.S. EPA's Watershed Academy web site at http://www.epa.gov/OWOW/watershed/wacademy/interfed/shedcors.html
1999 Course Schedule
June in the San Joaquin River Basin in California (tentative).
Early September, 1999 in Lafayette, Indiana (tentative).
Late September, 1999 in New England (tentative).
Contact: Barry Tonning, Environmental Policy Analyst, The Council of State Governments, P.O. Box 11910, Lexington, KY 405781910; (606) 244-8228; fax: (606) 244-8239. E-mail: email@example.com . For updates on the training schedules: http://www.statesnews.org/ecos/
The "Working at a Watershed Level" Course
A Student Review
by William Zigler
CSU Fresno Senior in Geography
I had the opportunity to attend the January 11-15, 1999 session of the Working at a Watershed Level training course held in Chico, California. Working for the Sequoia National Forest as a trainee in hydrology with a background in geography, I had hoped to gain enough foundational information to get me started "out in the field". The course exceeded my expectations, progressing systematically from structural stream elements to geomorphology to public outreach and education strategies. It was a great experience! Because of the course's potential benefit, I would like to provide a synopsis.
Working at a Watershed Level is a watershed management training course conducted on the California State University Chico campus, through which flows Big Chico Creek. This course received much popular support in Northern and Central California, drawing many from local, state and federal agencies as well as from consulting firms, local watershed conservancies, irrigation districts, and agriculture. Not all attendees were local: some came from the distant points of West Virginia, Vermont, and Vancouver, British Columbia. In fact, the course was so popular that organizers were forced to limit seating to just over 100 while maintaining a waiting list of about 40. (Organizers are considering providing another training session later this year for those who were unable to attend.) The interest in the course reflects an increased awareness of the importance of watersheds today, especially with a growing population and its requisite demands on the environment.
The course was comprised of classroom training sessions, group discussions, field trips, and two evening social gatherings. During a dinner sponsored by The Nature Conservancy, the speaker, Donald Outen of the Baltimore County, Maryland Dept. of Environmental Protection and Resource Management, gave an in-depth presentation on Baltimore County's Integrated Watershed Management Program. He addressed federal nonpoint source pollution control mandates, State initiatives for restoration of Chesapeake Bay, and local priorities for cooperative water quality projects. Mr. Outen was a knowledgeable speaker who demonstrated effective methods of managing an important watershed surrounding a growing urban center.
Other speakers involved with the course were equally credible. They represented a distinguished and diverse group from academia (CSU Chico, Univ. of Montana, Univ. of Washington, UC Berkeley, and Shasta Community College), state and federal agencies (USFWS, Council of State Governments), private industry (Tetra Tech, Inc.), and conservation groups (Center for Natural Lands Management, Tuolumne River Preservation Trust, Mill Creek Watershed, and Stanislaus River Project). The curriculum was effectively organized, progressing logically with each new theme building upon the last. The curriculum provided something for everyone, focusing on the many aspects of watershed management.
While the classroom sessions were informative, I especially enjoyed our training outside the classroom where we observed watershed management practices in action (with varying degrees of effectiveness). Two afternoons were dedicated to field trips to Butte, Big Chico, and Sycamore Creeks. Professors Matt Kondolf, Paul Maslin, and Morgan Hannaford led groups through a watershed assessment on Butte Creek. Butte Creek was an interesting study in the instream effects of flood control measures. The flood control channel was hastily excavated after a major flood event to divert high flows of water downstream during future flood events. The channel was effective as diverting flood waters away from the narrow main channel; however, it created a problem of sediment deposition at the point bar of the main channel, effectively closing the main channel after a flood event. Closing the main channel posed several problems, such as increased stream velocity, altered erosion patterns, and the inability to provide water at the irrigation diversion dam for agriculture. Currently, the main channel has been reopened but repeated manual removal of sediment at the point bar is required to maintain the main channel.
A different field trip took us to a flood control diversion on Big Chico Creek and the flood outflow area on Sycamore Creek. A similar approach to the Butte Creek flood control diversion was used on Big Chico Creekwith similar results. Point bar sedimentation is a problem on Big Chico Creek while Sycamore Creek has experienced significant streambed degradation. The accumulation of sedimentation on Big Chico Creek is manageable, but the control of erosion along Sycamore Creek is less certain. Both field trips provided excellent examples of good intentions (the protection of property from flood impacts) gone bad. When flood control efforts are undertaken without proper scientific research, the results can be more devastating that the flood event itself.
In summary, Working at a Watershed Level was an excellent experience for a novice like myself. I now have a better feel for how the many subsystems within a watershed comprise the whole, and how we are all impacted by the general health of our watersheds. I enjoyed the enthusiasm and professionalism displayed by our host of speakers and appreciate the material produced by those who put their energy and talent into developing the course. I especially valued the opportunity to view first-hand the effects of inappropriate flood control measures. I would heartily recommend this course to anyone desiring a deeper appreciation and understanding of watersheds.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Within EPA's Office of Wetland, Oceans and Watersheds (OWOW) is the Watershed Academy. The Academy offers several of its own training courses supporting watershed approaches and publicizes watershed courses sponsored by others. In addition, EPA's Office of Water sponsors its own courses that are related to watershed management. The Academy courses are not offered every year and they are apparently not always co-taught or co-sponsored through a university or college. Those that are generally available are listed below:
- Watersheds 101: Applied Watershed Management
- Watersheds 102: Statewide Approach to Watershed Management
- Watersheds 103: TMDL Training for State Practitioners
- Watersheds 104: Executive Overview of the Watershed Approach
- Watersheds 105: Watershed Management Tools Primer
- Watersheds 106: Watershed Partnership Seminar
- Watersheds 107: Using Internet Resources
Watershed Academy 2000 Distance Learning
As part of its Watershed Academy, EPA is developing Academy 2000 Distance Learning, using the Internet as a classroom. Academy 2000 consists of training modules on watershed science, effective communications, and organizational management and development. Modules include:
- Principles of Watershed Management
- Watershed Restoration
- Economics of Sustainability
- Monitoring Consortiums
- Watershed Modeling
- Executive Overview of the Watershed Approach
The website contains 13 modules, with at least seven more planned. Running time for each module is about two hours. The website is www:epa.gov/owow/watershed/wacademy/acad2000/index.html
Inventory of Watershed Training Courses
EPA's Watershed Academy has recently produced an Inventory of Watershed Training Courses, updating its earlier document titled "Watershed Academy Catalogue of Watershed Training Opportunities" (May 1997). Listed as a key action in the Clean Water Action Plan, the inventory provides information on available watershed-related training courses sponsored by governmental and non-governmental organizations. The target audience includes federal, state, and local agency staff; tribes, and watershed groups. EPA took the lead in updating this inventory, while working with the Interagency Watershed Training Cooperative, Natural Resources Training Council, EPA's Office of Water Watershed Training Work Group, and others.
Included courses focus on protecting or restoring watersheds (or aquifers), cover important tools used in watershed protection, or address one aspect of the watershed management cycle (e.g., planning, implementation, evaluation). In addition to agency courses, University training courses are also listed. Check the website for its availability: www:epa.gov/owow/watershed/wacademy/catalog.html
INTERDISCIPLINARY WATERSHED CENTERS
University of California at Davis
Center for Integrated Watershed Science and Management
In the Spring of 1998, UC Davis established a center that highlights and expands the campus role in watershed-related research, teaching, and outreach. Under the auspices of the John Muir Institute for the Environment and with guidance from the Commission on the Environment, the new Center for Integrated Watershed Science and Management has a threefold mission:
· develop, coordinate and track current and future campus efforts at integrated watershed study, with an emphasis on expanding the research support base and promoting the leadership role of the campus in watershed issues;
· support existing and future graduate and undergraduate programs that offer integrative watershed education;
· provide knowledge-based services and support to watershed stakeholders and decision-makers and promote the development of university/agency/foundation partnerships in watershed research.
A broad array of public and private institutions have noted that the next frontier in watershed study lies in the integration between disciplines. Authors have noted that failed attempts to manage multiple use in watersheds stem from traditional single agency, single issue approaches. This problem is exacerbated by academic and government institutions who continue to promote hierarchical, discipline-specific research programs in watershed. To date, no academic program has been singled out as successfully promoting such integration and taking a leadership role in this emerging field.
The University of California, Davis, with its diverse intellectual and technical resources, its numerous watershed-related research and teaching programs, its extensive public outreach program, and its long history of collaboration with federal, state and local watershed agencies, believes that it is ideally suited to become a national and international leader in integrated watershed studies.
The Center is intended to be an administrative and intellectual link between the numerous watershed-related programs currently operating on the UC Davis campus as well as watershed decision-makers and stakeholders. The mission of the Center is guided by a Steering Committee, made up of directors or heads of campus programs, and an Advisory Board, composed of watershed experts outside of the UC system. A goal of the Center will be to become self-sustaining within three years through recharge for knowledge-based services, indirect cost return monies, and agency or foundation support.
New faculty positions are being created and filled to expand watershed education and research at UCD. For example, an Assistant Professor in Watershed Hydrology was recently added to the Hydrology Program to develop a quantitative field-experimental research program in Watershed Hydrology. The appointee is expected to lead a team-taught field course in hydrology, an undergraduate course in watershed hydrology, and a graduate level course in experimental watershed hydrology.
The measure of success of the education and teaching mission of the program will be the changes in the curriculum of existing programs on campus, the development of new programs, and the number of students who attend courses associated with the center. An additional measure will be the number of student internships and fellowships sponsored through the center.
Contact: Dr. Jeff Mount, Dept. of Geology, UC Davis, E-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org
Also: Hydrology Program, Dept. of Land, Air and Water Resources, http://lawr.ucdavis.edu
University of Idaho
Eco-hydraulics Research Group
More recent approaches to river management are multi-objective, balancing beneficial uses for power generation, water supply and agriculture with the protection and enhancement of the riverine habitat, water quality, recreational use and aesthetics. These restoration and enhancement approaches place an emphasis on allowing the physical processes to drive the ecological healing by natural evolution, rather than an instantaneous engineering fix. Implementing this restoration philosophy, developing management plans, simulating the hydrological or ecological responses and untangling the complexities of aquatic systems require an interdisciplinary approach, which crosses the boundaries of science and engineering programs. The term "Eco-hydraulics" comes from the new forum created in 1996 by the International Association for Hydraulic Research (IAHR).
To address the specific problems of the Pacific Northwest, the University of Idaho's Eco-hydraulics Research Group comprises faculty from the Departments of Fish and Wildlife Biology, Geography, and the College of Engineering. Faculty expertise includes decision theory, GIS, stream ecology, fisheries biology, biological and microbiological processes, hydrology, hydraulic engineering, sediment transport, geomorphology, computer simulations and computational hydraulics. Collaboration occurs with state and federal agencies, the Idaho Water Resources Research Institute, and international researchers.
Graduate student opportunities exist leading to M.S., M.Engr. or Ph.D. degrees in Civil Engineering, Fish and Wildlife Resources, or Geography. Studies can be undertaken at the Moscow or Boise Campus of the U-I. The Eco-hydraulics laboratory also offers a range of residential short courses for practicing engineers, scientists and planners involved in ecological restoration and natural resource management.
Contact: Eco-hydraulics Research Group, University of Idaho, 800 Park Blvd., Suite 200, Boise ID 83712. (208) 387-1745; Fax (208) 387-1246. Website at: www.engbio.uidaho.edu
Pennsylvania State University
Center for Watershed Stewardship
The Center for Watershed Stewardship is an initiative begun in 1998 that is co-led by the Dept. of Landscape Architecture and School of Forest Resources and funded by a major grant from the Heinz Endowments. Its purpose is "to create the next generation of watershed professionals by combining interdisciplinary capabilities with strong disciplinary bases in a community-oriented context."
Inaugural programs include a graduate option in watershed stewardship and a continuing education program of short courses, seminars, and conferences for natural and water resources professionals and community leaders. Topics to be offered by the Continuing Education and Outreach Program will be: stream corridor management and restoration, community land use planning and design, GIS applications for watershed planning and management, non-profit organizational development and fiscal administration, legal and institutional aspects, water quality management for rural and urban watersheds, natural processes in watersheds, wetland restoration and design, and fisheries restoration and enhancement.
Specific courses will be designed to accommodate a diverse range of participants including landscape architects, community planners, watershed association and land trust staff, community volunteers and activists, natural resource managers, regulatory agency personnel, and environmental consultants, designers, and engineers. Other offerings are being developed through the Center or being co-hosted with other agencies, educational institutions, and departments at Penn State.
Contact: Kerry Wedel, Director, Center for Watershed Stewardship, The Pennsylvania State University, Room 8B, Ferguson Bldg., University Park, PA 16802-4302; (814) 865-8911, fax (814) 865-3725. E-mail: email@example.com
Internet Sites for the Professional Watershed Job Market
American Water Resources Association
Universities Council on Water Resources
COMMUNITY OUTREACH SERVICES
Portland State University
Community Watershed Stewardship Program
By Kristin Schaeffer, Graduate Assistant for CWSP
The Community Watershed Stewardship Program (CWSP) is a partnership between Portland State University (PSU) and the City of Portland's Bureau of Environmental Services (BES) in order to facilitate research and public outreach cultivating stewardship ideology. Our mission is to serve as a catalyst for community ownership of watershed health.
Program goals are to:
- Raise awareness and open avenues for actions to improve watershed health.
- Foster an increased sense of stewardship and promote community initiated projects to improve water quality and habitat in the watersheds of Portland.
- Promote community access to communication systems, training and education about watershed issues and activities.
- Foster partnerships between schools, businesses, interest groups, neighborhood associations, government agencies and individuals in watershed activities.
- Promote citizen evaluation and monitoring of watershed health and activities.
- Strive to be reflective of a diverse community, their values and evaluation.
- Information dissemination and awareness building
- Education and training
- Restoration and enhancement
- Evaluation of the health of watersheds
The role PSU takes in the Stewardship Program is multifaceted. We have two faculty members who are very involved in the management of our program and coordinate graduate assistant (GA) recruitment each year. As well, they facilitate other professor involvement in the Stewardship Program by offering access to our program resources. Since the program works intensively with community efforts, there are watershed research materials and connections we have made with the public. This collective data is then shared with professors who can use the resources to help base their curriculum on.
In the past three years, PSU has instituted a Capstone Class requirement for undergraduate seniors. These classes are intended to get the students involved in community outreach work and offer a number of different classes for specific fields, such as watershed education and awareness. We have found that our program has been getting more involved as a resource for Capstone students and helping to energize stewardship efforts through curriculum development.
Currently, our program funds four graduate assistants who work on average 15 hours a week. Three of the GAs focus on watershed stewardship efforts for a specific watershed, and one GA focuses on the administrative needs of the program and helps to facilitate the Stewardship MiniGrants Program. The GAs come from a variety of backgrounds and departments at PSU, which can change every one to two years. For example, we recruited Joe Blowers who is focusing on a Masters of Science in Teaching Science, Steve Gilchrist is focusing on a Ph.D in the School of Education, Kristin Schaeffer is focusing on a Masters of Public Administration emphasizing on Natural Resources Policy and Administration, and Clint Wertz is focusing on a Masters of Urban Studies and Planning.
At this time, a degree program does not exist in any of the schools or programs at PSU. For the past three years, the Stewardship Program has developed a Watershed 101 course available to communities in which they receive a certificate upon completion. In the past it was a course that was only offered at PSU, but some time was spent last year in developing it for Neighborhood Associations, Watershed Councils and other interested community groups who will have access to the course beyond the campus. We are still in the process of refining this educational component.
For more information, please contact us at phone (503) 8235625, or 'firstname.lastname@example.org'
Oregon State University Extension Service
Watershed Stewardship Guide
OSU Extension's 1998 publication, Watershed Stewardship: A Learning Guide, is intended to help residents and volunteers be good stewards of their watershed. The driving force for the development of this guide was the 1995-97 Oregon Coastal Salmon Restoration Initiative which focused primarily on coho salmon. However, the contents are relevant to all salmonids west of the Cascades. Contained within a two-inch thick 3-ring binder, the material is organized into 3 "user-friendly" sections: IWorking Together to Create Successful Groups, IIUnderstanding and Enhancing Ecosystems, IIIConnecting Resource Management to Watershed Ecosystems.
Copies can be ordered for $32.00 per copy of OSU Extension publication EM 8714 from: Publications Orders, Extension & Station Communications, Oregon State University, 422 Kerr Administration, Corvallis OR 97332-2119. Fax: (541) 737-0817. Discounts are offered on orders of 100 or more copies. Call (541) 737-2513 for price quotes. Also contact them for the latest catalog of publications, software, and videotape programs.
Some other watershed-related materials from Extension include:
- Healthy Watersheds videotape (20 min.) , VTP 019, $20.00
- We All Live Downstream videotape (29 min.) , VTP 021, $30.00
- The Miracle at Bridge Creek Case Study videotape (30 min.), VTP 013, $30.00
- Community Ventures: Interest-Based Problem Solving Process and Techniques, WREP 134, $1.50
- Maintaining Woodland Roads, EC 1139, $1.25
- Water Quality and Our Forests: Western Oregon Research videotape, VTP 014, $25.

Weather, temperature, carbon, water, soil and all other kinds of climate related open data. Including (but not limited to) data about:
- the atmosphere
- the weather
- air quality
- the ocean
- water levels
- water quality
- carbon emissions
- soil erosion
Existing Lists of Climate Datasets to Migrate Here
7 datasets gevonden.
About About page states: The Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center (Thomas A. Boden, Director), which includes the World Data Center for Atmospheric Trace Gases, has served as the...
About From website: Long-term mean sea level change is a variable of considerable interest in the studies of global climate change. The measurement of long-term changes in global mean...
About Guardian website says: UK and US temperature changes, by weather station, for the last century. The Met Office has released data from 1300 weather stations around the world which...
About From Laboratory profile: NCAR's Earth Observing Laboratory develops and deploys NSF Lower Atmospheric Observing Facilities (LAOF) and provides field project support and data...
About Meteorological Station Location Information (Observation Sites) Openness Open. Data is in the public domain. Disclaimer page states: The information on government servers are in...
About The National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) is part of the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences at the University of Colorado at Boulder. NSIDC supports...
About Background page states: The United States Historical Climatology Network (USHCN) is a high-quality data set of daily and monthly records of basic meteorological variables from 1218...

- Special Sections
- Public Notices
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and numerous conservation organizations will observe Endangered Species Day on Friday to recognize conservation efforts underway across the nation aimed at helping America’s imperiled species.
To date, the Endangered Species Act, which became law in 1973, has helped to prevent the extinction of hundreds of species. Co-administered by the Service and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the purpose of the Act is to conserve imperiled species and the ecosystems upon which they depend.
If you currently subscribe or have subscribed in the past to the Chiefland Citizen, then simply find your account number on your mailing label and enter it below.
Click the question mark below to see where your account ID appears on your mailing label.
If you are new to the award winning Chiefland Citizen and wish to get a subscription or simply gain access to our online content then please enter your ZIP code below and continue to setup your account.

Have you ever wondered why the Postal Service offers free rates for the blind, balloting materials for overseas voters, and items sent by some consular officials? Or why it offers reduced rates to qualified nonprofit organizations, election officials, local newspapers, and publishers of educational material? It is because Congress mandates that the Postal Service provide free or reduced rates to these mailers and then appropriates money to reimburse the Postal Service for the revenue “forgone.”
Initially, Congress reimbursed the Postal Service for all types of reduced rate mail. Over the years, as rates increased and the number and size of nonprofit organizations grew, the revenue forgone appropriation more than doubled from $441 million in fiscal year (FY) 1972 to $970 million in FY 1985. The increase spurred a debate about who should bear the cost of reduced rates: taxpayers or other mailers. To address these concerns as well as other matters, the Congress passed the Revenue Forgone Reform Act of 1993. Under the Act, the annual appropriation for free postage for the blind, overseas absentee balloting materials, and consular officials continued; however, new appropriations for reduced rate mail stopped. The Act required nonprofit mailers to cover more institutional or overhead cost and shifted the rest of these costs to other mailers.
Currently, nonprofit mailers that use Standard Mail pay approximately 60 percent of commercial Standard Mail regular rates. The remaining share is absorbed within rates charged to other mailers. Congress continues to reimburse the Postal Service for revenue forgone for free mail, but the amount appropriated is usually less than the Postal Service requests. For example, although the Postal Service requested $124 million in FY 2008 to cover the costs of revenue forgone, free mail and adjustments from previous years, it received only about $89 million.
What do you think are some of the pros and cons of offering free or reduced rates to certain organizations? Tell us what you think.

BirdLife Statement on Avian Influenza
April 12, 2006
There are several ways in which H5N1 can be spread within and between countries. Three major potential routes are the movements of infected poultry (and poultry products), movements of caged wild birds in trade, and movements of wild birds. Effective responses need to focus on all of these possible means of spread.
Outbreaks among wild birds in Europe and Iran during 2006 show that wild birds are capable of carrying the virus to new sites after infection, possibly in a “leap-frog” fashion by travelling for a short time and passing on infection to another group of birds before dying. Many questions remain concerning the effects of the virus on wild birds and how efficiently they can spread it to other wild birds or to domestic poultry. (See section “The role of wild birds”.)
By contrast, recent outbreaks in Cameroon, Egypt, India, Israel, Jordan, Niger, Nigeria and Pakistan originated within the poultry industry. Here, as in most other H5N1 outbreaks, there is strong circumstantial evidence that movements of poultry and poultry products are responsible. The timing and location of these outbreaks do not match the movements of migratory birds. Moreover in many of these countries poultry outbreaks occurred almost simultaneously in multiple large-scale poultry operations, indicating that migratory birds were an unlikely agent of the transmission.
For south-east Asia, recent comprehensive analysis of viral lineages concludes that poultry movements were responsible for multiple reintroductions, both within and between countries, and that “transmission within poultry is the major mechanism for sustaining H5N1 endemicity in the region”.
As H5N1 continues to spread, there is need for responses to be calm, balanced, prompt and effective. In particular, BirdLife urges:
In some parts of the world, authorities have proposed attempting to control the spread of H5N1 by culling wild birds, or destroying their habitats, or displacing them from breeding and roosting grounds. These approaches are unlikely to prevent the transmission of the disease and may in fact spread it to non-infected areas by forcing already-infected birds to disperse. They are at best ineffective, probably counterproductive, and distract from more suitable interventions. They could also add to the stresses already imposed on some species through habitat loss.
The risk of humans contracting H5N1 remains very low. Practically all human cases have resulted from frequent and intimate contact with poultry, but in relation to the number of humans, especially in Asia, who have this degree of contact, the number of known human infections is tiny.
BirdLife believes that greater collaboration between veterinarians, the poultry industry and food, agriculture, health and environment bodies is needed to tackle the threat of avian ‘flu effectively. BirdLife participates actively in a task force on avian influenza comprising scientists and conservationists from nine different international organizations, including four UN bodies, convened by the UNEP Convention on Migratory Species (CMS).
The role of wild birds
Outbreaks among wild birds in Europe during 2006 show that wild birds are capable of carrying the virus to new sites after infection — at least during the early stages of infection. It is possible the birds spread the disease in a “leap-frog” fashion by travelling for a short time and passing on infection to another group of birds before dying. It is also possible that the initial outbreaks in Europe in February related to movements of birds away from the Black and Caspian Sea regions in response to unusually cold weather. These areas are known to have widespread H5N1 infection in poultry, and limited biosecurity measures in place.
In contrast to the recent European incidents, the movement of wild birds are not to date the main cause of the spread of H5N1 in Asia over the decade since the virus was first discovered there. Prior to April 2005, wild birds found dead or dying with H5N1 in Asia were largely sedentary species that scavenge near poultry, live markets or captive bird populations.
In May to July of 2005 there were significant die-offs of migratory wild birds in Qinghai Lake (1,500–6,300 birds) and Mongolia (126 birds). The majority of the birds affected in May of 2005 in Qinghai Lake were Bar-headed Geese Anser indicus. Deaths from H5N1 in the geese occurred weeks after their arrival from wintering grounds in India, suggesting that the source of the H5N1 infection was local to Lake Qinghai. Furthermore no Bar-headed Geese or other wild birds were found dead in other wetlands near to Qinghai Lake.
In Mongolia, at Lake Erhel, the main species found dead or dying with H5N1 in July 2005 were Bar-headed Geese and Whooper Swans Cygnus cygnus. Both species would have arrived to breed in Mongolia several months earlier, and during the outbreak the birds would have been near to completing their annual feather moult, during which they are sedentary. Bird surveys carried out during the same period at eight wetlands in Mongolia found no other birds with H5N1. These facts point to the source of H5N1 infection being local to Lake Erhel and that the infected wild birds did not spread the disease to new locations.
It is possible that in some Asian and Australasian countries where little or no surveillance work has been done, infected wild birds have gone undetected . However, in Japan, Korea, New Zealand and Australia, where there has been extensive surveillance, there have been no infected wild birds identified. Countries such as the Philippines, on a major migration route from south-east Asia, remain free of H5N1. Japan and South Korea have both remained free of the disease after early outbreaks confined to poultry were brought under control by closing borders to poultry imports.
Wild birds have tested positive to H5N1 in Asia. Six out of more than 13,000 wild birds tested in China were positive, and 3% of this total had antibodies to H5N1. However, out of 16,000 wild birds tested over the last decade in Hong Kong, not a single live bird infected with H5N1 has been found. This finding is particularly striking since Hong Kong is so close to centres of infection in poultry in mainland China.
The lack of a trail of H5N1 infections along migratory pathways from infected breeding habitats in Mongolia, China and Russia to southern wintering areas in Asia suggests that migratory wild birds are not spreading the disease long distances between continents. With few exceptions, there is limited correlation between the pattern and timing of spread among domestic birds and wild bird migrations.
Nevertheless some authorities argue that the timing and location of outbreaks in the Black Sea and Caspian Sea in the autumn of 2005 did follow the southern migration routes of birds. These outbreaks occurred after H5N1 was detected in poultry in Russia and wildfowl in south west Russia in the summer of 2005. However, there appeared to be no trails of death along this migration route; wild bird deaths were localised and at least in some instances were restricted to a few individuals from larger flocks. Equally plausible explanations for the spread of avian influenza westwards during the latter half of 2005 are the movements of poultry and poultry products (See section “Movements of poultry and poultry products”).
BirdLife believes that it is unlikely that migratory wild birds carried H5N1 to Africa. There is strong circumstantial evidence that movements of poultry and poultry products are responsible. The timing and location of these outbreaks do not match the movements of migratory birds. Moreover in countries such as Nigeria and Egypt poultry outbreaks occurred almost simultaneously in multiple large-scale poultry operations, indicating that migratory birds were an unlikely agent of the transmission. If H5N1 was carried by wild birds, outbreaks should have occurred in key wetlands for migratory birds, especially in East Africa where there has been surveillance of wild birds in place over the past six months.
Understanding of the epidemiology of H5N1 in wild birds, and the behaviour of the virus in the wider environment, remain very inadequate. Most of the research on H5N1 has been on domestic animals in laboratory environments. How easily infected wild birds can pass the disease on to other wildfowl or poultry remains an important, unanswered question. The limited evidence that exists suggests tremendous variability in transmission rates and virulence between different host species and different strains of the virus.
Better quality data collection and reporting is crucial to understanding general patterns in outbreaks, possible routes of transmission, and the potential impacts on migratory bird populations. This information can be used to focus contingency efforts, to predict future outbreaks, and to guide effective policy to reduce the economic and conservation impacts of avian influenza.
In the interests of all those attempting to control the spread of HPAI H5N1, BirdLife believes that all surveillance and test data, whether positive or negative, should be published and made freely available to researchers.
There are several ways in which H5N1 can be spread within and between countries. It is therefore essential to monitor and control those activities which are known or strongly suspected to spread H5N1. These include the movements of untreated poultry and poultry products, the re-use of inadequately cleansed transportation crates, and the trade in wild birds. Further investigation is also needed of the use of potentially infected poultry manure as fertiliser in agriculture and as feed in fish-farms and pig farms, described by the UN Food and Agriculture organisation as a high-risk activity.
Movements of poultry and poultry products
Most outbreaks in south-east Asia can be linked to movements of poultry and poultry products (or accidental transfer of infected material from poultry farms, such as water, straw or soil on vehicles, clothes and shoes). Globally, the most important route of spread remains unrestricted poultry movements. A recent paper (Chen et al., “Establishment of multiple sublineages of H5N1 influenza virus in Asia: Implications for pandemic control”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 21 February 2006) analyses the viral lineages and concludes that poultry movements were responsible for multiple reintroductions in south-east Asia, both within and between countries.
Live animal or ‘wet’ markets may have played a major part in spreading the virus in south-east Asia, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and World Health Organisation (WHO): “In 1992, live poultry markets in the USA were considered the ‘missing link in the epidemiology of influenza’. They were identified as the source of the H5N1 infection in chicken farms in Hong Kong in 1997 when approximately 20% of the chickens in live poultry markets were found to be infected. The same situation was seen in Viet Nam, where the circulation of H5N1 in geese in live bird markets in Hanoi had been documented three years before the 2004 outbreaks in chicken farms.” (FAO/OIE/WHO Consultation on avian influenza and human health: Risk reduction measures in producing, marketing, and living with animals in Asia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, July 2005).
There is also a huge international trade in poultry—both legal and illegal. The legal trade involves literally millions of hatching eggs and poultry being shipped to destinations world-wide. For example, prior to the outbreaks in Egypt, the country was reported to export 180 million day-old-chicks plus 500,000 mature fowl a year. Almost 12 million live chickens were officially imported into the Ukraine in 2004 and more than 16 million into Romania. In Turkey, one factory has the capacity to produce over 100 million hatching eggs per year, many of them exported to Eastern Europe and the Middle East. Recent outbreaks in India, Nigeria and Egypt originated within the poultry industry, and there is strong circumstantial evidence that movements of poultry and poultry products are responsible.
For obvious reasons, little information is available on the extent of the unregulated and illegal poultry trade. However, recently it was revealed that poultry meat is being illegally imported from Asia into the USA; in October 2005 3,000 chickens were intercepted by Italian customs after being smuggled into the country from China; and in November 2005 the UK authorities revealed that large quantities, possibly hundreds of tonnes, of chicken meat had been illegally imported from China, and fraudulently relabelled before being sold on to food manufacturers across the country. In February 2006, 20 kg of chicken tongues from China were found by customs in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and 21 tonnes of (mainly) poultry meat from China were confiscated in southern Spain. These indicate continuing lapses in border controls, despite the widely publicised risks. Illegal poultry movements are reported to be extensive in central Asia. In 2005, Ukraine’s State Department of Veterinary Medicine said there had been substantial illegal re-exportation of meat from Ukraine to Russia from third countries.
Illegal trade in cage birds
Faeces as fertiliser and livestock feed
Initial investigations reveal that Russian fish farms have recently started using chicken faeces as fertiliser, and this practice is followed in Eastern Europe where poultry faeces are also spread onto agricultural land and discharge inevitably runs off into waterways. The collection and transport of untreated poultry manure could be a highly effective way of spreading the virus. The FAO recommends “that the feeding of poultry manure/poultry litter should be banned in countries affected by or at risk from avian influenza, even if correctly composted, ensiled or dried with heat treatment.”
For more information see BirdLife's March 2006 report, Fish farming and the risk of spread of avian influenza (PDF, 200 KB).
Prevention and control
The best veterinary advice concerning issues such as confinement of free-ranging flocks and vaccination should be sought and followed. Vaccination may be effective — providing there is adequate antigen in the vaccine. Poor-quality vaccines stop the signs of the disease but allow the virus to continue replicating, spreading and evolving. There is continuing debate among virologists, veterinarians and politicians over the merits of vaccination.
The role of wild birds must be seen in the much larger context of the global poultry industry and the movements of huge quantities of poultry products around the world. Focusing on wild birds alone is misplaced and a potentially dangerous diversion of energy, effort and resources. Attempts to cull migratory wild birds or destroy their habitat are highly misguided—experience shows that this approach is completely ineffective, and indeed is likely to make matters worse.
Risks to people
In the last 100 years there have been at least three major pandemics of human influenza A, which killed many people around the world. The origins of these deadly virus strains remain uncertain, but at least two are thought to have arisen when bird flu and human influenza viruses came together, possibly in pigs, and reassorted their genetic material. Continued outbreaks of H5N1 increase the chances of this happening again, especially as the current strain of H5N1 is exceptional in that it can pass directly from poultry to humans, without the intervention of an intermediate host.
There are a few anecdotal reports of humans contracting the virus directly from wild birds, but none confirmed as yet. Almost always, human infections have occurred in people who have been closely associated with poultry. Given the substantial number and distribution of outbreaks in domestic poultry and waterfowl, there have been relatively few cases in people, indicating that the transmission of the virus from poultry to man remains inefficient.
Activities such as bird watching and feeding garden birds are completely safe, if simple common sense precautions are followed. These include avoid touching carcasses of wild birds, and washing hands with soap and water after filling or cleaning bird feeders. Both measures are advisable as birds can carry other potentially dangerous pathogens. Terrestrial sites of known H5N1 outbreaks should be avoided, for at least six weeks after the last recorded case. However, as avian influenza viruses can survive a very long time in water (up to 100 days depending on PH, salinity or temperature) it is recommended that people avoid swimming in infected water bodies for much longer.
In countries where H5N1 outbreaks have occurred, people working with poultry or other captive birds need to take stricter precautions, to minimise the risk of carrying infection to the birds they work with. They should avoid direct contact with wild birds and should also avoid contact with water from ponds and other sources which are used by wild birds as much as possible.
Conservation implications for wild birds
There have been reports in the media of wild birds being demonised. In some countries politicians have called on hunters to wipe out or frighten away incoming migrant birds. Some governments have reportedly revived plans to drain wetlands, under the pretext of denying waterfowl landing and breeding places. Nests of birds, such as Barn Swallow Hirundo rustica and House Martin Delichon urbica, which breed in close proximity with man have been destroyed in the mistaken belief that this measure will lessen the risk of contracting bird ‘flu. None of these measures will control the spread of avian influenza, instead putting wild birds and other biodiversity in jeopardy
The virus is generally highly pathogenic (causes a high level of mortality) to wild birds. However, the total number of wild birds affected has so far been small: very many more birds die of other, commoner avian diseases each year. Nevertheless, H5N1 could be damaging to species that are already threatened, and/or congregate in just a few localities. One globally threatened bird species may already have been affected. In February 2006, the virus was isolated from a Red-breasted Goose Branta ruficollis in Greece. This is of concern as 90% of the world population of 88,000 is confined to just five roosts in Romania and Bulgaria, both affected countries. It is also estimated that between 5% and 10% of the world population of the Bar-headed Goose Anser indicus perished in the outbreak at Lake Qinghai, in China in spring 2005.
BirdLife International is a member of a task force on avian influenza comprising scientists and conservationists from nine different international organizations including four UN bodies, convened by the UNEP Convention on Migratory Species (CMS). The task force seeks much better data and information on the cause of the spread of the disease. It is convening a meeting in early April 2006 to assemble some of the top scientists to examine the latest information on avian influenza.

Cats can’t talk. Their aggressive or destructive behavior, vocalization, or house soiling can be their only way of communicating a problem. By being aware of what constitutes “normal” behavior and learning to watch for warning signs, you can work to correct bad behavior and recognize potential health problems such as diabetes, arthritis, and senility.
Nutrition and Exercise
Obesity has become a chronic problem in cats, one that can lead to other health problems such as loss of mobility, chronic arthritis, chronic constipation, and endocrine-related illnesses such as hypothyroidism, diabetes, and Cushing’s disease. Good nutrition is one way to fight obesity.
At Arroyo, we offer a range of pet foods for specific dietary needs, including weight loss, as well as ideas for healthy foods you can prepare yourself and for feeding schedules.
Regular exercise is equally important. To prevent injuries, parasites, life-threatening diseases, and other health threats, and to protect indigenous animals, we recommend keeping cats indoors. Exercise your indoor kitty with toys, especially wands, that get him or her chasing and dancing after tempting items.
When you come to Arroyo for your pet’s examination, be sure to find out his or her weight and how it measures up on our body scale system.
You can be a partner in fostering your cat’s health and well-being.Arroyo’s services include behavior consultation.
Spaying and neutering are common and highly recommended procedures, ones that can help protect the health and safety of your cat and control the animal population.
Arroyo offers spay and neuter programs that adhere to the highest medical standards and provide total pre- and post-operative care, all at a competitive, predetermined price.
Science can’t explain the phenomenon, but numerous studies have shown that animal companions—just by their presence—can help lower your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, increase your chances of survival after a heart attack, reduce loneliness and depression, and spread all-around good cheer. Your presence, affection, and attention have an equally powerful and positive effect on your pet’s well-being.
If your pet becomes extremely ill or severely injured, sometimes the kindest thing you can do is have your veterinarian induce his or her death quietly and humanely through euthanasia. This decision is always serious and seldom easy. At Arroyo, we understand the special relationship you have with your pet and can help you weigh what is best for the animal as well as for you and your family. If you choose euthanasia, we can guide you through the medical and grieving process with care and compassion.
Arroyo Veterinary Hospital offers wellness programs that cover all aspects of preventive health for kittens and for cats in their active and senior years. Learn more about our full range of services.
Arroyo Veterinary Hospital is proud to be accredited by the American Animal Hospital Association, a member of the Sonoma Valley Chamber of Commerce, The Better Business Bureau and a certified Green Business

Posted on August 6, 2010 by saya
3D technology is an important emerging technique developed quickly during the past few years and it has been widely applied in the fields of advertising, furniture and electronics. And recently, three designers have even collaborated with a new 3D printer that can spit out fabric structures for clothing. When three-dimensional body data is fed into the computer, certain software will then start to work and have the printer produce fabric structures, just as what you can see from the video below. On the other hand, the new technology will also result in great changes, such as much better efficiency, less needed labor and various customized fabric structures.

James Ford Rhodes (18481927). History of the Civil War, 18611865 1917.
responsibility that was not clearly his, probably prevented him from urging his President to negotiate a peace; but, if the memories of private conversation may be believed, he had lost all hope of success. It was Jefferson Davis who in this matter imposed his will on all his subordinates and it was he more than anybody else who stood in the way of an attempt to secure favorable terms for the South in a reconstruction of the Union.
If Davis, Lee and the Confederate Congress could have made up their minds to sue for peace, the contemporaneous occurrences in Washington reveal the magnanimous spirit in which they would have been met by Abraham Lincoln.
Two days after the Hampton Roads Conference, on Sunday evening, February 5, the President called his Cabinet together to consult them in regard to a message he proposed to send recommending that Congress empower him to pay to the eleven slave States of the Southern Confederacy then in arms against the Union and to the five Union slave States four hundred million dollars as compensation for their slaves provided that all resistance to the national authority should cease on April first next. The Cabinet unanimously disapproved this project and Lincoln with a deep sigh said, You are all opposed to me and I will not send the message. Such a proposal to the Southern Confederacy, tottering to her fall, only sixty-three days before Lees surrender to Grant would have shown magnanimous foresight. Had the Confederate States accepted it, there would have been an immediate fraternal union after the Civil War. Had they rejected it, the President and Congress would have made a noble record. The offer, however, was too wise and too generous to be widely approved of men; Lincoln of all those in authority had reached a moral height where he must dwell alone and impotent. But when reflecting on the

|.: Formations of Natural Catastrophes :.|
Before thunderstorms develop, a change in wind direction and an increase in wind speed with increasing height, creating an invisible, horizontal spinning effect in the lower atmosphere. Warm rising within the thunderstorm updraft tilts the rotating funnel of air from horizontal to vertical. An area of vertical rotation, ranging from 3-9.5 kilometres (2-5 miles) wide, extends through most of the storm. Progressively, with increasingly warm air and a constant updraft, a tornado forms within this area of rapid rotation.

Office of the Federal Register
The Office of the Federal Register
The Office of the Federal Register (OFR), an agency within the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), is a resource for anyone reporting on the federal government's day-to-day operations or assigned to a beat involving the environment, health care, exports, education or other major public policy issues. Through the OFR and the Government Printing Office (GPO), journalists can access the official text of federal laws, presidential documents, administrative regulations and notices about scheduled hearings and grant applications. In addition to administering the Electoral College and the Constitutional Amendment Process, the OFR publishes the Federal Register, The Code of Federal Regulations, United States Statutes At Large, Privacy Act Issuances and other document compilations.
The Federal Register: The Daily Journal of the US Government
The Federal Register is perhaps the OFR's most useful resource for journalists. Published by 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, with the exception of federal holidays, the Federal Register, also referred to as the Fed. Reg., is the official journal of the US federal government. The Fed. Reg. contains proposed rules, executive orders, proclamations and any other presidential documents. It is a useful research tool and a great way for journalists to find story ideas.
The Fed. Reg. is available in print, on microfiche and on the Internet. To access the publication for free online visit the Federal Register 2.0, the GPO’s Federal Digital System. Archives dating back to 1994 are available online. Archives dating back to the Federal Register's creation in 1935 are accessible at any Federal Depository Library. Click here to find one near you. Reporters do not have to waste time skimming through endless pages to find out whether or not something of interest to their beat is included in the day’s edition of the Fed. Reg. The index breaks down all of the content alphabetically by agency and includes one sentence synopses of the content that journalists can read and decide whether or not its contents are worth their time.
The Federal Register for Busy Journalists
Don't have time for the hard copy or the full online text of the Federal Register? Journalists can subscribe to Federal Register email notifications and RSS feeds. The Federal Register email notifications will not flood your inbox with updates irrelevant to your beat. Journalists can tailor e-mail updates and feeds so they are only notified when there is information relevant to their news beat. For directions on how to customize email notifications or to receive pre-configured notifications visit the Federal Register Blog. For standard agency notifications visit the National Archives website.
The Federal Register 2.0 is easy to navigate and loaded with information that may help you come up with a story idea that hasn't yet caught the attention of the mainstream media. The Federal Register's blog can be another story-generator tool. A list of all topics that have appeared in the Federal Register is available here. It includes everything from exports and government contracts to straw, watermelons and dry cleaners. Click here for more information on the how to maximize your search results.
The Public Papers of the US Presidents
The Public Papers of the US Presidents are also published twice a year and contain all Executive Orders, Proclamations, Administrative Orders and text of addresses and remarks of a public nature made by the President.The search can be narrowed by time frame, subject or addressed agency. Up until the inauguration of Pres. Barack Obama, the OFR printed a weekly compilation of presidential documents. It now publishes a daily compilation on its website.
The US Government Manual Online Edition
In April 2011, The OFR announced the first-ever Internet release of the new United States Government Manual (the Manual), the official handbook of the Federal Government. The Manual provides easy access to agency organizational charts, definitions of the federal government's commonly used abbreviations and acronyms, and a detailed section on Federal agencies that have been terminated, transferred, or changed in name since March 1933.
View Office of the Federal Register in a larger map
Does this agency's information need updating? email@example.com

samedi 7 avril 2012 13:24tell me.
- Modifié TEJ2911 samedi 7 avril 2012 13:26
Toutes les réponses
samedi 7 avril 2012 16:23
You need at least the one class for a program to run. Creating a new project will automatically create the class for you . If you have older code, create a new project and drop the old code into the new project. A console application wil automatically generate a main function. Take you old main function code an paste it into the new main function. If you have any additioanl functions just place the code after the main function keeping the code inside the same class as main.
samedi 7 avril 2012 17:42
No you cannot execute it. C# at least need one system defined or user defined class. That is what an objects oriented programming language should be.
I am bit curious to know what you want to achieve.
dimanche 8 avril 2012 07:04
do you mean you don't required .net framework to run your program ?
then you have to you use c++ to create your Project.

07-10-2012 (Dayton, OH) -
A recent outbreak of E. Coli in Germantown, OH has led health officials to remind citizens to take caution when preparing and handling food. This is especially important during outdoor picnics in the high temperatures of the summer months which can intensify the bacteria in the food.
“Human infection of E.Coli is acquired through contaminated food or water or by direct contact with an infected person,” says Terrie Koss, infection preventionist at Dayton Children’s.
Infections due to Escherichia coli bacteria can cause severe, bloody diarrhea. Some cases can result in kidney failure or other serious complications. Fortunately, most healthy kids who get the infection recover on their own without the need for treatment.
“If you suspect your child might have E.Coli you should consult their pediatrician or visit the Dayton Children’s urgent care or emergency department,” says Koss. “The biggest concern is making sure the child stays hydrated.”
The incubation period generally lasts anywhere from 10 hours to six days. An infection is contagious for at least as long as the person has diarrhea, and sometimes longer.
A doctor might take a stool sample to detect the presence of E. coli bacteria. Blood tests may be used to check for possible complications.
Antibiotics have not been found to be helpful in treating infections caused by E. coli O157:H7 and can, in fact, be harmful. Likewise, anti-diarrheal medicines can increase the risk of complications and should not be used.
Kids with an E. coli infection should rest as much as possible and drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration. Those who are dehydrated might need to be hospitalized to get IV fluids.
“While recovering from an infection, kids can resume normal activities after two stool cultures are free of the bacteria” says Koss. “Refrain from letting kids use swimming pools or water slides until 2 weeks after their symptoms have gone away.”
E. colioutbreaks have been related to a wide variety of foods, such as fresh spinach, hamburgers, ground beef, bologna, hazelnuts, packaged cheeses, shredded lettuce, and prepackaged cookie dough.
Being vigilant about safe food preparation can go a long way toward protecting your family from E. coli infections:
- Cook meat thoroughly until it reaches a temperature of at least 160ºF/70ºC at its thickest point.
- Thoroughly clean anything that comes into contact with raw meat.
- Choose pasteurized juices and dairy products.
- Clean raw produce well before eating.
Teach your kids the importance of regular, thorough hand washing, especially after going to the bathroom, touching animals, or playing outside, and before eating or preparing food. They should avoid swallowing water while swimming.
When to Call the Doctor
Call your doctor if your child has any symptoms of an E. coli infection, especially stomach pain or persistent, severe, or bloody diarrhea. Call immediately if your child shows signs of dehydration, such as decreased urination.
For more information, contact:
Marketing Communications Specialist
We believe there are 18 ways we're just right for our region's kids! Learn more and share your story at justrightforkids.org.

Preaching and Evangelism
Preaching is a work within the church
- Men were called evangelist: Acts 21:8; II Timothy 4:5
- Christ appointed some men as evangelists - Ephesians 4:11
- The word translated evangelism comes from a Greek word used to describe the bringing the joyous news of victory from the battlefront. It is often translated as "preaching the gospel" as in Romans 1:15.
- The same work is called preaching - II Corinthians 1:19, I Timothy 2:7, II Timothy 1:11
- The word translated preaching comes from a Greek word for a herald or town-crier.
- The same work is called ministry - Romans 15:15-16; Ephesians 3:6-7; Colossians 1:23; I Timothy 4:6
- The word translated ministering comes from a Greek word for a serving. This same word is used for a servant, a deacon, and a preacher. The context defines its usage.
- Preaching and ministering are used for the same work - Colossians 1:24
- Evangelism and ministering are used for the same work - II Timothy 4:5
- Preachers hold authority - Titus 2:15
The work of a preacher
- An evangelist is to build up Christians to maturity - Ephesians 4:11-13
- A minister reaches out to the lost - Romans 15:15-16
- A preacher proclaims the good news of salvation - Romans 1:15-16, I Timothy 4:16
- A preacher rebukes those in error - II Timothy 4:2, I Timothy 4:1-6
- A preacher reproves those who teach error - II Timothy 4:2
- A preacher exhorts people to live in accordance with God's will - I Timothy 4:13; II Timothy 4:2; Titus 2:15
- A preacher teaches - I Timothy 4:11, 13
- A preacher speaks, which can include speaking in the worship service - Titus 2:1, 15; 3:8; I Corinthians 14:26
- A preacher teaches other Christians to become teachers - II Timothy 2:2
- A preacher sets an example for others to follow - I Timothy 4:12
- A preacher is involved in the selection of elders - Titus 1:5
- A preacher is involved in the rebuking of elders who sin - I Timothy 5:17-21
- A preacher is involved in organizing a congregation - Titus 1:5
- A preacher guards the truth - I Timothy 6:20-21; 1:3-4; 1:18-19; II Timothy 1:13-14; Titus 1:13-14
- A preacher must study - II Timothy 2:15
Who can be a preacher?
- A woman cannot be a preacher - Titus 2:15; I Timothy 2:12
- A man can serve as both a preacher and an elder - I Timothy 5:17

The sky is big. Searching it for potentially hazard objects like asteroids and comets is hard. The best way to do it? A big ‘scope, equipped with a BIG camera, and a wide, wide field of view. That’s just what the Panoramic Survey Telescope & Rapid Response System — PanSTARRS — brings to the table. It’s just a prototype, but it has a 1.8 meter ‘scope on — wait for it, wait for it — Mount Haleakala, and it sports a 1.4 gigapixel camera. You read that right: 1.4 billion pixels.
It scans the skies looking for threatening objects, and astronomers just announced they have found their first one: 2010 ST3, an asteroid 50 meters (150 feet or so) across. It was found September 16, when it was still 30+ million kilometers (20 million miles) from Earth. Here’s the object in question:
How big a threat is this object? Well, not very: there’s "a very slight chance" it will hit Earth in 2098, so I’m not terribly concerned. When astronomers map an orbit of an object, there’s some uncertainty in the measurements. It’s hard to get the exact position of the object, and its motion over a day or two isn’t enough to get a good idea of its trajectory. The farther you try to project where it’ll be in the future, the fuzzier the prediction gets.
For something like 2010 ST3, there’s a huge volume of potential space it might occupy come 2098, and it so happens that the Earth is in that same volume of space at that time. But the Earth is near the edge of the projected position, and as time goes on, and the orbit is better determined, the volume of space the asteroid might be in will shrink. Eventually, what almost always happens is that the Earth winds up outside that volume as our data get better. That’s why the odds of it hitting us are so low.
Now, if it did hit us, it would be bad. An object a bit smaller than that carved out Meteor Crater in Arizona, a hole over 1.5 kilometers across (that’s me posing in front of it; click it to get an idea of how big this scar is, and bear in mind the far rim is almost a mile away). An impact by something like that is about the same as exploding a 20 megaton bomb.
So yeah, bad.
The good news here… let me correct myself: the great news here is that Pan-STARRS found this thing at all! From that distance, an object this small is really hard to see, and no other asteroid survey could’ve found it. That means that as time goes on, Pan-STARRS will find lots and lots of threatening objects. And they’re out there whether we look for them or not! So it’s best to find the beasties before they find us.
And when we do find them, we need to keep a really good eye on them. We need accurate orbits, and good statistics, so that we can figure out just how big a threat these guys are. 2010 ST3 is almost certainly benign, at least for the next century. But there are thousands more like it roaming the sky. We don’t get hit very often, but we do get hit.
For those of you who fret about such things, I like to say that this is something to be concerned about, but not something to worry about. Worry accomplishes nothing, but concern means we’re turning our brains to the problem. And that’s the very best way to solve problems.
Image credit: PS1SC
Links to this Post
- Astronews Daily (2455468) | September 28, 2010
- Android OS news » Fifty Meter Asteroid Might Hit Earth In 2098 | September 28, 2010
- 20 Million Miles To Earth « Movie Mania | September 29, 2010
- ‘potentially hazardous’ asteroid to pass Earth Earth in mid-October - Dateline Zero | September 29, 2010
- Un nuevo peligro para la Tierra | La mentira está ahí fuera | September 30, 2010
- Un meteorito de 50 metros podría impactar la Tierra en el 2098 — Tecnoculto | October 5, 2010

Some of the kids at Cape May Elementary School, fourth- to sixth-graders, got a chance the other day to show off a little science project they've been working on lately.
Well, make that a science and technology and engineering and math and writing and art and communications - and maybe a few more subjects - project they're working on.
These kids broke out the remotely operated vehicles and motorized controllers they built and put them through their paces - underwater, in the school's pool.
Right, remotely operated vehicles doing tricks, on and under the surface of the water. And no, this isn't science fiction. This is grade school.
Edgar Ramirez, 10, got his ROV to pick up and spin a ball as he navigated the submersible craft around the surface, at the end of a wire maybe 30 feet long.
Along the pool to his right, Gabriella Hristov and Chandler Herr were getting their battery-powered motors to pull a floating hoop around the water. And that gave the other kids, including Sadie Jensen and Abby Simcox, a target to chase when they got their turns at the controls.
By the way, this was just about the first time these kids got to practice with the ROVs, which they started building last month from scratch - or at least from kits provided by Seaperch.
That's a project sponsored by a branch of the U.S. Navy, the Office of Naval Research, and developed by professors and scientists from MIT, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The idea is to get students interested in careers in science, technology, engineering and math - or STEM, in education terms.
So while these kids may think they're getting out of class - and out of their shoes into bare feet - to mess around with a submersible boat in a pool, the real lesson in the project is that science and all those related subjects don't have to be dull. They can be challenging, fascinating, even fun.
And the kids obviously get that point.
"To find the Titanic, they used one of these," explains Jensen, an 11-year-old fifth-grader, as she tools an ROV around the pool. "But it was bigger, and it was attached to a ship."
Sandy Sandmeyer-Bryan, a veteran Cape May Elementary teacher who's in charge of the Seaperch project, adds the technology her kids are working with has plenty more important uses in today's world.
"After the oil spill (in the Gulf of Mexico), when they had to go down and cap the wells, they used ROVs," she said.
But the kids' Seaperch journey doesn't end once they finish building boats they can control by wires. (The wires are still needed, even in today's increasingly wireless world, because radio waves don't travel well through water, the teacher explains.)
"We're learning about ROVs, but we're also going to learn about AUVs" - autonomous unmanned vehicles, which are pre-programmed on land and then sent on missions underwater. And another focus of study will be HOVs, or human-occupied vehicles, Sandmeyer-Bryan says.
She's getting volunteer help with Seaperch from Sue Slotterback, an environmental-education consultant from Dennis Township who has run popular programs at local schools on monarch butterflies and horseshoe crabs. Slotterback was at an education conference in Virginia a few years ago when she heard about Seaperch, and she talked her friend, Sandmeyer-Bryan, into trying it out at her school.
They knew Cape May Elementary had a natural head start on an underwater project - it has had its own built-in pool since the 1960s. But this particular school also had one potential disadvantage when it came to advanced undersea exploration, Slotterback adds:
"This is normally done by high-school and middle-school students," she says.
And the project is about to get much more complicated for these grade-school engineers. They have to add lights and cameras to their ROVs, and even operate the vehicles without looking at them. One Seaperch challenge forces the operator to control the ROV while looking away from the pool - only seeing where the craft is, and what it's doing, by watching it on a monitor for that camera.
Jensen adds she looks forward to another part of the project, when the kids have to add arms and hooks to the vehicles, and work them remotely too.
The teachers say they're getting a lot more lessons than just hard science into the kids' underwater work. Sandmeyer-Bryan, whose specialties include literacy and the school's enrichment programs, has all the Seaperch students keeping journals of their progress and discoveries. Plus they're creating art in sketchbooks - and they got together to create one joint book that's scheduled to be on display soon at the Brooklyn Art Library, through its annual Sketchbook Project.
Then there's plenty of oceanography and other environmental education involved. The teachers know their kids have a huge lead over most American students on doing actual undersea exploration, given they all live within a few miles of the Atlantic Ocean and the Delaware Bay.
Victoria Zelenak, the school's principal and Cape May's district superintendent, liked all that when Sandmeyer-Bryan pitched Seaperch to her.
"The fact that we have a pool, and we're by the ocean and the bay - it's using our resources to help the children explore the environment in which they live," said Zelenak, who adds the Cape May Elementary pool is open to the public out of school hours, and it's a popular feature around the town.
She happens to know first-hand that controlling a ROV isn't as easy as it looks - more on that later - but she says she was confident Sandmeyer-Bryan could make it work for grade-school kids.
The school plans to show off the project in public next month when it holds an annual community festival Feb. 26. This year's theme is "Dive Into Ocean Exploration," and everybody involved expects the Seaperch mission to be a highlight of that night.
Shortly after the kids finished the submersible boats she'd heard so much about, Zelenak asked to take a turn running one. Alas, at least that science experiment was apparently not a great success. By some reports, the students had to work on their social skills - by bravely, politely stifling their laughter - as this highly educated adult tried to do what she'd just seen them do so easily.
"I kind of felt like, 'Are you smarter than a fifth grader?'" says Zelenak, who can laugh about her own performance. "But that's OK. They can be smarter than their superintendent, their principal."
In fact, you could even say that's a good definition of success in education.
(For more details on the program, visit seaperch.org.)
Contact Martin DeAngelis:

John P. Cunha, DO, FACOEP
John P. Cunha, DO, is a U.S. board-certified Emergency Medicine Physician. Dr. Cunha's educational background includes a BS in Biology from Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, and a DO from the Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences in Kansas City, MO. He completed residency training in Emergency Medicine at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, New Jersey.
- Why does reflux laryngitis occur?
- What are the typical symptoms of reflux laryngitis?
- How are reflux laryngitis evaluated?
- What is the conservative therapy of reflux?
- What types of medications are used to treat reflux?
- What are the difficulties in diagnosing reflux laryngitis?
- Reflux Laryngitis At A Glance
- Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Why does reflux laryngitis occur?
Reflux is caused by weakness in the muscle at the junction of the esophagus with the stomach. Normally, this muscular valve, or sphincter, functions to keep food and stomach acid from moving upward from the stomach to the esophagus and larynx. This valve opens to allow food into the stomach and closes to keep the stomach's contents from coming back up. The backward movement of stomach contents (gastric contents) up into the esophagus is referred to as gastroesophageal reflux.
Additionally, any increase in abdominal pressure (such as obesity), which can push acid back from the stomach up the esophagus, or a patient with a hiatal hernia, will have an increased risk for reflux. When it causes symptoms, it is referred to as gastroesophageal reflux disease (or GERD). When the acid backs up into the voice box (larynx), the condition is referred to as reflux laryngitis.
Stomach acid can cause irritation of the lining of the esophagus, larynx, and throat. This can lead to:
- erosion of the lining of the
esophagus (erosive esophagitis),
- narrowing of the esophagus (stricture),
- chronic hoarseness,
- difficulty swallowing,
- foreign body sensation in the throat,
- asthma or cough,
- spasms of the vocal cords,
- sinusitis, and
- growths on the vocal cords (granulomas).
Viewers share their comments
Get the latest treatment options.

Space weather "storms" can cause electricity to flow in Earth's atmosphere. That can cause unusual electrical currents in the wires that carry electricity to homes. Sometimes space weather storms mess up the flow of electricity in our power system so much that they cause blackouts.
Click on image for full size
Image courtesy John G. Kappenman, Minnesota Power, Duluth, Minnesota.
Space Weather Effects on Electrical Power Systems
Space weather "storms" can cause problems on Earth. They can even mess up our systems that make electricity and that deliver electricity to peoples' houses. Sometimes really big space weather storms can cause massive blackouts over large areas. In March of 1989 six million people in eastern Canada lost their electrical power for nine hours because of really big space weather storm.
Our electrical systems are designed to use alternating current (AC) electricity. Space weather disturbances can cause large flows of direct current (DC) electricity in power transmission wires. Electrical systems use very high voltage electricity to transmit power over long distances from power plants to peoples' homes and to businesses. However, high voltage electricity is dangerous, so the power is converted to lower voltage before it is delivered to homes and other users. Transformers are devices that convert high voltage electricity to lower voltage electricity.
Transformers work fine with AC electricity, but can be damaged or destroyed if too much DC electricity flows into them. That's what can happen during big space weather storms. If many transformers fail at once, the whole electrical system over a large area can go down. That's how space weather can cause a blackout.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
on science education, ranging from evolution
, classroom research
, and the need for science and math literacy
You might also be interested in:
There are two types of electrical currents that can flow through wires: direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC). Direct current (DC) flows in the same direction all the time through an electric...more
Space weather causes electricity to flow in our atmosphere. Sometimes that electricity lights up the sky by causing the aurora (the Southern and Northern Lights). Electric currents in the atmosphere can...more
Our electrical power system supplies our homes and businesses with electricity. Space weather storms can mess up the power system, leaving us without electricity. A transformer is a piece of equipment...more
Sometimes a whole electric power system shuts down. This can happen after a strong space weather storm. It is hard to get the whole system running again after it has been shut down all the way. The main...more
In 1989 a space weather storm caused an electrical blackout over a large area. Six million people in eastern Canada lost electrical power for 9 hours or longer. The blackout of the HydroQuebec power grid...more
Earth's magnetosphere shields our planet from most of the solar wind. Some solar wind particles do leak in and combine with ions escaping from the top of Earth's atmosphere to populate the magnetosphere...more
There is a giant magnetic "bubble" in space around the Sun. That "bubble" is called the heliosphere. In a sense, we Earthlings live within the outer atmosphere of our Sun. The solar...more

A Terrier-Improved Orion suborbital sounding rocket carrying the experiment of four Drexel Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics Students blasted off from NASA’s Wallops Island Flight Facility at 6:40 a.m. this morning.
Kelly Collett, Christopher Elko, Danielle Jacobson and their advisor Dr. Jin Kang, of the Drexel Space Systems Laboratory were on hand to watch the rocket carrying their experiment take flight. The launch was expected at 6 a.m., however, it was delayed to allow boats moving through the danger zone to clear the area.
“Before it launched we were all really anxious, but as soon as it went of it was the coolest thing,” Collett said. “It was the most incredible experience of my life,” she added.
The rocket contained 17 educational experiments from universities around the country. Among them, was the Drexel team’s piezoelectric cantilevers experiment designed to test the feasibility of using piezoelectric materials to convert vibrations in to storable energy. The rocket is capable of reaching speeds up to 2,902 mph. After completing its mission NASA will collect the experiments and deliver them to the students for analysis.

Calculating Cash flow from Operations
Here are the steps for calculating the cash flow from operations using the indirect method:
Start with net income.
Add back non-cash expenses.
(Such as depreciation and amortization)
Adjust for gains and losses on sales on assets.
Add back losses
Subtract out gains
Account for changes in all non-cash current assets.
Account for changes in all current assets and liabilities except notes payable and dividends payable.
In general, candidates should utilize the following rules:
Increase in assets = use of cash (-)
Decrease in assets = source of cash (+)
Increase in liability or capital = source of cash (+)
Decrease in liability or capital = use of cash (-)
Cash Flow from Investment Activities
Cash Flow from investing activities includes purchasing and selling long-term assets and marketable securities (other than cash equivalents), as well as making and collecting on loans.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash Flow from financing activities includes issuing and buying back capital stock, as well as borrowing and repaying loans on a short- or long-term basis (issuing bonds and notes). Dividends paid are also included in this category, but the repayment of accounts payable or accrued liabilities is not.

F. Hou et al., “MAVS forms functional prion-like aggregates to activate and propagate antiviral innate immune response,” Cell, 146:448-61, 2011.
In trying to tease apart the signaling pathway that activates an innate immune response, Zhijian “James” Chen and colleagues at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center discovered that an intermediary mitochondrial protein called MAVS acts like a prion—activating other MAVSs and aggregating—and in this form potently initiates the next signal in the cascade that leads to innate cytokine production. This finding is the first report of a prion-like protein in mammalian cells.
A cell infected with an RNA virus such as influenza alerts other cells by activating innate immune pathways. A cytoplasmic receptor, RIG-1, detects viral RNA particles and activates the mitochondrial membrane protein MAVS, which in turn activates the next step in the signaling cascade. Chen and colleagues showed that once RIG-1 had turned on the MAVS proteins, those MAVSs could activate other MAVSs in vitro, even when RIG-1 was absent. “They form the seed that cause the other MAVS to aggregate,” says Chen.
Chen thinks that the prion-like activation and aggregation of MAVS proteins can amplify the signal from just a few molecules of activated RIG-1. By multiplying the next step, the activated MAVS convey a stronger downstream signal.
With such a simple way to amplify a signal, “one wonders how common this is in signal transduction,” says The Scripps Research Institute’s Bruce Beutler, as many signal transduction pathways could benefit from such an amplifying step.

The Mahabharata is India’s greatest epic. ‘Mahabharata’ means ‘Great India,’ India the Sublime. This unparalleled epic is six times the size of the Iliad and the Odyssey combined.
The great sage Vyasa was inspired to write this epic, but he found that it was impossible for him to write it all down. So he prayed to Brahma, the Creator.
In the Hindu Trinity, Brahma is the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, Siva the Transformer. Vyasa prayed to Brahma and Brahma descended in human form. The sage said to Brahma, “Please send me someone who can write down what I say.” Brahma said, “Well, there is only one person on earth who can do that, and that is Ganapati. You invoke him, he can take down your dictation.” So he invoked Ganapati, the son of Lord Siva.
Ganapati came and agreed to write on one condition. The condition was that Vyasa could not pause; he had to dictate continuously, without interruption. If he hesitated or if he paused, then Ganapati would leave him. Vyasa consented and said, “Now, I also want to dictate to you on one condition, and that condition is, that unless and until you know the meaning of what I dictate you will not write. You have to wait and ask me if there is anything you do not comprehend.”
Vyasa was very clever. He thought that he would use complex sentences and it would take time for Ganapati to understand them, and in the meantime he would be able to get more inspiration and get ready for dictation.
Thus the Mahabharata was composed.
from Tales of the Mahabharata
by Sri Chinmoy
Published by Citadel Books

The ice birds of
SUMMIT COUNTY — You had to know it was coming sometime. I’m actually surprised I was able to resist posting a penguin photoblog for as long as I have. They’re so cute and photogenic, as well as incredibly tame, so you don’t even have to have any special wildlife photography skills to photograph them. But I have an ulterior motive, or two of them, actually. I’m hoping these birds are cute enough to drive a record number of page views to a single post — call it a social media experiment.
And, I’m concerned about penguins. They are one of the species that just don’t really have anywhere to go as the Earth heats up. Some other species of plants and animals may be able to adapt, or find new niches with suitable habitat, but some ice-dependent species may be doomed.
In fact, the simple and prolific food chain in the entire Antarctic region is under the global warming gun. In the last half century, winter temperatures on the Antarctic Peninsula — the skinny spit of land sticking up toward South America — have climbed five times faster than the global average. Subarctic conditions around the peninsula have given way to a moist maritime climate, with impacts to Antarctic birds and mammals, who all depend on krill for sustenance.
Krill are tiny shrimp-like crustaceans found in great abundance in Antarctic waters. The krill feeds on tiny free-floating plants called phytoplankton. In turn, the krill is eaten in mass quantities by whales, sea birds, seals and penguins. But changing weather patterns linked to global warming are altering the system.
Travelers to Antarctica can witness the changes first-hand, since many of the tourist voyages to the region explore the Peninsula and nearby islands. Some recent studies have shown that more cloudiness and less sea ice near the northern end of the peninsula combined to slow plankton growth. Farther south, sunnier skies and more sea ice spurred greater plankton growth.
Ice-loving Adelie penguins are following the phytoplankton, and the krill who feed on them. In the process, sub-Antarctic species — including Chinstrap and Gentoo penguins–are replacing the Adélies in their former range. Though the Chinstraps and Gentoos are faring better than the Adélies, they, too, are pushing south in pursuit of food.
Satellite imagery helps reveal changes in ocean color, temperature, sea ice distribution and wind. Many researchers, including a team from the University of Hawaii, are collecting data from the sea to help pinpoint the changes.

What is RSS?RSS stands for Really Simple Syndication. Using RSS, you can easily stay up to date with changes to a website without having to check it on a regular basis. For example, this classroom website syndicates its home page, and announcements, and it will automatically refresh the feed if one of these is updated.
How do I use RSS?Several modern browsers, such as Firefox and Apple's Safari 2.0, support RSS in some way. Websites like Google and Yahoo! can also act as free RSS readers.
To view the RSS feed in your RSS reader:1. Copy the URL.
2. Paste the URL into your reader.
Firefox 1.5 users:1. Click the orange RSS icon in the address bar of your browser.
2. Add the Live Bookmark to your bookmarks list.
Safari 2.0 users:1. Click the URL above.
2. Select "Add to bookmarks" in the menu to the right.
Google users:1. Click on the "Add to Google" button.
2. Follow the instructions for adding the feed either to Google Reader or your Google homepage.
My Yahoo! users:1. Click on the "Add to My Yahoo!" button.
2. Follow the instructions for adding the feed to your My Yahoo! homepage.

Botanically, bulbs are buds, commonly subterranean, producing roots from their undersides, and consisting of layers of fleshy rudimentary leaves, called scales, attached to abbreviated stems. There is considerable uncertainty in the minds of many gardeners as to the difference between bulbs, corms, rhizomes and tubers, for their function is the same—to tide the plant over a period of adverse conditions, such as summer droughts and winter cold. All have common factors: food storage; rapid growth under suitable conditions; and the same life-cycle, in that during growth and flowering, next year's flower is formed in miniature, the foliage soon reaching maturity and dying away, as do the roots in most cases when the whole plant enters a period of rest.
A true bulb, such as that of a tulip, hyacinth or narcissus, is a bud surrounded by fleshy or scaly leaves, arising from a flat disc of 'basal plate'. In `tunicated' bulbs the fleshy leaves are rolled close together, as in the tulip. In 'imbricated' bulbs the bulb leaves are thick and overlapping, as in the lily.
The determination of whether or not a
particular plant is a bulb depends upon the structure of the storage organ. If the botanical definition of the bulb i s strictly accepted, many plants that gardeners ordinarily consider bulbs, such as crocuses, calla lilies, cannas and dahlias, must be eliminated. These and many other plants not technically true bulbs have bulb-like organs that function in the same way as bulbs but are not structurally scaly buds. They include rounded or flattish, solid, swollen stem bases called corms as in gladioli, crocuses; elongated thickened stems called rhizomes as in cannas, calla lilies, lily-ofthe-valley; thickened terminal portions of stems called tubers as in anemones, begonias, caladiums ; and swollen tuber-like roots as in dahlias.
Nearly all bulbs produce offsets sooner or later, and these, except for rarities, give sufficient stock for the ordinary gardener. All that needs to be done is to dig up the clumps, separate the bulbs, sort out the small ones and replant them, treating them like mature bulbs until they reach the flowering stage. Rhizomes and tuberous roots may be treated in the same way, so each eye will produce another plant if care is taken of it. The exceptions are erythroniums, which rarely produce offsets, and cyclamen, which never do, and therefore can only be increased from seeds.
This leads to a consideration of raising bulbs from seed. Except for the most enthusiastic of amateurs, this should be left to the specialist. Where seed is produced, it is easy to obtain a supply, but the seed of many bulbs does not come true. That is the seedlings raised have characteristics which differ from their parents. There is also the question of cross fertilization to take into account, and, of course, raising bulbs from seed is a lengthy undertaking, often a risky one as well. However, with these provisos it may be said that raising lilies from seed is an interesting process.
Corms replace themselves annually. After having thrown up their leaves and flowers, each corm shrivels away and a new corm, sometimes several, forms while the leaves and flowers of the old one are growing.
Without bulbs all gardens would be the poorer the whole year round, but particularly in autumn, spring and summer Bulbs are so popular because they yield such big rewards for so little in terms of money and care. Bulbs make it possible to have a continuous succession of color outdoors and indoors throughout the year. Bulbs will flourish in virtually any kind of well-drained soil. Bulbs will thrive in almost every conceivable position or situation in the garden, in sun or partial shade. Bulbs offer infinite variety in color, form and texture. When in bloom they vary from an inch or two in height to several feet and the characteristics of their foliage are as diverse as their flowers. The flowers of most bulbs last well when cut and are ideal for flower arrangements. Gardening with bulbs requires a minimum of work. Bulbs are easy to cultivate, giving a high percentage of successful results even for the beginner. Bulbs are not only inexpensive but are easily obtainable.
Always purchase good-size, healthy bulbs from a reputable dealer. Early ordering is vital to ensure the best selection. Plant immediately the bulbs arrive and if this is inconvenient open the bags for ventilation and keep the bulbs in a cool, dry place until you are ready to plant them. Plant in well-drained soil. The vast majority of bulbs will do well in any soil provided it is well drained. It is advisable, however, to treat heavy soils with applications of peat or well-rotted leaf mold.
The planting period for bulbs will depend upon their flowering season. The planting period for spring-flowering bulbs extends from September 1 to December 15 in Northern Hemisphere, but daffodils should be planted before the end of
October. Autumn-flowering bulbs (crocus and colchicum) should be planted in August. Most summer-flowering bulbs should be planted in March and April, although some, such as lilies, should be planted in November and December. Stem-rooting lilies can also be successfully set out in early spring.
Plant bulbs at the right depth. Although there are exceptions, bulbs are generally set with their tops about three times the diameter of the bulb below ground; small bulbs deeper proportionately. Usually it is the pointed end of the bulb which should be uppermost, but some tubers are planted horizontally. Some bulbs, such as anemones, give no indication which end is up, but there are usually signs of previous stem or root sources. Spring-flowering bulbs such as hyacinths, daffodils and tulips are planted 16cm (6in) deep and most spring-flowering small or miscellaneous bulbs are planted 8-10cm (3-4in) deep. Variation in depth depends upon the height of the stem and on the type of soil—the longer the stem and the lighter the soil, the deeper the planting.
No general guidance can be given on spacing of bulbs, for this may range from 2.5cm (1 in) to 0.6m (2ft) apart, depending upon the size of the plant, its flower and foliage. Bulbs planted in groups or clusters produce the best effects, and if flowers are wanted for indoor decoration extra bulbs should be planted in the vegetable garden or special cutting garden.
Bulbs can be grown virtually anywhere in the garden. There is a place in every garden for some kinds of bulbs in beds, borders, edges, shrubberies, rock gardens, orchards, woodlands, lawns, on walls, between paving stones, in tubs or window-boxes. Many bulbs can be naturalized, that is, planted in informal groups or drifts and left to increase naturally. This is often done in rough grass or woodland, The grass should be left uncut until the bulb foliage has died down naturally, usually in June.
Most bulbs do not require full sun but can be planted in partial shade. Indeed, partial shade makes for longer lasting blooms. Flowers should be removed when petals fade and the foliage should not be cut off, but should be allowed to die down naturally, permitting the bulb to replace energy and flower the following season. Most spring-flowering bulbs (the exceptions are lilies, anemones and ranunculuses which require winter protection) should be lifted. Lift bulbs carefully only after the foliage has died down and store them in a cool, frost-free and well-ventilated place until it is time to replant them again. Generally, if bulbs are doing well, natural increase will make lifting of the clumps and separation of the bulbs necessary every few years. Be careful when separating clumps of bulbs not to damage them. Bulbs should always be handled carefully to avoid physical injury.
The most commonly grown bulb flowers in our gardens are narcissi, tulips and hyacinths, with lilies, snowdrops, grape hyacinths and several others also represented in the list.
Daffodil is merely the common name for narcissus, of which there are more than 10,000 named varieties, with some 500 in normal commercial cultivation.
With the exception of one or two kinds, such as tazettas, narcissi are hardy, tolerant and adaptable plants. They will grow in almost any situation except heavy shade or in badly-drained soil. In open ground they flower from February to the end of May. Normally most varieties remain in flower for three to four weeks and if they are picked in bud for cut flowers they will last in water for ten days or more.
Narcissi will flourish in beds and borders, naturalized in meadows, open woodlands, lawns, orchards or under scattered trees, among shrubs, in tubs and window boxes. The smaller kinds do well in rock gardens and many varieties are suitable for forcing.
Out of doors daffodils will flourish in any well-drained soil although N. bulbocodium prefers sandy soil and N. cyclamineus peaty soil. The best sites are in sun or light shade with shelter from sweeping winds. Plant the bulbs as early in the autumn as they can be obtained Robust kinds that have large bulbs should be planted 13-16cm (5-6in) deep, less vigorous kinds with smaller bulbs 8-l0cm (3-4in) deep, and tiny species 8cm (3in) deep. Space vigorous growers 16-23cm (6-9in) apart, moderately vigorous growers 10-13cm (4-5in) apart, and small species 6-l0cm (2-4in) apart. In naturalized plantings these distances are varied considerably and it is best to scatter the bulbs at random, in groups or drifts, planting them exactly where they fall.
For planting bulbs out of doors, especially in turf, special planting tools are available. Some of these are long-handled tools, shod with a circularmetal cutter which is forced into the soil. When the tool is lifted a core of turf and soil is removed intact. A bulb is then placed in the hole and the core of turf replaced over it and firmed with the foot. To enable the cutter to be driven easily into hard turf the tool is fitted with a foot bar. There are versions of this tool with short handles, without the foot bar. Otherwise, when planting in soil or in the rock garden it is always advisable to do so with a trowel, never with a dibber. If a dibber is used an air pocket may be left below the bulb, into which the roots will not grow, thus preventing proper development. If the soil is dry, water thoroughly after planting.
Where winters are severe, protect bulbs which are not planted in grass with a covering of leaves or other suitable material. Feed established plantings in early autumn and early spring, using a complete fertilizer in spring and a slower-acting organic fertilizer in the autumn Water copiously during dry spells when the foliage is above ground. Never remove the foliage until it has died down naturally. When plantings become crowded so that the bloom deteriorates in quantity and quality, lift, separate and replant the bulbs as soon as the foliage has died down.
Tulips are equally numerous, with several thousand named varieties and some 800 in commercial cultivation. They differ more than narcissi and are divided into 23 main groups of classes, of interest mainly to the specialist.
Some tulips flower early (in mid-April, some in mid-season (late April),
and others bloom late, in May. The color range is from white to almost black, from softest pink to deepest purple; there are broken colors, self-colors, striped, streaked, shaded and tinged. Some have oval flowers, some are shaped like turbans, and others are square at the base. Some tulips resemble paeonies, others have lily-like flowers. There are tulips with fringed or curled petals and others with pointed petals. A number produce several flowers on a stem. Some have tiny flowers, while others produce blooms up to 38cm (15in) in diameter. Heights range from a few cm to nearly m (3ft).
Cultivation Bulbs can be planted out of doors between mid-September and mid-December. Species or botanical tulips should be planted 10cm (4in) deep and about 13cm (5in) apart with the exception of T. fosteriana, which should be planted 13-16cm (5-6in) deep and some 16cm (6in) apart, like all divisions of garden tulips. Good drainage is essential; they will thrive in virtually any well-drained soil, but in light sandy soils the bulbs should be planted a little deeper than normal. Tulips can be interplanted with roses or with annuals or with other bulbs flowering at the same time, taking into account the differing heights of other plants when interplanting. Species tulips do best in sunny positions, but garden tulips can be planted in sun or in partial shade. Early-flowering garden tulips planted in sheltered sunny spots will come into flower sooner, or if late-flowering tulips are planted in partial shade, they will last longer.
Apart from kaufmanniana tulips which are naturalized, all tulips should be lifted every year when the foliage has turned completely yellow and begun to die off. The old flower stems should be cut off a little above the newly formed bulbs at the end of June or early July. They should, under no circumstances, be left on the bulb in storage trays. If the bulbs must be cleared from the ground before the foliage begins to die, to make way for other bedding plants, they may be lifted and heeled into a shallow trench in a spare corner until the leaves yellow. The lifted bulbs should be kept out of sunlight, cleaned and stored in a cool, airy, frost-free place until planting time comes round again. Indoor cultivation is the same procedure as narcissus, but forced tulip bulbs are not really worth keeping for later outdoor planting.
There are far fewer hyacinths than tulips or daffodils, but because of their beauty and their perfume they continue to be firm favorites for the garden.
Cultivation Bedding hyacinths are best planted in late October about 10cm (4in) deep in well-drained soil and in a sunny position. Space the bulbs about 20cm (8in) apart for maximum color effect. Bone meal forked into the soil
before planting at the rate of 112g (4oz) to the sq m (sq yd) will ensure good heads of flower in April.
Watering, feeding, mulching It is essential for all bulbs to have plenty of moisture when growing actively, but excess water during the dormant period is harmful. Like all plants, bulbs respond to fertile soil, but manures and fertilizers must be used carefully. Well-rotted manure improves soil structure and provides nutrients for all plants and may be used to advantage with bulbs as long as there is a protective layer of soil between the bulbs and the manure. Fresh manure should never be used. Slow-acting fertilizers other than manure are particularly recommended for feeding bulbs. Bonemeal is one of the best and 3kg (61b) to a 11sq m (100 sq ft) is not too heavy an annual application.
Mulches are useful in the summer to help the soil to retain moisture and peat is excellent for this purpose. Mulches intended for protective winter covering should be applied to the surface of the ground after the ground has frozen and should be removed after bulb growth is under way in the spring.
Weeds, pests, diseases Areas planted with bulbs should be kept as free of weeds as possible and the surface soil
1. Should be loosened from time to time.
2. Injured or infected foliage should be removed and burned.
Diseases can be avoided by buying only healthy, top quality bulbs, and few gardeners who do this are troubled by diseases.
The major pests are slugs and snails and fortunately these can be controlled by modern slug killers. In dealing with any diseases or pests, proper diagnosis is important before resorting to drastic measures. Should a disease appear among a planting, lift the healthy bulbs, disinfect them, and move them to an area not previously used for growing bulbs of the same kind. This will usually save them from infection.

The observance of Purim was thus originally ordained by the Sages: "To observe these days of Purim in their times. 'In their times:' In the specific time of each."
The reason for the different dates designated for the observance of Purim is that the Jews of Shushan originally observed the festival on a different day than the Jews who lived elsewhere. Whereas Jews in Shushan waged war on both the 13th and the 14th of the month, and observed the 15th as a day of festivity and rejoicing, in all other provinces the Jews waged war on the 13th and observed only the 14th as a day of festivity and rejoicing.
Therefore our Sages chose to distinguish between Shushan and all other places in accordance with the original event.
Wishing however, to accord honor to the Land of Israel which then was desolate, they determined as follows: The capital city of Shushan, in which the miracle occurred enjoys special preeminence and the festival is to be observed there on the 15th. This is despite the fact that in the days of Yehoshua, under whose leadership the Jewish People first entered and conquered the Land of Israel, Shushan was not yet surrounded by a wall, and hence enjoyed only minor status as a city.
All other cities which were already settled and were surrounded by walls in the days of Yehoshua, are to be accorded the preeminence of Shushan - although they might presently lack surrounding walls and might be in a state of ruin - and they are to observe Purim the 15th. Cities which were not surrounded by walls in the days of Yehoshua though they may have surrounding walls presently - are not to be accorded the status of Shushan, and they are to observe the festival on the 14th.
What then is the criterion for judging the status of a city?
The condition of the city during the days of Yehoshua. That is to say, walled cities either found by Yehoshua in the Land of Israel, or built with walls in his time, are assured of eternal existence. Their present destruction is viewed as passing. Cities outside the Land of Israel - though they later acquired the status of walled cities - are not regarded as assured of permanent existence.
Therefore the Purim which is observed on the 14th is called 'Purim-of-the-open-cities;' (Purim De'Prazot) and the Purim observed on the 15th is named the 'Purim-of-the-walled-cities' (Purim De'Mukafot).
In our times, the only city besides Shushan in which Purim is observed the 15th of Adar is Jerusalem, "Yerushalayim."
In a number of other places, the Megillah is also read the 15th - but only because of doubt. In these communities, the essential observance of Purim is fixed for the 14th, and though the Reading of the Megillah is repeated in them the 15th as well, the required brachah which precedes the Megilah-Reading, is not recited.
PURIM KATAN - Little Purim
On a leap year when, according to the Hebrew calendar there are two months of Adar, I and II, Purim is observed for two days in Adar II, which is followed by Nissan. However, the 14th and 15th of Adar A on a leap year are traditionally called "Little Purim". On these days also one is supposed to celebrate, is forbidden to mourn or fast and omits certain prayers.
Sometimes Purim falls on a Friday, therefore making the next day, Shabbat, Shushan Purim. However, it is forbidden to read the Megilla on Shabbat, and of course, Shabbat cannot be postponed because of Purim.
For Jerusalem and other walled cities, the procedure is as follows:
“Mikra Megillah” is done on Thursday night and Friday morning, as in the “open” cities; “Matanot La-Evyonim” are given on Friday.
The reading of “Parashat Amalek” and the insertion of “Al HaNisim” into the “Shemoneh Esray” and the “Birchat HaMazon” are done on Shabbat, their regular Purim in ordinary years.
“Seudat Purim” is served and “Mishloach Manot” are exchanged on Sunday, the sixteenth of Adar.
Thus, the holiday is felt and marked in Jerusalem for three days, and therefore Purim in such a year is called “Purim MeShulash,” Triple Purim.
Learning from the Purim experience, a custom has evolved for Jewish communities to celebrate the anniversary of their escape from destruction. These special communal Purims are also called 'Purim Katan.'
This is a day of rejoicing, feasting and the distribution of gifts which Jewish communities, families, or even individuals set aside in commemoration of a miraculous event through which they were rescued from catastrophe or destruction or from evil and oppressive edicts.
There are such festivities which are established for a definite period of years and others which are to continue through all the generations. These were called "Second Purim" and an effort was made to celebrate them like the first Purim following the pattern which Mordecai and Esther established for all the generations.
In honour of the Second Purim special megillot were written and read in the synagogue on that day in the cantillation of the Book of Esther (the megillot of the Purim of Castile, of Saragossa and of the Casablanca Hitler). Poets composed special poems on the pattern of "On account of the miracles" to be said during the "Amidah" (Shmona Esreh) and as part of the grace after meals (Purim of Candea, of Carpentras, France, and others). In other places they would recite the Hallel during the morning prayers as is done on Hanuka and the first day of the month even though the Hallel is not said on Purim.
The number, both in the Diaspora and in the Land of Israel during foreign rule, comes to hundreds. Many have been forgotten or have disappeared in the course of time, and others are recalled only in community annals and in history books.
Sometimes such a Second Purim was even established on a day of national mourning if the redemption occurred on that day; thus Purim of Candea falls on the 18th of Tammuz (1538) even though Tammuz is a month of mourning according to Jewish tradition. The Purim of Ibrahim Pasha on the first day of Av (when festivities are reduced to a minimum) commemorates the miracle by which the Jews of Hebron were rescued from the army of Ibrahim Pasha. And there are others.
Sometimes a Second Purim is established on a holiday without qualms about mixing celebrations: For example, the Purim of Ancona (Italy, 1740), on the second day of Succoth, the Second Purim of the community of Carpentras (France, 1651) on the eighth day of Pesach, when the community was rescued from a blood libel.
At times a Second Purim was established for a family as happened in Vilna where the 16th of Kislev (1803) is called "the Purim of Abraham Danzig". In a nearby military camp there occurred a heavy explosion. Many houses were destroyed and there were many killed and wounded. The house of Rabbi Abraham Danzig, scholar and poet, was in the area of the catastrophe but was undamaged and its occupants unharmed.
In 1629 Rabbi Yom Tov Lipman Heller, the Rabbi of Prague and the author of the famous commentary on the Mishnah, "Tosefet Yom Tov", proclaimed as a Second Purim for his descendants the second day of Rosh Hodesh Adar to commemorate his deliverance from death.
A famous Second Purim is that of Frankfurt-am-Main on the 20th of Adar (1614-15). The baker, Vincent Fettmilch, who called himself the "New Haman", organized attacks on the Jews, who defended themselves. However, after a battle which lasted a full day and night they were forced to surrender and were expelled from the city, despoiled of all their belongings.
After several months the king of Germany learned that a flagrant injustice had been done to the Jews. He commanded that the baker be killed, his house destroyed, his body beheaded, quartered, and hung on the gates of the city.
The story of Vincent Fettmilch's crimes and of his punishment were inscribed in German and Latin on a column erected on the site of his house. The king called upon the Jews of Frankfurt to return to their homes with full honours, accompanied by a military band and with a reception by the local authorities. This Purim the Jews called "Vincent Purim" and they also proclaimed a special fast and penitence. Rabbi Elhanan Ha'elen composed a "Vincent Megillah" in Hebrew and Yiddish.
A "Hitler Purim" was proclaimed by the Jewish community of Casablanca (North Africa) on the 20th of Kislev (1942) because on that day it was saved from the Nazi invaders and their followers. A special Megillah, the "Hitler Megillah", was composed ("...and the month which was turned for us from sorrow to rejoicing and the making of holiday and the giving of gifts to the poor. Cursed be Hitler, cursed be Mussolini... etc...." From the Hitler Megillah).
- Casablanca Purim Katan, celebrated on the 2nd of Kislev, commemorates the Jewish community there being saved from anti-Jewish riots and Nazi occupation in 1943.
- Purim Winz was established by the Jews of Frankfort on the Main (Germany) on the 20th of Adar in 1616, and celebrates the expelled Jews being admitted into the town, as well as the execution of the chief Jew-baiter and anti-Semite, Fettmilch.
- The Jews of Tiberias celebrate a Purim Katan on the 7th of Elul dating from 1743 when they were saved from the danger of war from the surrounding Arab countries and their foreign allies.
- Cairo: called 'Purim Mizrayom,' the Jews of Cairo celebrated the 28th of Adar, 1524, when they were saved from extermination.

It depends on the camera and the situation, but as a rule of thumb, it's usually better not to -- at least toward a bright mid-day sun.
I think a possible reason for the caution about pointing the camera at the sun comes from early video sensors which would quickly get a burn on them which was difficult to get rid of. With today's 3 CCD chips, it is highly unlikely the same burn will occur but it is always wise to take caution and look after your gear in a normal manner and don't expose it to unneccessary risk.
Many videographers take exquisite video of sunrises and sunsets, and these do virtually no harm to the camera since the light is far less bright than mid-day sun. Others use extremely dark filters (such as those found in welding goggles) to photograph the sun during solar eclipses.
However, the biggest reason to be careful when pointing a video camera toward the sun is because the lens of the camera can actually act like a magnifying glass and focus the rays of the sun into a very small area on the lens. If left in place long enough, this can burn a hole. Remember doing this as a kid when you took a magnifying glass outside and burned holes in a leaf by focusing the sun on it? You're using the same principle when pointing a camera lens at a bright mid-day sun.
It's actually OK to point your camera toward the sun when you're shooting video (this means you're using the sun as a back light in your pictures, which can yield quite dramatic results). Just don't keep it in the same position for a long period of time.
Also, with electronic sensors, the direct sun can sometimes cause "blooming" problems where the sensor is overloaded and it won't record properly afterward. In newer cameras, this is only temporary. However, in some older cameras, it can cause permanent damage.
Filters to use
Neutral Density (ND) A colour-neutral filter which absorbs light evenly throughout the visible spectrum. Used to reduce the amount of light coming through the lens in strong lighting situations.
Ultra Violet (UV) Video cameras are sensitive to both visible light and ultra violet (UV) light. UV is invisible to humans but it can create a blue tinge and/or washed-out effect on video, especially outside. A UV filter removes UV light while leaving visible light intact. UV filters are also commonly used as a protective filter for the lens.
Polarizing A special type of lens which removes polarized light, reducing the washed-out effect sometimes created by reflected light. This results in more saturated, vibrant colours. Polarized filters are usually mounted with a rotational adjustment to align the polarization.
Last update: 01:21 PM Saturday, July 5, 2008

The question soon arose of how to actually implement the Chinese Exclusion Act. Initially, customs service officers individually and arbitrarily administered Exclusion; in time, procedures became standardized and as they did, Exclusion enforcement eventually fell upon the Bureau of Immigration, forerunner of today’s Bureau of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), formerly Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). Fast forward thirty years: by the first decade of the 20th century, a national system had formed for specifically regulating Asian immigration. This system invoked fear and loathing in the community, remainied a baleful memory for generations.
As part of this system, Immigration officials planned a new facility on Angel Island, the largest island in the San Francisco Bay, far from the mainland. It would replace the old two-story shed at the Pacific Mail Steamship Company wharf previously used to house and process incoming and outgoing migrants. The new station would prevent Chinese immigrants from communicating with those in San Francisco, isolate immigrants with communicable diseases, and, like the prison on nearby Alcatraz Island, be escape proof. In January 1910, over the late objections of Chinese community leaders, this hastily built immigration station was opened on the northeastern edge of Angel Island, ready to receive its first guests.
The first stop on disembarking at the pier was the Administration Building. Men were separated from women and children, then proceeded for medical exams, a humiliating experience for Asians, whose medical practice does not include disrobing before the leering eyes of strangers or being probed and measured by metal calipers. Here, they would also be tested for parasitic infections. Consequences could be severe for failing this test, including hospitalization at their own expense or deportation. After the examinations they were then assigned a detention dormitory and a bunk, where they would await their interrogators, the Board of Special Inquiry.
Circumventing the Chinese Exclusion Act became a first order concern for most immigrants from China, as it allowed only merchants, clergy, diplomats, teachers, students as “exempt” classes to come here. Many Chinese immigrants resorted to buying false identities at great cost, which allowed them to immigrate as either children of exempt classes or children of natives. In 1906, the San Francisco earthquake and fire destroyed municipal records which created an opportunity for the city’s Chinese residents to claim that they were born here and therefore were American citizens. As citizens Chinese could bring their children to this country, and on return visits to their ancestral villages, claim new children had been born to them. Some of these were “paper sons” or less frequently “paper daughters” — children on paper only without a direct family connection. These paper children were in effect “slots” which people could sell to allow new immigrants to come to this country.
For more information about paper sons, view this 2009 CNN news story by Richard Liu.
To counter this practice, Immigration inspectors developed grueling interrogations, and by 1910 they had refined this procedure. The immigrant applicant would be called before a Board of Special Inquiry, composed of two immigrant inspectors, a stenographer, and a translator, when needed. Over the course of several hours or even days, the applicant would be asked about minute details only a genuine applicant would know about — their family history, location of the village, their homes. These questions had been anticipated and thus, irrespective of the true nature of the relationship to their sponsor, the applicant had prepared months in advance by committing these details to memory. Their witnesses — other family members living in the United States — would be called forward to corroborate these answers. Any deviation from the testimony would prolong questioning or throw the entire case into doubt and put the applicant at risk of deportation, and possibly everyone else in the family connected to the applicant as well. These details had to be remembered for life. Because of return trips to China, the risk of random immigration raids and identity card checks on the street, a paper son often had to keep these details alive throughout their life.
In the meantime, immigrants suffered through long waits on Angel Island for these accounts to be taken or to arrive in a world before instantaneous electronic communication. This period could range from several weeks if the testimony was taken locally to several months to years if the applicant was rejected and appealed the decision. The length of stay varied for travelers from other countries; Japanese immigrants held documents provided by their government that sometimes expedited the process of entering the country, and thus, the majority of the detainees were Chinese. Often, one’s relatives might be on the other side of the country in New York or Chicago. Wherever they were, until their testimony was taken and corroborated and found its way back to San Francisco, the applicant would languish in detention.
In the end, the complaints of the community and public officials regarding the safety of the Immigration Station proved true when the Administration Building burned to the ground in August 1940. All applicants were relocated to a mainland facility by November. In 1943, Congress finally repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act in consideration of its ally in the Pacific Theater, thus ending 61 years of official Exclusion. But there was a twist: while the repeal finally allowed Chinese to become naturalized citizens at last, it continued to limit immigration from China to a mere 105 people a year until 1965.
Once closed due to fire, the Immigration Station site was used as a World War II prisoner of war processing center by the U.S. military. After the war, the site was abandoned and deteriorated. In 1963, Angel Island was established as a state park and the California Department of Parks and Recreation (State Parks) assumed stewardship of the immigration site.
Angel Island Immigration Station Foundation is pleased to present a 5-part series designed for upper elementary, middle and high students and their teachers, and readers everywhere.
This series first appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle Spring 2003 and highlights the experience of a few of the immigrant groups that passed through Angel Island Immigration Station (1 page each, downloadable PDFs, aprox 100 KB):
Special thanks to our graphic designer Stephen Lowe, our field trip sponsor Blue and Gold Fleet, and Jennifer Gee, Jay Gonzales, Harjit Gosal, Hardeep Gosal, Bill Green, Jeff Ow, Maria Sakovich, Ted Sibia, Jaideep Singh, and Judy Yung for their assistance with this series.

The Human Brain Project: following CERN’s example
by Prof. Henry Markram (Blue Brain Project, Founder & Director - Brain Mind Institute, EPFL)
at CERN ( 40-S2-D01 - Salle Dirac )
The Human Brain Project aims to lay the technical foundations for a new model of ICT-based brain research, driving integration between data and knowledge from different disciplines, and catalyzing a community effort to achieve a new understanding of the brain, new treatments for brain disease and new brain-like computing technologies. This will enable collaborative research in brain research and its applications similar to the way that CERN has pioneered this type of large-scale collaborative science for high engery physics. The HBP aims to build 6 ICT platforms: Neuroinformatics Platform, Medical Informatics Platform, Brain Simulation Platform, High Performance Computing Platform, Neuromorphic Computing Platform and Neurorobotics Platform as part of the mission. The primary reason that we do not understand the brain is because what we know is highly fragmented. The overarching strategy of the HBP is therefore to bind researchers from different disciplines together in a grand attempt at putting the fragmented pieces of data and knowledge together into a unifying computer model of the Human brain. Major trends in ICT indicate the time is ripe to begin this international effort. The potential benefits are huge: in brain research we could begin to understand how the brain codes physical reality and gives rise to cognition and behavior by exploiting 9 orders of magnitude on the spatial scale and 18 orders of magnitude on the temporal scale; in clinical brain research, we will be able to begin mapping out the vulnerabilities of the different brain diseases and develop personalized medicine; in future computing we will be able to extract tested architectures and validated principles to build brain-inspired interactive supercomputers and tailored neuromorphic computing systems that could increase efficiency of certain types of computing by several orders of magnitude.
Coordinator of the Human Brain Project, EPFL

Fidel Alejandro Castro was born on August 13, 1926 in Cuba. He was brought up by wealthy parents and had five siblings. Fidel’s parents, both illiterate, were determined their children should receive a good education. Fidel was sent to a Jesuit boarding school where he learnt discipline and soon showed that he was extremely intelligent. However even as a teenage Fidel was a rebellious boy, he helped organize a strike of sugar workers on his father’s plantation.
Fidel went on to become a lawyer in Havana, often taking on the cases of people who could not afford to pay him, leaving himself constantly short of money. Fidel’s experience as a lawyer made him extremely critical of the great inequalities in wealth that existed in Cuba. Fidel resented the wealth and power of the American businessmen who appeared to control the country.
In 1947 Fidel joined the Cuban People’s Party. Fidel was attracted to this new party’s campaign against corruption, injustice, poverty, unemployment and low wages. By 1952 he was a candidate for congress for the Cuban People’s Party. A powerful public speaker Fidel soon built up a following amongst the young members of the party. The party was expected to win the election but during the campaign with the support of the armed forces General Batista took control of the country. For the Cuban People’s Party to gain power Fidel came to the conclusion that revolution was the only way.
By 1953 Fidel planed to overthrow Batista by attacking the Moncada Army Barracks with an armed group. The plan ended in disaster with eight of his group killed in the fighting and another eighty murdered by the army after they were captured. Fidel avoiding execution was put on trial and charged with organising an armed uprising. Using this opportunity Fidel made a speech about the problems of Cuba and how they could be solved, this speech later became a book entitled ‘History Will Absolve Me’. Fidel was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years in prison. Fidel became famous in Cuba from the trial and the publication of the book. His attempted revolution had considerable support in the country. Batista decided to release Fidel after he had served only two years of his sentence due to considerable pressure from the Cuban population. Castro left for Mexico where he began to plan another attempt to overthrow the Cuban government.
The Batista’s soldiers arrested, tortured and questioned many innocent people. Suspects, including children, were publicly executed then left hanging in the streets for several days as a warning to others who were considering joining Fidel.
Despite Batista having the backing of the United States government, Castro was confident he could beat him in a battle to rule Cuba. Castro’s troops began to march into the main towns and soon after Batista fled Cuba. In response the remaining government Generals attempted to rule, however Castro called for a general strike and the workers of Cuba supported him, forcing the military to accept their desire for change. As a result in 1959 Fidel Castro became Cuba’s new leader.
Castro’s government passed many new laws. Rent was cut for low paid workers by as much as 50 percent and land owned by Batista and his former ministers confiscated. Cuba’s US owned Telephone Company was nationalised and land redistributed among peasants. Morally opposed to racism, drugs, prostitution and gambling, Castro abolished segregation laws in public places such as swimming pools and cemeteries, and passed laws to close down casinos and night clubs. He believed in education for all. In Cuba at this time particularly in poor rural areas, many people were illiterate and children did not attend school. Following the revolution Castro set about changing this. At Castro’s request students travelled to rural areas, teaching people to read and write. Eventually free education was made available to all Cubans. To help improve the health of the young the government introduced a free health service and began a mass inoculation program.
During the three years following the revolution a quarter of a million Cubans out of a population of six million left the country. Many were middle and upper class Cubans who found they were worse off financially as a result of Castro’s policies. Whilst most Cubans who remained in the country supported him, many began to resent Castro. He did not keep his promise to hold free elections and was becoming less tolerant to those who disagreed with him. He sacked ministers and replaced them with people who were often young and inexperienced. Politicians who disagreed with him faced being arrested and considered as deviants, as were homosexuals who were often imprisoned.
Castro used his power to achieve many good things in Cuba including social welfare, universal education, almost guaranteed employment and quality health care. However his one- party state jailed those who opposed him, ruined the economy and led hundreds of thousands of Cubans to flee. This abuse of power has led to a government which controls every Cuban newspaper, television channel and radio station and restricts internet access. Castro used his power to avenge the torture and murder of hundreds of Cubans by the Batista government. He set up public tribunals where the people responsible were tried and executed. Whilst this pleased many Cubans, world opinion was divided and somewhat shocked.
Denied the right to vote against Castro and his party in free elections, anyone can be jailed for “social dangerousness” which does not need them to have committed any specific offence. Before coming to power Fidel Castro used his power to influence Cubans to have faith in him and support him and the revolution to overthrow the Batista government. Many Cubans kept their faith and belief in Castro right till the end of his political life, however this goodwill was not returned. Fidel Castro remained suspicious of not only other governments, but also of his own people for as long as he was in power. Castro’s health declined and in 2006 he transferred his political responsibilities to a younger brother.
- by Maddi Pecar

One of the hottest trends in health care organizations is that of using mobile devices to access electronic health records. Although accessing electronic health records (EHRs) through mobile devices provides an unprecedented level of convenience, it also exposes health care organizations to new security risks.
Mobile device encryption helps mitigate security risks. Data must be encrypted while it is in transit, but it must also be encrypted when it is stored. In spite of the need for encryption, some health care organizations have been reluctant to require encryption for mobile access of EHRs for fear that the encryption process will cause a major performance impact.
Currently there are a number of different vendors offering solutions for accessing EHRs on mobile devices such as smart phones or tablets. Most of the mobile EHR solutions do not store large patient health databases on the mobile devices. Factors such as limited device capacity, the need for databases to be centrally accessible and the potential for data exposure if the device is ever lost or stolen have lead most vendors to create mobile EHR solutions to act as a front-end application that interfaces with a back-end database.
Although most mobile EHR applications do not attempt to locally store patient data, mobile device storage encryption is still important. Mobile applications often cache patient health data in an effort to improve the application's response time. Unless encrypted, this cached data potentially could be exposed if a mobile device were lost or stolen.
Data encryption in health care
Encryption in health IT in 2013
Health care encryption strategy
More on mobile device encryption
Encryption a part of HIPAA risk analysis
When it comes to storage encryption, health care organizations should insist on hardware-level encryption. Although there are a number of software-based encryption solutions for mobile devices, software solutions consume system resources such as memory and CPU cycles, thereby leading to diminished performance. Conversely, hardware-level encryption usually has no noticeable impact on performance.
Most of the major mobile device manufacturers offer hardware level encryption, but there are certain nuances on each platform that IT pros need to be aware of. For example, Android devices offer hardware-level encryption, but only on Honeycomb- and Ice-Cream-Sandwich-based devices. Likewise, iPhones and iPads running iOS 4.0 or later also support hardware-level encryption, but the encryption is not turned on by default.
Windows Phone 8 devices support hardware-level encryption that is always turned on. However, because the encryption is based on the use of a trusted module platform chip, Microsoft Corp. chose not to perform hardware-level encryption of removable secure digital (SD) cards. Because SD cards are not encrypted, the Windows Phone 8 operating system will not allow sensitive data to be stored on them. SD cards can only store music, photos, videos and eBooks.
Data transmission encryption
Storage encryption for mobile devices is critically important in health care organizations, but encrypting data while it is in transit is even more important. Often times mobile EHR applications do not take measures to encrypt data as it flows across the network. The software assumes that the administrator has already secured the network.
Some health care organizations reduce the chances of sensitive data being exposed by using firewalls to control the boundaries at which patient data may be accessed. For example, mobile devices might be allowed to access patient data over the facility's Wi-Fi network, but not over a cellular network or an external Wi-Fi network.
Of course, the facility Wi-Fi network must be encrypted. The encryption process does tend to make the wireless network run more slowly than it otherwise would, but there are a number of different factors that determine the true performance impact.
One of the big factors is the wireless access point itself. As a general rule, older or low-end wireless access points tend to be less efficient than the newer access points. Some access points offload the encryption process to a dedicated chip. As such, organizations with aging wireless access points might experience better performance by upgrading to a newer model.
If employees access health care data from outside of the organization, they most likely do so either through a virtual private network or through a transmission core protocol tunnel. In either case the connection is encrypted, but there isn't a lot that can be done on the user's device to mitigate any performance impact the encryption process causes. However, you might be able to improve the performance of encrypted sessions by using a wide area network optimization solution to reduce the amount of traffic that flows between mobile devices and the corporate network.
Unfortunately, there isn't one single magic fix for overcoming the overhead that encrypting data causes. The best approach is often to use performance monitoring techniques to look for network bottlenecks and then work to resolve those bottlenecks.
Brien M. Posey, MCSE, is a Microsoft Most Valuable Professional for his work with Windows 2000 Server and IIS. He has served as chief information officer for a nationwide chain of hospitals and was once in charge of IT security for Fort Knox. Write to him at email@example.com or contact @SearchHealthIT on Twitter.
This was first published in January 2013

Natural Tick Control Tested
By Jan Suszkiw
January 12, 2011
Nootkatone, a component of essential oil in grapefruit peels and other sources, is used in many food, beverage and personal-care products because of its clean, citrusy taste and smell.
Now, nootkatone may find another use: repelling blacklegged deer ticks that spread Lyme disease. U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) entomologist Bob Behle is investigating the possibility with Kirby Stafford, an entomologist at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station (CAES) in New Haven, Conn.
Stafford began researching nootkatone's tick repellency in 2008 and sought Behle's formulation expertise when it became apparent the essential oil lacked sufficient residual activity to kill the tick's tiny nymph stage, which is more likely to transmit the Lyme disease bacterium than the larger, easier-to-spot adults.
In studies at the Crop Bioprotection Research Unit, operated in Peoria, Ill., by the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), Behle and colleagues refined a spray-dry procedure that uses lignin to encapsulate the nootkatone. ARS is USDA's principal intramural scientific research agency.
In nature, lignin acts like a molecular mortar that binds plant cell walls. In this instance, the lignin served as semipermeable packaging that extended nootkatone's residual activity and improved its effectiveness.
In greenhouse tests, the lignin-encapsulated (LE) nootkatone lasted longer than a previously tried formulation, known as emulsified concentrate (EC), and caused less harm (phytotoxicity) to cabbage plants when applied at standard field rates. No signs of plant damage were observed when researchers applied the LE formulation in outdoor trials, conducted in 2009 on residential properties. Just as importantly, no live ticks were recovered from treated sites.
Another round of tests was conducted this past June on nine residential properties—five of them using another nootkatone-encapsulating formulation devised by Behle.
In 2009, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 29,959 confirmed cases of Lyme disease, which can affect the joints, heart and nervous system of afflicted individuals if left untreated.
Read more about the research in the January 2011 issue of Agricultural Research magazine.

A protein that drives the generation of new muscle fibers from stem cells during development and after injury paradoxically also appears to be responsible for the gradual decline in our muscles’ ability to repair as we age. In vitro and in vivo studies by scientists at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), Kings College London, and Harvard Stem Cell Institute have found that the protein, fibroblast growth factor-2 (fgf2), is naturally overexpressed in aging muscles, and effectively sends muscle stem cells into overdrive, preventing them from replenishing their own populations and reducing their ability to keep muscles in tiptop condition.
A rare population of muscle stem cells—also called satellite cells—is found in every skeletal muscle. The cells reside in a dormant, or quiescent state, but can be mobilized rapidly to differentiate into new muscle cells following injury, and also generate a replacement pool of stem cells that revert back to a healthy dormant state until next required.
Initial studies in mice by scientists at MGH showed that the numbers of these dormant satellite cells in muscle decline with age, and the cells also lose markers of quiescence and self-renewal and gain markers of differentiation and apoptosis. In their hunt for factors expressed in the muscle fiber that might trigger this change in satellite cells, they found that fgf2—which is one of the natural triggers for stem cell mobilization and differentiation—are markedly elevated in the niche, or microenvironment, that surrounds stem cells in aging muscle.
Critically, in vitro and in vivo mouse studies demonstrated that the high levels of fgf2 in aged muscle effectively kicks the stem cells out of their quiescent state and triggers them to proliferate and differentiate, preventing the replenishment of the pool of quiescent stem cells, and effectively leading to a depleted satellite cell population and thus reduced ability of muscle to regenerate.
Andrew S. Brack, M.D., and colleagues also showed that either blocking fgf2 signaling or chemically inhibiting fgf2 using tamoxifen significantly increased the numbers of satellite cells in aged muscle, and boosted the ability of muscles in old mice to undergo self-repair and regenerate after injury. “To our knowledge, this is the first identification of a ligand that specifically increases within a mammalian aged niche that can promote breaks in quiescence leading to declines in stem cell function and number during homeostasis,” they write in their published paper in Nature, which is titled “The aged niche disrupts muscle stem cell quiescence.”
Dr. Brack puts the results into the context of an athlete’s training schedule. “Analogous to the importance of recovery for athletes training for a sporting event, we now know that it is essential for adult stem cells to rest between bouts of expenditure. Preventing stem cell recuperation leads to their eventual demise...That makes sense to us as humans, in terms of the need to sleep and to eat a healthy diet, but that the need to rest also plays out at the level of stem cells is quite remarkable.”
What isn’t yet known is why levels of fgf2 are naturally increased in aged muscle. The MGH and Kings’ College investigators suggest it may be a cell-autonomous response that is trying to keep aging muscle in good condition. Their findings in mice also need to be validated in humans to see if the same mechanism is responsible for stem cell depletion in human muscle fibers, and age-related loss of muscle mass and muscle wastage.
Even so, states co-author Albert Basson, M.D., at Kings College, the findings open up the possibility that it may one day be possible to develop treatments to rejuvenate old, tired muscles. “If we could do this, we may be able to enable people to live more mobile, independent lives as they age...Preventing or reversing muscle wasting in old age in humans is still a way off, but this study has for the first time revealed a process that could be responsible for age-related muscle wasting.”

Medicines to improve the quality of life of people with HIV/AIDS, to cure tuberculosis (TB) and to fight malaria are needed more than ever before. Increased financial commitment to supplying those medicines means that the resources for procuring these medicines are more readily available. But impacts will only be seen at country level if sufficient quantities of medicines of good quality can be procured and distributed.
Systematic procurement can both speed up medicines distribution and help maximize treatment outcomes - as well as optimize use of resources. WHO launched a project in 2001 to create unified standards for performing inspections at suppliers, and assessing regulatory information about product quality, before pharmaceuticals are sourced. In short, it created a Model Quality Assurance System. The vastly enhanced rate of "pre-qualification" now possible with this system has speeded up adjudication and contract award, and hence access to medicines. It has also helped to eliminate or vastly reduce the risk of sourcing sub-standard, counterfeit and/or contaminated medicines.
The initial focus of the project was on medicines for treating HIV/AIDS (but it has since been expanded to cover anti-TB medicines and antimalarials). By the end of 2002, 69 products, for treating HIV/AIDS, had been pre-qualified. Just as importantly:
• developing country capacity to produce good-quality antiretro-virals (ARVs) had been increased
• developing country regulatory capacity to assess ARVs had been strengthened
• international cooperation on medicines quality had been enhanced.

On This Day - 30 October 1918
Theatre definitions: Western Front comprises the Franco-German-Belgian front and any military action in Great Britain, Switzerland, Scandinavia and Holland. Eastern Front comprises the German-Russian, Austro-Russian and Austro-Romanian fronts. Southern Front comprises the Austro-Italian and Balkan (including Bulgaro-Romanian) fronts, and Dardanelles. Asiatic and Egyptian Theatres comprises Egypt, Tripoli, the Sudan, Asia Minor (including Transcaucasia), Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Persia, Afghanistan, Turkestan, China, India, etc. Naval and Overseas Operations comprises operations on the seas (except where carried out in combination with troops on land) and in Colonial and Overseas theatres, America, etc. Political, etc. comprises political and internal events in all countries, including Notes, speeches, diplomatic, financial, economic and domestic matters. Source: Chronology of the War (1914-18, London; copyright expired)
Over 30,000 prisoners taken in Flanders during past month.
Region above Valenciennes flooded by Germans.
Mannheim bombed by British.
Serbs reach Danube east of Semendria and occupy and Pozharevats.
Italian advance continues between Upper Brenta and sea; 33,000 prisoners.
Severe fighting at Grappa.
Fiume surrendered to the Croats by the Hungarians.
Asiatic and Egyptian Theatres
Turkish Army on Tigris surrenders to British.
Serious influenza epidemic in London; 2,200 deaths last week.
Hungarian Republic proclaimed: Count Hadik Prime Minister.
German Note to U.S.A. received sating Armistice terms are being awaited.
National Council of Fiume proclaims independence of city and desires union with Italy.
Armistice between Turkey and Entente Powers signed at Mudros.

AN INTRODUCTION BY THE BRADSHAW FOUNDATION
This is an account written by the eminent French prehistorian Dr. Jean Clottes
, presented as part of the Bradshaw Foundation India Rock Art Archive
. Jean Clottes is the first to admit that 'Indian rock art is not as well-known abroad as it should be', despite the fact that the country contains a vast concentration of ancient rock paintings. His research in this Archive, along with that of Dr. Meenakshi Dubey Pathak
, highlights both the sheer number of rock art sites as well as the quality and diversity of the prehistoric rock art found in the shelters. Because of this, its preservation - through awareness and appreciation - is clearly essential.
INDIAN ROCK ART & ARCHAEOLOGYBY DR. JEAN CLOTTES
Despite the excellent work carried out by my Indian colleagues in the past quarter of a century, Indian rock art is not as well-known abroad as it should be. And yet it is both extremely abundant and spectacular. It has often been said in the recent local literature that India shares the privilege - with South Africa
- of possessing one of the three largest concentrations of rock art in the world. Be that as it may, it is certain that the sites with paintings and/or engravings are exceptionally numerous all over the country, particularly in its centre.
This is why, when an International Rock Art Congress was organized in Agra (Uttar Pradesh), south of Delhi, in November/December 2004, and I was invited to participate in it, I immediately agreed and registered on two of the after-Congress field trips to see some of the surrounding rock art. The Congress was the Tenth Congress of the International Federation of Rock Art Organizations (IFRAO), the first of its kind to be held in India, and it was organized by Dr. Giriraj Kumar on behalf of the Rock Art Society of India (RASI).
A herd of red stags with huge antlers
I shot all the images shown here during the two field trips that, under the guidance of my Indian colleagues, took us first to the rock art sites of Karabad (page 2)
, in the Raisen district and to those of the Shamla Hills (page 3)
next to Bhopal, then to more than 20 of the numerous painted shelters of Bhimbetka (page 4 & 5)
, and finally to Magazine Shelter (page 6)
and Chaturbhujnath Nala (page 7 & 8)
in the verdant Chambal valley and its tributaries. All these sites are in Madhya Pradesh, the state with most rock art in India.
As to the general information provided hereafter most of it is taken from books and articles published in the past twenty years (see References
). My aim is to pass on some of the information I gleaned through the writings of my colleagues and their painstaking work and also - through the images- some of the wonder I felt when I approached a whole new world of rock art.
Red and white humped bull
Humped bull with huge horns

|Uploaded:||June 24, 2010|
|Updated:||June 24, 2010|
Animals are some of the cutest and most mysterious creatures in the world. When it comes to drawing them, there is many ways to sketch animals out. You can draw animals to look realistic, simple, easy, cartoony, or just plain out normal. Today, I thought I would do another lesson that will teach you "how to draw a owl", step by step. I have an owl lesson already but it is really old. The whole point of doing a new owl tutorial, is to update the old, and upload a newer version that will be a lot easier to tackle. Believe me, I know how hard it can be to draw birds. That is why this bird is going to be pretty simple. The inspiration to draw an owl came from Winnie the Pooh. I was watching some of the old reruns on Youtube, and I have to tell you, even though I'm pretty old, watching Winnie the Pooh is still very entertaining. Owls are wondrous animals that are quite, swift, wise, and simple. They lead or live simple lives which is why not a lot of them are seen. You can say that I live in a country setting, and even though I do, I have never seen an owl yet. I hear them hooting every night around the same time, but no dice as to actually seeing one in the flesh. I love these creatures, and if I could, I would travel to a place that dedicates their animal exhibit to just birds and owls. I can't express how much I love birds and their anatomy. When I was a young girl, I used to want to be a bird and fly the skies as I looked below and watched people at play or live their day to day lifestyle. Well, I guess I should be shutting up now so you guys can get busy and start drawing this owl that I have drawn for you all. You should have fun with this sketch because this is the second owl I have on the site as of right now. I have plenty of birds, but out of all those birds, there is only two owls. Peace peeps, and make sure you have fun with the rest of your drawing day.

View a collection of video clips and associated information related to projectile motion.PBS Teachers
View a lesson plan on the topic of projectile motion. The lesson plan centers around the physics of juggling and is presented by PBS Teachers.Shockwave Studios
The Projectile Simulator activity from the Shockwave Studios is an excellent accompaniment for this reading.Curriculum Corner
This collection of sense-making activities from The Curriculum Corner will help your students understand projectile motion.Treasures from TPF
Need ideas? Need help? Explore The Physics Front's treasure box of catalogued resources on projectile motion.PhET Simulation: Projectile Motion
This projectiles lesson from The Physics Classroom Tutorial provides a thorough background of projectiles to complement the PHET simulation.
What is a Projectile?
In Unit 1 of the Physics Classroom Tutorial, we learned a variety of means to describe the 1-dimensional motion of objects. In Unit 2 of the Physics Classroom Tutorial, we learned how Newton's laws help to explain the motion (and specifically, the changes in the state of motion) of objects that are either at rest or moving in 1-dimension. Now in this unit we will apply both kinematic principles and Newton's laws of motion to understand and explain the motion of objects moving in two dimensions. The most common example of an object that is moving in two dimensions is a projectile. Thus, Lesson 2 of this unit is devoted to understanding the motion of projectiles.
A projectile is an object upon which the only force acting is gravity. There are a variety of examples of projectiles. An object dropped from rest is a projectile (provided that the influence of air resistance is negligible). An object that is thrown vertically upward is also a projectile (provided that the influence of air resistance is negligible). And an object which is thrown upward at an angle to the horizontal is also a projectile (provided that the influence of air resistance is negligible). A projectile is any object that once projected or dropped continues in motion by its own inertia and is influenced only by the downward force of gravity.
By definition, a projectile has a single force that acts upon it - the force of gravity. If there were any other force acting upon an object, then that object would not be a projectile. Thus, the free-body diagram of a projectile would show a single force acting downwards and labeled force of gravity (or simply Fgrav). Regardless of whether a projectile is moving downwards, upwards, upwards and rightwards, or downwards and leftwards, the free-body diagram of the projectile is still as depicted in the diagram at the right. By definition, a projectile is any object upon which the only force is gravity.
Projectile Motion and Inertia
Many students have difficulty with the concept that the only force acting upon an upward moving projectile is gravity. Their conception of motion prompts them to think that if an object is moving upward, then there must be an upward force. And if an object is moving upward and rightward, there must be both an upward and rightward force. Their belief is that forces cause motion; and if there is an upward motion then there must be an upward force. They reason, "How in the world can an object be moving upward if the only force acting upon it is gravity?" Such students do not believe in Newtonian physics (or at least do not believe strongly in Newtonian physics). Newton's laws suggest that forces are only required to cause an acceleration (not a motion). Recall from the Unit 2 that Newton's laws stood in direct opposition to the common misconception that a force is required to keep an object in motion. This idea is simply not true! A force is not required to keep an object in motion. A force is only required to maintain an acceleration. And in the case of a projectile that is moving upward, there is a downward force and a downward acceleration. That is, the object is moving upward and slowing down.
To further ponder this concept of the downward force and a downward acceleration for a projectile, consider a cannonball shot horizontally from a very high cliff at a high speed. And suppose for a moment that the gravity switch could be turned off such that the cannonball would travel in the absence of gravity? What would the motion of such a cannonball be like? How could its motion be described? According to Newton's first law of motion, such a cannonball would continue in motion in a straight line at constant speed. If not acted upon by an unbalanced force, "an object in motion will ...". This is Newton's law of inertia.
Now suppose that the gravity switch is turned on and that the cannonball is projected horizontally from the top of the same cliff. What effect will gravity have upon the motion of the cannonball? Will gravity affect the cannonball's horizontal motion? Will the cannonball travel a greater (or shorter) horizontal distance due to the influence of gravity? The answer to both of these questions is "No!" Gravity will act downwards upon the cannonball to affect its vertical motion. Gravity causes a vertical acceleration. The ball will drop vertically below its otherwise straight-line, inertial path. Gravity is the downward force upon a projectile that influences its vertical motion and causes the parabolic trajectory that is characteristic of projectiles.
A projectile is an object upon which the only force is gravity. Gravity acts to influence the vertical motion of the projectile, thus causing a vertical acceleration. The horizontal motion of the projectile is the result of the tendency of any object in motion to remain in motion at constant velocity. Due to the absence of horizontal forces, a projectile remains in motion with a constant horizontal velocity. Horizontal forces are not required to keep a projectile moving horizontally. The only force acting upon a projectile is gravity!

I recently survived to a 75th birthday. When you reach three-quarters of a century, your thoughts naturally turn to recollections of major events and leaders over that time. Thirteen Presidents served: Franklin Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, G.H.W. Bush, Clinton, G.W. Bush, and Obama.
I was born in the Great Depression, but didn’t feel deprived, because Dad had a job, using a shovel provided by the Works Projects Administration, created by Democratic President Roosevelt, who put thousands to work rebuilding America’s infrastructure—roads, sewer systems— literally digging us out of the economic collapse. .
Most people loved FDR—elected him four times—because he did so much for the country, leading us through World War II, and starting government programs that helped everyone, and explaining them in his “fireside chats.” Social Security, unemployment compensation, worker rights, and bringing electricity to much of Appalachia. It helped individuals, and the economy as a whole, giving everybody more purchasing power.
FDR was succeeded by Harry Truman, who implemented Roosevelt’s idea of the United Nations, where countries could, “Jaw, jaw, instead of war, war.” The U.N. has helped us avoid a World War III. Truman, a Democrat, racially integrated the military, and stood for non-discrimination in employment.
He was succeeded by General Dwight Eisenhower. Though a Republican, Ike raised the minimum wage, used troops to protect minority students in Arkansas, and increased Social Security.
Ike was succeeded by Democrat John Kennedy. JFK was one of our most eloquent leaders, which he demonstrated in many live news conferences. He forcefully supported the racial integration of colleges, jawboned the steel companies to back down from inflationary price increases, and became the first President to recognize the right of government employees to unionize.
Kennedy’s assassination produced Lyndon Johnson, a President whose considerable accomplishments were overshadowed by the Vietnam War. LBJ signed laws creating Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs that helped reduce poverty, and laws guaranteeing voting rights to minorities. The minimum wage, now only $7.25, peaked at the end of the Kennedy-Johnson years at $10.00, in today’s dollars.
President Richard Nixon, a Republican, signed legislation creating the Environmental Protection Agency, as well as Title IX, providing more equality for women.
Gerald Ford, Republican, restored stability to the nation after Nixon resigned in disgrace. Jimmy Carter, Democrat, helped bring a measure of peace to the Middle East, and was the first President to push for alternative fuels.
Republican icon, Ronald Reagan, was the anti-Roosevelt, blaming government for most of our problems. His tax cuts helped the wealthy and the stock market, but not so much working people. He ended the Fairness Doctrine making possible the rise of the one-sided radio and TV we see today. He does deserve credit for signing a major nuclear weapons treaty with the then Soviet Union.
George Herbert Walker Bush, a Republican, led the nation in an invasion of Iraq and raised taxes after promising, “Read my lips. No new taxes.” That cost him his job to Bill Clinton, the Democrat.
Stable energy prices and the growth of technology helped the Clinton-Gore administration achieve increased prosperity for most Americans, with even lower income groups gaining ground, and a balanced budget achieved.
George W. Bush, Republican, became President in 2000 with a minority of the votes, the election decided by the U.S. Supreme Court. His tax cuts and occupation of Iraq and Afghanistan helped crash the economy in 2008.
Barack Obama became our President, as the nation embraced more diversity. He’s been vilified as a “socialist,” which he obviously isn’t, or as born in Africa, which he demonstrably wasn’t. He bailed out the auto industry, is winding down the wars he inherited, supports gender equality, and is working to develop industries of the future. Inheriting a nearly catastrophic banking system and economy, he’s reversed the downward trend. His “Obamacare” is already providing health care benefits to millions of Americans.
The next President will be Obama again, continuing his policies of moderation, or Republican, Willard, Mitt, Romney, and back to Bush era policies. It’s a pretty clear choice, though many pundits and political operatives, as well as some billionaire bigwigs, will try, as they always do, to muddy the waters.
Jack Burgess is a retired teacher of American & Global Studies and a Portsmouth native.

by Dr. Jeff Zweerink and Dr. Hugh Ross
Among the vast expanses of the cosmos, humanity resides on an amazing planet with remarkable conditions for observing the birth and expansion of the universe. It seems as though a purposeful Designer has allowed human civilization and technology to develop so that the Designer's work can be studied in exquisite detail.
Thanks to new instruments that provide breakthroughs in understanding, scientists can test the validity of various origin-of-the-universe models. RTB's cosmic creation model, a big bang model, states that the universe began in a hot, uniform state. It then cooled down, eventually forming the stars, galaxies, and clusters of galaxies observed today. The latest images (left) from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) affirm this picture of an immature universe that "grows up" over time. Images of galaxy clusters as they appear a couple billion light years ago show signs of their great age-a high degree of symmetry, many old stars, few galaxy interactions, and lots of clustering.
Images (right) from the Hubble Ultra Deep Field (HUDF), showing galaxies from 7-13 billion years ago, look remarkably different. Galaxies are noticeably more ragged, more dispersed, and more uniformly distributed; they are dominated by younger stars and show frequent interactions-all signs of immaturity and of a much smaller, more densely packed cosmos.
Two more snapshots of the universe come from the cosmic microwave background (CMB, lower left)1 and a particular class of galaxies (red luminous galaxies or RLGs, lower right)2 These two images show how dramatically the universe changed between 380,000 thousands years and 10 billion years after the creation of the universe. Comparing the clumpiness of the universe at these two epochs provides compelling evidence that dark matter and dark energy-features predicted by RTB's model-dominate the dynamics of the universe. The spatial distribution of the RLGs also establishes that the fluctuations of the CMB grew through straightforward gravitational interactions to form the galaxies and clusters of galaxies observed today. All this evidence strengthens RTB's creation model and testifies of a supernatural Creator who has left unmistakable cosmic fingerprints for humans to discover.
- C. L. Bennett et al., "First-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Preliminary Maps and Basic Results," Astrophysical Journal Supplement 148 (2003): 1-27.
- Daniel J. Eisenstein et al., "Detection of the Baryon Acoustic Peak in the Large-Scale Correlation Function of SDSS Luminous Red Galaxies," Astrophysical Journal 633 (2005): 560-74.
Portraits of Maturity. The Hubble Space Telescope captures signs of age in the Abell 1689 Galaxy Cluster, located about 2 billion light years away from Earth. The image records how the cluster looked 2 billion years ago-or, more than 11 billion years after the big bang.
Six representative galaxies from Abell 1689 show maturity in several ways: a high degree of symmetry, preponderance of older, red stars, and few galaxy interactions.
Youthful Impressions. This section of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field (HUDF) image contains over 2,500 galaxies (only one star is visible). Observers can now see galaxies (over 13 billion light years away) as they appeared less than 1 billion years after the big bang creation event.
Irregular shapes and a wide range of star colors characterize the images from the HUDF. These galaxies contrast remarkably with those from Abell 1689, revealing an era when structure and order were just beginning to emerge in the universe.
Baby Pictures. The cosmic microwave background (CMB) as measured by the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) satellite presents a picture of the universe when it was only 380,000 years old-the oldest possible picture that can be obtained using electromagnetic radiation.
Detailed analysis of the clumpiness (shown here as a multipole spectrum) seen in the CMB allows scientists to measure numerous cosmological parameters such as the curvature of space, the baryon density (density of protons and neutrons) and the exotic matter density. The large peak confirms that space is very nearly flat. The ratio of the second peak to the large peak measures the baryon density of the universe. The third peak shows the amount of exotic matter. All measured parameters confirm the hot big bang picture and, consequently, RTB's biblical creation model.
Confirming Snapshots. A small section (1/5000th) of the first image taken by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) heralds more confirming evidence. When complete this survey will image more than one million galaxies and over 100,000 quasars in one quarter of the sky. Scientists have constructed a three-dimensional sky map using these images and the measured distances to these objects. Using a particular subset of red luminous galaxies (RLGs), the SDSS team measured the baryon peak, corresponding to the second peak from the WMAP data, as it appeared 10 billion years after the big bang.
Quantifying the spatial correlations of the RLGs provides a spectrum (shown above) similar to that produced by the WMAP project. The peak in the spectrum gives "smoking gun" evidence that the clumpiness seen in the WMAP data grows into the galaxies and galaxy clusters imaged by SDSS by straightforward gravitational processes, as predicted by big bang models. Further, the height and sharpness of the peak provides independent confirmation of the amount of exotic matter in the universe as well as of the existence of space energy density (or dark energy).

